Scanned and proofed by Ron Burkey (rburkey@heads-up.com).  Items in
[brackets] are editorial comments added in proofing.  Descriptions of
figures have also been added in [brackets], although the figures
themselves have not been included.





A B C's of Science
By
CHAS. OLIVER




INDEX

I.  The Supreme Power of Nature
II.  Astronomy
III.  The Solar System
IV.  Across the Divide
V.  Flourishment of the Earth
VI.  Animal Magnetism
VII.  Miscellaneous


The author of this little book spent several years in composing his
work, to the best of his ability, making the treatise brief and to the
point, so that the reader may not become weary and misunderstand the
true meaning.

His desire is to have the flourishing human know the truth of Science
and to learn what he can of its greatest wonders.

CHAS. OLIVER.


ABC's OF SCIENCE


CHAPTER I
THE SUPREME POWER OF NATURE

1.
Supreme power of Nature is comprised of all.

2.
It may be divided into three parts:  Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal.

3.
Mineral is comprised of Mineral Matter and Mineral Magnetism.

4.
Animal is comprised of Animal Matter and Animal Magnetism.

5.
Vegetable is comprised of Vegetable Matter and Vegetable Magnetism.

6.
Each of the foregoing have life, and by cooperating with each other
produce life that flourishes.

7.
There being as many different kinds of Magnetism as there are matter
which is beyond the strength of human to classify.

8.
The supreme power of Nature had no beginning so it has no end; its
life is indestructible.


[Figures:  Five line-drawings, captioned as follows.  "Comet of 1881,
the year Mother Shipton prophecied the Earth to come to an end."
"Comet of 1744."  "Comet of 1857."  "Biela's comet discovered in 1827.
returned at intervals of 6 1/2 years.  In 1846 it returned split,
returned in 1852, but never appeared since."  "Saturn."]


CHAPTER II
ASTRONOMY

(The word "vapor" used in general for water, ice, atmosphere, etc.)

1.
Space without beginning or end, filled with unmaterial and material
life.  The material is in motion by the currents of unmaterial life.

2.
The material is in perfect bodies, imperfect bodies, and
unconcentrated material.

3.
Perfect bodies group into constellation, called sun's planets,
planetoids, and moons.

4.
Imperfect bodies are comets, called periodic and parabolic comets.

5.
Unconcentrated material called Milky Ways, and rings such as are
around Saturn.

6.
The unmaterial life currents run in every conceivable manner.  I will
call the currents carrying constellation sun currents, planet
currents, planetoid currents, moon currents, and comet currents,
respectively.

Milky ways eddys.

7.
Saturn is the only body we know which has an unconcentrated obsequious
attendant. Such rings may appear around constellations, planets,
moons, etc.

These rings can be accounted for in two ways,--first, the material
never being concentrated; second, by two or more bodies coming
together and throwing the bodies into atoms.

8.
Suck, or Nebula, currents form in the Milky ways (the same as two or
more currents of air coming together and making a whirlwind), which
concentrates the material into bodies, thus forming constellations and
comets; also rings such as are around Saturn.

If a constellation is formed its current is called sun current, and
here it continues to whirl with all its subordinate currents, planet,
planetoid, and moon.

9.
Comets are caused by sun currents' pressure forcing the suck currents
at a great speed, and forces the comet current to pass through sun
currents.  Some comets pass in and out of their sun currents at
regular intervals and are called periodic, i.e., its orbit is an
ellipse.

Comets that are parabolic will never return to their starting point
and travel wild.

10.

Bodies may be destroyed by suck currents carrying bodies in collision
with each other; if the bodies are equal size, will throw the material
into atoms.  If a small and large body come in collision the small
body will bury itself in the greater.  Bodies thrown into atoms, the
atoms may continue to be carried by its respective current (as rings
around Saturn), or the atoms may be forced beyond its current and pass
as shooting stars to other bodies or milky ways.

11.
Nebula is the suck current in the process of condensing material into
bodies.  Can be seen in Milky Way with naked eve.


[Figures:  two line drawings, captioned as follows.  "The solar
system."  "The sun."]


CHAPTER III
THE SOLAR SYSTEM

1.
The Solar System is better known to us, as the earth on which we
flourish belongs to it.

2.
The System is comprised of one sun (star), eight major planets,
Mercury, Venus, Earth, and one satellite, Mars and two satellites,
Jupiter and seven satellites, Saturn, its rings and ten satellites,
Uranus and four satellites, Neptune and one satellite, and some 600
planetoids, varying in size from 600 miles in diameter to mere rocks.

3.
The sun's diameter is 866,000 miles.  Rotates every 606 hours.  The
length of time its current carries the sun over its orbit is unknown.
The sun remains a melted mass; its vibration is maintained; has but
little vapor and its theme reflected on the surface of its obsequious
attendants which gives them heat and light.

Dark spots caused by vapor becoming concentrated to the sun's surface;
these spots change.

4.
Mercury, the smallest major planet, also the closest to the sun.  It
is carried over its orbit about 36,000,000 miles from the sun, which
requires 88 days to complete its course, and rotates once every 24
hours and 5 minutes.  Its diameter is 3,000 miles and it has a
suitable amount of vapor for animals and vegetables to flourish.

5.
Venus has the brightest lustre of our planets which is caused from
enormous amount of vapor.  It is carried over its orbit at about
67,000,000 miles from the sun, which requires 224 7/10 days to
complete its course.  Rotates once every 23 hours and 21 minutes.
Diameter, 7,700 miles.

6.
The earth is carried over its orbit; main distance being 93,000,000
miles from the sun, which requires one year to complete its course,
which is 680,000,000 miles:

                                   MILES
     Earth's diameter              8,000
     Greater or equatorial         7,925
     Less or polar                 7,899
         Difference on comparison     26

The earth rotates once every 23 hours, 56 minutes, and 4 seconds; has
one satellite, which is carried over its orbit at a distance of
238,850 miles from the earth.  Its diameter is 2,160 miles.  The moon
completes its orbit in 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, and 2 seconds.
Its currents touch the earth and cause the tide; also affects some
plants of the phenomena verita; these plants are also affected by the
sun.

Many years after the earth's material began to flourish, a small body
(whose crust was cooled) came in contact with the earth; this caused
the earth's crust to crack almost from pole to pole and formed North
and South America.  The eruptions in Europe, Asia, and Africa were
greatly scattered.  Australian soil is deficient in phosphorus, which
shows it is foreign and represents the small body which did not
entirely bury itself.  This caused some of the earth's land surface to
be below the sea level; also caused the earth's axis to change at a
very slow rate of about 77 yards per year.  This will require many
thousands of years for the North Pole to become the South Pole.  For
many years the Polar star appeared "fixed" at the earth's north axis.

7.
Mars is carried around the sun by its planet current at a distance of
140,000,000 miles, which requires 687 days, and rotates every 24
hours, 37 minutes, and 22 1/2 seconds.  Diameter, 4,200 miles.  Mars
has two satellites and is not abundant in vapor which causes its
reddish appearance, therefore vegetation and animals are scanty.

8.
Jupiter is the largest major planet.  It makes a great jump from the
sun of 483,000,000 miles, carried by its planet current to complete
its orbit in 12 years.  Rotates every 9 hours, 55 minutes, and 37
seconds.  Diameter, 88,000 miles; has seven satellites.  The climate
has a very even temperature due to its fast rotation.

9.
Saturn, the beauty of the skies, carried by its planet current around
the sun at its main distance of 883,000,000 miles (a greater distance
of 400,000,000 miles than Jupiter) which requires about 29 1/2 years.
Rotates once every 10 hours, 14 minutes, and 23 seconds.  Diameter,
75,000 miles.  It has ten satellites and three rings of unconcentrated
material.  The cape ring is about 9,000 miles across, the other two
about 16,000 each.  Diameter of rings about 170,000 miles, which makes
the rings very close to the surface.

10.
Uranus is carried by its planet current around the sun at a great
distance of 1,778,000,000 miles, which requires about 84 years.  Rate
of rotation unknown.  Diameter, 31,000 miles.  It has four satellites.

11.
Neptune is the farthest from the sun.  Its main distance being
2,792,000,000 miles; carried by its planet current over its orbit once
in 164 years, 9 months.  Diameter, 37,000 miles.  Period of rotation
unknown.  Has one satellite.  At Neptune we haven't taken a step but
our next neighbor is across the divide.  Let us have a fairy dream and
travel from the sun to Neptune in a straight or direct course at the
rate of 1,000,000 miles an hour; it would take us 116 1/3 days to
reach Neptune.


[Figure:  Line drawing, captioned "The solar system."]


CHAPTER IV
ACROSS THE DIVIDE

1.
Crossing the divide (Abyss) we encounter other systems of about
25,000,000,000, or the first magnitude.  Our most powerful glass
reaches the 16th.

Magnitude is very uneven and irregular, and beyond this there is no
end.

2.
Many constellations have more than one sun, while others are double,
quadruple, and multiple.  It is estimated a brilliant star, and can be
seen; of these over a million have been catalogued and only about 25
whose distance have been measured.


CHAPTER V
FLOURISHMENT OF THE EARTH

1.
The earth reached its state of concentration, and the vapor in great
clouds enveloped the heavier substance.  The earth being heaved up by
volcanoes (caused by the vapor coming in contact with the heated
material); as the vapor reached its state, rain fell on the earth
crust, and thus rivers, lakes, and oceans were formed.

2.
Here animal and vegetable matter began to flourish.

3.
Great deposits of protoplasm became concentrated over the earth's
surface; from the deposits sprang all kinds of vegetables and animals
that flourish, and many more families than inhabit the earth to-day
became extinct.

4.
Vegetable matter began to flourish as its semen became concentrated,
likewise animal matter.  (This takes place to-day in different ways,
principally in Marine varites.  See Chap. I, par. 6.)

5.
Reproductions in all families that flourish; some families mix and
their offspring will not reproduce.  (Life cannot be destroyed, but
flourishment can.)

6.
Man came from deposits of protoplasm (semen) as is produced for
reproduction of man to-day.  The deposits were of different kinds;
each deposit brought forth its own branch of humanity, these branches
being of different type and tongue.  Later the tongue of one branch
became learned by the other.  From the different original tongues will
give us a good estimate of deposits in number.

7.
Babies were nourished in the protoplasm deposits the same as they are
in their mother's womb.  This nourishment came from the abundance of
albumen which accompanied the semen in concentrating.  As the babies
matured they broke the crust of the deposit of protoplasm and put
forth their heads and breathed the air; their bodies still remained in
the albumen until they gained strength to feed themselves on the
albumen.  Here the babies broke the cord (navel cord) that brought
nourishment into their bodies, as in the womb of a mother, and crawled
around over the crust of the deposit where they came, feeding on its
crust by putting it into their mouths. The babe has not forgotten it
yet, as everything he gets that he can handle goes to his mouth.  He
learned to walk and talk to his brothers and sisters, and composed a
language of their own.  Here manhood and womanhood is reached.

8.
All animals came in like manner, but without a fluent language.

9.

Vegetable matter flourished and the earth is inhabited. All bodies
that have atmosphere are inhabited.  Atmosphere is vaporized
protoplasm.

10.
Ten of the principal materials that produce flourishment are carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, potassium, nitrogen, sulphur, calcium,
iron and magnesium; protoplasm contains everything; chemists have not
been able to determine and classify protoplasm.  (See Chap. I, par.
7.)

11.
Humanity varied much in size.  The giant tribe (such as the petrified
Cardiff Giant) has long been extinct.  Men of this type weighed 500
pounds and more, measured nearly 12 feet in height, while our midgets
measure under 2 feet.

12.
Hermaphrodites exist in all material that flourishes.  Malformation.


CHAPTER VI
ANIMAL MAGNETISM

1.
Every animal has its own magnetism which is its source of strength and
intelligence.  The glands, nerves, and ducts are batteries, ducts and
glands storage batteries, the nerves motive and sensation (or
intelligence).  The brain is the principal battery of sensation (or
intelligence), while the heart is the principal motive battery.

2.
The child begins to train himself to make use of his limbs, first by
swinging his arms and legs, second by creeping, third by walking.
Note a child feeding itself, how unsteady he is in getting his food to
his mouth; sometimes his spoon misses his mouth and the food is
spilled, for which he usually receives a slap, although he has
displayed all his energy in getting his food in his mouth.  Next we
find him a trained athlete and skilled laborer, capable of applying
himself to most anything he cares to do.

3.
But little attention is paid to the training of animal magnetism.  Any
one with nerves in his teeth can concentrate magnetism in the teeth,
so it can be easily felt, also the lips; by training the magnetism it
can be concentrated in any part of the body.  This takes constant
practice and could be used when one has any disability by
concentrating the magnetism in the disabled part, causing the blood to
circulate more freely at the point where the magnetism is
concentrated, and thus improving the disabled part.  The osteologist
does this by massage, the real faith cure man by concentrating his
magnetism on the patient, the practitioner uses medicine and drugs,
each having their own magnetism, etc.  Accordingly many diseases are
contagious by people becoming inoculated by mild magnetism which comes
from some kind of matter.  (See Chap. I, par. 7.)

4.
The hypnotist or mesmerist gains control of his opponents through
animal magnetism and controls every movement.  The nerves cease to act
and the hypnotist is boss.  The patient can be made to exert great
strength and pass dangerous points without falling.  A hypnotist or
mesmerist is invariably in poor health and flesh.  This is caused by
the over-taxation of his own nerves and ducts.

6.
Animal magnetism can he used like wireless telegraphy.  Miss Helen
Kellar is one of the best known for telepathy.  She was born blind,
also deaf and dumb.  She is a great linguist and well educated.

7.
The dumb animals in their wild state use telepathy much when
encountering danger; their keen scent of the deer, horse, etc.,
enables them to determine the direction of the enemy.

8.
Predestination is cultivated and in most instances comes true.  I
observed this in the case of William McKinley, martyred President of
the United States of America, who said he wanted to follow in the
footsteps of James A. Garfield, also martyred President.  Let us see
how nearly he came following in his footsteps:  Born in the same
locality, President of the same country, each supported a platform of
good currency, each assassinated in the same month, and in the seat of
the Presidency.  Both died a lingering death; the difference in the
length of time of their flourishment was 8 months and 7 days.


[Figures:  Photographs of William McKinley and James A. Garfield.]


9.
Next observe the old in their feebleness and we see these well trained
hands tremble; the gland ducts and nerves are withering, the animal
magnetism is weakening, which renders them childish .

10.
The ducts, glands, and nerves throw off their magnetism in many
different ways, in exertion, fright, fear, anguish, discontent,
happiness, kindness, loveliness, desire, etc.

Dr. T. B. Robertson discovered that Tethelin (located in the pituitary
body at the base of the brain) produces the growth of the body.


CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS

1.
Lightning is caused by the friction of vapor, which is at a suitable
temperature.  Thus two or more currents of air coming together will
cause lightning, as the friction concentrates the electricity, and as
there is no conductor the heavy voltage flies usually toward the
nearest conductor.  This voltage is so great that it explodes the air.
The air coming together again produces a great vibration, called
thunder.

2.
Aurora Borealis.  The outer circle around the earth represents
atmosphere.  The sun current carries it far from the earth's surface.
At the north, when the sun's reflection strikes the earth's crust in
such a manner, its reflection will be seen in the atmosphere at a
great height, called Northern Lights.  This is mostly seen in
November, December, and January.


[Figure:  Uncaptioned line drawing (accompanying the paragraph above)
of the Earth's orbit about the sun.]


3.
The museum of Alexandria was established about 400 years B.C., for the
purpose of restoring science that had been lost thousands of years
before.

The cultivation of knowledge by experiment, observation, and
mathematical discussions:  this was the birth of a science of to-day.
The library contained many thousands of volumes of books, but was
destroyed by Cyril; a girl in charge of the library by the name of
Hypatia was brutally killed and the flesh was scraped from her bones
with sea shells.  This occurred in 414 A.D.

Alexander died at Babylon 323 B.C.

China, Mesopotamia, and India had made astronomical observations at
this early date.  Most of these learnings were destroyed.  Brono,
Isaac Newton, Brably, and some few others, promoted science by their
discoveries of what is to-day.  "Good Will to man."







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ABC'S OF SCIENCE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.