Produced by http://www.ebooksgratuits.com







« feruiteur de Sainct Maixant »


ADVIS DE LA DEFFAICTE DES ANGLOIS ET AVTRES HERETIQUES VENUZ EN BRETAIGNE,
POUR LE ROY DE NAUARRE, PRES CHAFTEAU-BOURG.


(1591)


Monsievr, defpuis vous auoir efcrit par le Sieur de fainct Romain,
& vous auoir donné aduis de la mort de la Nouë & du Comte de
Montgomery, ie me retiray auec mes trouppes à Nantes pour me
rafraifchir, fuyuant le mandement que Monfeigneur le Duc de
Mercure m'en auoit faict, tant par fes lettres que par le Sieur de
Genlis, la Motte, qui me vint trouuer, expres au Chafteau de
Nubourg, où i'auois mené le fils du Millord Honfedõ, que nous
prinfmes prifonnier au dernier recontre. La Royne d'Angleterre à
faict grand' inftance enuers le Roy de Nauarre, qu'il euft à
employer fes moyens pour mettre le fils dudit Millord en liberté,
à quoy Mõfeigneur de Mercure ne veut entendre, quelque
fupplication que le Roy de Nauarre luy en ait faicte, par fes
deputez: finon en rendant Mõfeigneur le Duc d'Elbeuf prifonnier à
Loches, en pleine & entiere liberté. Ce q ne pouuant faire le Roy
de Nauarre, s'excusãt qu'il eft entre les mains du Duc d'Efpernon
qui tient du tout Loches à fa deuotion, Mõdit Seigneur n'eft pas
refolu de le deliurer qu'à bonnes enfeignes. Le Prince de Dõbes
efchappé de la derniere deffaicte, s'eft retiré auec fort peu de
ges dãs Renes, où il feroit bie toft affiegé, n'eftoit les forces
que mondit Seigneur de Mercure à enuoyé en l'armee de Monfeigneur
le Duc de Mayene, fous la conduite du Sieur de S. Laurens:
neantmoins il doit bie toft receuoir quatre mille hõmes du Roy
Catholique, dont il a efté affeuré par Mõfieur le Cõmãdeur
Morceau, qui faict toute diligece pour leur acheminemet. Cepedant
la Roine d'Angleterre aiãt enuoyé douze ou quinze cens Anglois
fous la conduite du Millord Hauart en Bretaigne, lors qu'elle
fçauoit q mõdit Seigneur de Mercure eftoit defnué de forces pour
les auoir enuoyees en Lorraine, arriuerent à Vitray, ville
diftante de Renes de treize à quatorze lieuës, le 21.iour de
Septebre dernier, où ayãts feiourné douze iours pour fe
rafraifchir en intetion de fe venir ietter dans Rennes pour
defendre la ville, au cas que mõdit Sieur de Mercure les vint
affieger. Ce qu'eftant denoncé à mõdit Sieur, il refoluft d'y
donner ordre, & pour ceft effect m'efcriuit de faire rebrouffer
chemin à mes trouppes qui eftoyent de fix ces hommes de pied, pour
me ioindre au Sieur d'Aradon, qui auoit 300.cheuaux. Ce qu'eftant
faict & ayans ioincts mõdit Sieur de Mercure pres Chafteau-bourg,
nous eufmes aduis, que le ieune la Hunaudaye & le Millord Hauart,
auec leurs trouppes, qui pouuoyent faire en tout douze cens hõmes
de pied, & cinq cens cheuaux eftoyet partis de Vitray le
4.d'Octobre, iour de S.Frãçois, & venoyent coucher à S.Iean fur
Vilaine deux lieuës pres de Chafteau-bourg, fur le grand chemin de
Vitray à Rennes. Mondit Seigneur qui s'eftoit mis entre-deux, auec
forces inegalles: car il n'auoit que huict cens hommes de pied, &
quatre cens cheuaux, feit affembler fon Cõfeil pour deliberer s'il
deuoit combattre ou non. Le Marquis de Chauffein, Prince de grande
expectation, remonftroit qu'il valloit mieux combattre que de fe
retirer, & qu'il failloit s'affeurer que Dieu leur affifteroit, &
qu'il ne permettroit point que les ennemys euffent le deffus, qui
ne pouuoyent auoir que cinq ou fix cens hommes d'auantage, & que
fe retirer, mondit Seigneur ne le pouuoit faire, fans perte de fa
reputation. Le sieur d'Aradon au contraire remo nftroit combie les
batailles eftoyent incertaines, & qu'il valoit beaucoup mieux
ceder vn peu, que de mettre en hazard vne telle Prouince que la
Bretaigne, qui feroit en danger de fe perdre, fi mondit Seigneur
demeuroit au combat, pour eftre la perte des Chefs, vn abaiffement
de coeur aux Soldatz, effroy & efpouuantemet des villes, qui apres
Dieu, ne s'appuyent que fur eux; & qu'en tout euenement fe
retirant fans combatre, & l'ennemy entrant dans Rennes, pour leur
fecours ils ne pouuoyent faire grãd cas en Bretaigne pour y auoir
peu de retraictes, & que les villes de l'Vnion dudit pays, (eftant
bien pourueues de toutes fortes de munitions) il ne falloit rien
craindre, Que l'ennemy venoit feulement pour defendre Rennes, fans
vouloir rien entrepredre de nouueau, & partãt qu'à l'occafion
d'vne feule ville il ne falloit mettre la Prouince en danger, à
quoy le Marquis de Chauffein frere de mondit Seigneur, remonftra
la commodité grande, qui pouuoit aduenir au pays, d'empefcher
l'entree du fecours ennemy dans la dite ville, & que par ce moyen
ceux de la ville, & notamment les pauures Catholiques, fafchez de
la domination du Prince de Dombes, & des rauages que noz gens font
autour de Rennes, fe pourroyent (ennuyez de tant d'incommoditez)
ranger à l'Vnion, & que l'ennemy feroit contrainct ou de s'en
retourner en Angleterre, ou d'aller paffer l'hyuer à Vitray, qu'il
falloit (au moins fi l'on pouuoit fans combatre) leur empefcher
l'acheminement dans Rennes. Mõdit Seigneur de Mercure apres auoir
ouy tous leurs aduis refoluft de fuiure le Confeil de Mõfieur le
Marquis de Chauffein, & apres s'eftre recõmandé à Dieu & à noftre
Dame, à laquelle tous les Princes de Lorraine ont particuliere
deuotion, feit mettre fes gens en equipage pres de Chafteau-bourg,
& ayant aduis que l'ennemy s'en approchoit, enuoya vne cõpagnie
d'enfans perdus du Capitaine fainct Martin les recognoiftre,
lequel ayãt rapporté l'eftat de leur armee, mõdit Seigneur
refoluft de les attendre, faifant faire alte à fes gens l'efpace
de trois heures: en fin mondit Seigneur les ayant faict attaquer
par quatre cõpagnies de gens de pied & deux compagnies de
Caualerie, noz ges eurent du pire. L'ennemy pourfuiuant la
victoire criãt viue le Roy, fe vint getter à corps perdu au milieu
de trois embufcades, que mõdit Seigneur auoit fait demy lieuë pres
de Chafteau-bourg, à chafeune defquelles y auoit deux coleuurines,
lefquelles commençans à iouër auec l'infanterie feirent vn tel
efchecq & carnage des ennemis, qui s'affeuroyent d'auoir ia la
victoire entiere, qu'il en demeura plus de douze cens fur la
place, & le refte s'enfuit à vauderoute dans Vitray: ceux qui
efchapperent l'efpee du Soldat n'efchapperent point les mains des
Payfans, aucuns desfquels y ont faict vn beau butin, le Millord fe
fauua en habit defguifé. Nous y auons perdu trois cens bons
Soldatz & quelques Gentils-hommes. L'ennemy y a faict perte outre
les eftrangers, de plus de cinq cens hommes, & entre autres du
ieune d'Auaugour Gentil-homme bien né, mais qui malheureufement fe
rangea du party des Heretiques. Le sieur de la Fons, le ieune la
Hunauldaye, le Capitaine la Planche, le Sieur de Rofimont,
Lieutenãt du Gouuerneur de Vitray, & plufieurs autres Gentils-
hommes & Capitaines fignalez, y ont laiffé la vie. Nous en auons
plus de foixante prifonniers que mondit Seigneur à faict conduire
au Chafteau de Nantes. C'eft vn effect fignalé de la bonté de
noftre Dieu & de fa prouidence paternelle fur fon Eglife, ayant
permis que mondit Seigneur auec vn fi petit nombre de gens, ait
deffaict les forces des ennemis, contre l'opinion mefme de fes
plus fideles feruiteurs, qui le diffuaderent de combattre. Ayans
recenz les forces d'Efpaigne, mondit Seigneur deliberé d'affieger
Rennes, Le Prince de Dombes fe trouuant, bien eftõné d'auoir perdu
en deux recontres & en moins de trois moys, autant de gens qu'il
luy en falloit pour executer les entreprinfes de fon Roy en
Bretaigne. Le tafcheray par voye affeuré de vous faire entendre en
ce pays, vous priant me tenir aduerty de ce qui fe paffe en voz
quartiers, eft defpuis & attendant de voz nouuelles. Ie prie Dieu.

MONSIEVR, vous conferuer en fa grace me recommandant bien
humblement à la voftre. Du Camp, de Chafteaubourg le fixieme
Octobre, 1591

Voftre affectionné feruiteur de Sainct Maixant.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVIS DE LA DEFFAICTE DES ANGLOIS ET AUTRES HERETIQUES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.