Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                            ALF THE FREEBOOTER
                           LITTLE DANNEVED AND
                               SWAYNE TROST

                            AND OTHER BALLADS

                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION

                                   1913

               _Copyright in the United States of America_
           _by Houghton_, _Mifflin & Co. for Clement Shorter_.




SIR ALF THE FREEBOOTER
_Song the First_


Sir Alf he is an Atheling,
Both at Stevn and at Ting. {5}
   _Know ye little Alf_?

Alf he builds a vessel stout,
For he will rove and sail about.

Alf he builds a vessel high,
The trade of pirate he will try.

He draws on the sand a circle mark,
And with a bound he gained the bark.

Upon the prow Alf foremost stood,
And Copenhagen’s koggers view’d.

O’er the wide sea he flung a look,
He knew the course the vessels took.

“There koggers nine salute mine eyes,
All, all they bear shall be my prize.”

Alone into a boat he goes,
And briskly to the koggers rows.

“Well met, ye Courtmen, clad in mail
Unto what haven do ye sail?”

“Unto that haven we are bound,
Where Alf is likeliest to be found.”

“What will ye on the man bestow
Who unto ye Sir Alf can show?”

“Silver and gold to him we’ll give,
All he can wish for shall he receive.

Presents of worth he shall not miss,
The robber’s vessel shall be his.”

“And what shall be the pirates’ lot,
If Alf the pirate escape you not?”

“His mariners we’ll hew and slay,
Himself we will in irons lay.”

“Ha! little Alf ye here may see,
Slight victory ye shall win from me!”

“Up, up and board, my gallant crew,
Cable and rope asunder hew!”

Till he was weary Alf he hew’d,
In fifteen Courtmen’s gore he stood.

He captured all the koggers nine,
And sailed for Norway o’er the brine.

To Rostock in the tiding goes,
Then palened many a cheek of rose.

Widow and child lamented sore,
This hurtful hawk had made them poor.

But they must thole this damage all,
Their tears but bootless, bootless fall.
   _Know ye little Alf_?




SIR ALF THE FREEBOOTER
_Song the Second_


Sir Alf will not stay in Norroway land,
   For he passes his time there wearily;
Full fifteen lordships in fief he holds,
   He can live thereout right merrily.

Sir Alf he walks on the verdant wold,
   Conning his breviary;
There meets him Bendit Rimaardson,
   For God of his sins was weary.

“Good morrow, good day, thou little Sir Alf,
   Thou art a valiant noble,
But if thou become the King’s prisoner to-day,
   The land will know less trouble.”

“I am not the little Sir Alf,
   I vow by the holy Mary;
I am but a little mass-boy, Sir,
   To the priest the wine I carry!”

Bendit lifted his high, high hat,
   And upon his visage staring,
Said: “Thou art the little Norwegian Alf,
   If mine eyes are the truth declaring.

“Thou wast a school boy along with me,
   Thou darest not deny it;
And well at the school I remember thee,
   Thou gavest us no quiet.”

“If thou be Bendit Rimaardson,
   Thou art my near relation;
If to-day thou wilt swear thou knowest me not,
   Thou wilt do me an obligation.”

But straight they took the little Sir Alf,
   And gyves to his legs they fastened;
And away, away to Helsingborg,
   With the captive Alf they hastened.

“Now take little Alf to the chamber high,
   To the hall of the regal tower,
That the Queen at her ease, and her maids, if they please.
   May behold this thief of power.”

Then up and spake the Danish Queen,
   On first little Alf espying:
“The man that I see cannot surely be he,
   Whose fame through the world is flying.”

“Though I of stature be little and mean,
   I’ve every manly talent,
And ne’er wilt thou bear thy lord an heir,
   Half, half so good and gallant.

“I’d give my mantle with roses red,
   And lilies flowered over,
If I might sleep one night with thee,
   And play the ardent lover.

“If I one night with thee might sleep,
   None knowing but thy maid servant,
For then, I ween, thou would’st beg, fair Queen,
   For my pardon in accents fervent.”

Then answered him the Danish Queen,
   As she struck the board with vigour:
“To-morrow, ere folk to breakfast go,
   On a gibbet thou shalt figure!”

“Why hang’st thou not Ivor of Holsterbro,
   And Canute of Sonderboro?
They were thieves like me, but they slept with thee,
   And their death would have caused thee sorrow.”

Then they took away the little Sir Alf
   From the hall of the regal tower;
For the beauteous Queen and her ladies had seen
   Enough of this thief of power.

They led the little Count Sir Alf
   Out East from Helsing city;
With contrite breast he his sins confess’d,
   And to God he cried for pity.

“Now I counsel each noble woman’s son,
   He in honour’s courses guide him,
With his equals dwell in the land, for well
   With all will that land provide him.

“For many a day and many a year
   I’ve plundered, as every one knoweth;
But what we win with injustice and sin
   With shame and sorrow goeth.

“A Count was I, of Erling’s race,
   O’er Timsberg’s rich fief I lorded;
That filled me with pride, and my will I would have,
   Though my will with no law accorded.

“First, first on all who my hate had won
   I murders foul committed;
Then to wife and maid no respect I paid,
   But shamefully them I treated.

“From the needy citizen his goods
   And his life besides I’ve riven;
Widow and orphans my deeds bemoan,
   And for vengeance cry to heaven.

“Lord God to me kind and clement be,
   And grant me this petition:
Let me gain, when this death of shame I’ve thol’d,
   Into endless life admission.”




LITTLE DANNEVED AND SWAYNE TROST.


“O what shall I in Denmark do?
   To bear your armour I’m too weak;
The Danish warriors jeer at me,
   Because their tongue I cannot speak.”

It was the young Danneved,
   He bade them saddle his courser grey:
“O I will ride to Borrebye,
   And a visit to my mother pay.”

O clinking were his spurs so keen,
   And swiftly sped his horse along;
At Lundy Kirk in Skaaney land
   He stopped to hear the matin song.

O first he heard the matin song,
   To hear nine masses stopped he then;
And now it lists young Danneved
   To mount upon his steed again.

Out spake Oluf, the aged and good,
   He was I ween the parish priest:
“I beg of thee, little Danneved,
   To be this day my honoured guest.”

“This day I’ll break with no man bread,
   Nor drink a drop of rosy wine,
Until I come to Borrebye,
   And hold discourse with mother mine.”

“Now hear me, dearest Danneved,
   Give o’er, I beg, thy purpose straight;
So many of thy enemies
   Before the town in ambush wait.”

“O first I trust in my faulchion good,
   And then I trust in my courser tall,
And next to them in my merry swains,
   But in my own self most of all.”

“’Tis well to trust in thy faulchion good,
   ’Tis well to trust in thy courser tall,
But do not trust in thy merry swains,
   For they’ll deceive thee first of all.”

It was little Danneved,
   Abroad before the town he came;
And there met him his enemies,
   Thrice nine in number were the same.

So numerous were these enemies,
   For him that did in ambush lie,
All Danneved’s swains they took their leave,
   And from their lord did basely fly.

All his merry men took their leave,
   And from their master basely flew,
Except the young Swayne Trost alone,
   He with his lord took on anew.

“O I, my Lord, your clothes have worn,
   And ridden have I, my Lord, your steed,
And I will stand by you to-day,
   Nor leave you in your greatest need.

“O I have taken your silver and gold,
   And I have eaten of your bread,
And I’ll not budge from you to-day,
   Although my life-blood I should shed.”

So they their backs together placed,
   Master and man, in the forest green;
And in the early morning tide
   They of the foemen slew fifteen.

Then they their backs together placed,
   Where thick and high the bushes were;
They twain alone full thirty slew,
   Acquiring honour ever fair.

It was the young Danneved,
   To his side his trusty faulchion tied;
And now they both so joyously
   Home to his mother’s castle ride.

It was the young Danneved,
   Came riding to the Castellaye;
It was then his mother dear
   Came out to meet him, blythe and gay.

“Be welcome, little Danneved,
   Be welcome to this house of mine;
What doth it please thee now to drink?
   O, say, shall it be mead or wine?”

“O, I will ne’er break bread with you,
   Or drink a drop of mead or wine,
’Till thou hast given the young Swayne Trost
   Fair Ellen, only sister mine.”

“And do thou hear, my dearest son,
   Hear what I now declare to thee;
As God shall help me in my need,
   Brothers of Ellen both ye be.”

“Now do thou hear, my mother dear,
   Thou’st not to me the truth declar’d;
Where didst thou bear the young Swayne Trost,
   That of his birth I never heard?”

“O he was but a little child,
   When him from out the land I sent;
And, hearing it said that he was dead,
   To none I did my loss lament.”

Then up spoke little Danneved,
   He was the son of a knight so high:
“Now I have such a brother found,
   I never more will grieve or sigh.

“God’s blessing upon thee, young Swayne Trost,
   To thee my troth I now will give;
I’ll ne’er deceive thee, young Swayne Trost,
   As long as I on earth shall live.”

Little Danneved and young Swayne Trost,
   In sables and mard themselves array;
And both of them took so joyously
   To the imperial Court their way.




SIR PALL, SIR BEAR, AND SIR LIDEN.


Liden he rode to the Ting, and shewed
   His bloody gashes there:
“And these were done by no other one
   But my dear brother Bear.”

With humble air upstood Sir Bear,
   And for leave to speak he cried:
“I’ll give thee gold and silver to hold,
   And my good broad lands beside.”

“Keep thou thyself thy silver pelf,
   And thy good broad lands for me;
By God I swear this little hand fair
   Thy death, brother Bear, shall be.”

Home to their hall ride Bear and Pall.
   With unsuspicious mind;
In wrathful mood, with five swains good,
   Followed Liden close behind.

Sir Pall, and Sir Bear, and Sir Liden, three were,
   And they met the boughs beneath:
’Twas sad to view how quick out-flew
   Their faulchions from the sheath.

First Pall he slew his brother true,
   Then Bear to death he smote;
I tell to ye for verity
   His own death wound he got.

They took up with care Sir Pall and Sir Bear,
   To the city them they bore;
Beneath the skies in the greenwood lies
   Sir Liden amid his gore.

To the earn and the owl and the beasts that prowl
   Sir Liden’s corpse they left;
When that was said to his plighted maid
   She died of sense bereft.

Had he paid heed to his mother’s rede,
   And himself to the law address’d,
His brothers twain had remained unslain,
   And their feud had been laid at rest.

In piteous mode wept Mettelil proud,
   The death of her three sons bold:
“Woe’s me,” cried she, “That e’er my eyes
   Should this sad hour behold.”

For Pall she wept sore, and still, still more
   For Bear the good and brave;
But most of all for Sir Liden’s fall,
   For he had no hallowed grave.




BELARDO’S WEDDING


From the banks, in morning’s beam,
Of Xarama, famous stream;
From the spot, or nigh it, where
It joins the Tagus broad and fair,
Sped Belardo, blithe and gay,
To receive the righteous pay
Of all the years of love he’d spent
In doubts, and fears, and discontent—

   _But happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his manifold pains_.

Unto her village now he goes
The handsome Philis to espouse;
For now her father, kind and bland,
But late so stern, yields him her hand.
Now in his eyes the shepherd shows
The rapture in his breast that glows,
That after storm and hurricane
The heaven should look bright again.

   _How happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his manifold pains_.

Not as of yore on foot, I trow,
Or in albarcas goes he now;
Albarcas made of slain wolf hide,
In blood of cow or heifer dyed.
O snow-white pointed shoes wore he,
Green stockings gartered at the knee;
Button composed of burning glass,
Presented, mind ye, by his lass.

   _How happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his manifold pains_.

What a knight of gallant air
Rides he forth on sorrel mare;
Saddle of Friezeland leather made,
Fringe of the most dainty thread.
Sombrero new, of neatest shape,
Mantle long with lengthy cape,
Sayo green, obscure to see,
Graced with much embroidery.

   _How happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his labour and pains_.

By the guise in which he’s drest,
His hopes are visibly exprest;
Hopes which so often damped and chilled
Are on the point to be fulfilled.
Within his bosom he doth bear
All the billets of his dear;
They are so many bills which he
Is bent to settle speedily.

   _Happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his manifold pains_.

Arriving at the house he saw,
Waiting for him, his father-in-law,
Who, good-bye to scoffs and slights,
Holds his stirrup whilst he lights.
Lovely Philis at the door
Calls him “husband” and “senor;”
He “senora” and “dear wife”
Calleth her, they’re one for life.

   _Happy the shepherd who finally gains_
   _The beautiful prize of his manifold pains_.




THE YEW TREE


O tree of yew, which here I spy,
By Forida’s famed monastery;
Beneath thee lies, by cold death bound,
The tongue for sweetness once renown’d.

Thou noble tree who shelterest kind,
The grave from winter’s snow and wind,
May lightning never lay thee low,
Nor archer cut from thee his bow;
Nor Crispin peel thee, pegs to frame,
But may thou ever bloom the same;
A noble tree the grave to guard
Of Cambria’s most illustrious bard!

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.
                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.




Footnotes:


{5}  _Stevn_ and _Ting_.  Both words signify a tribunal before which
litigations were decided.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALF THE FREEBOOTER, LITTLE DANNEVED AND SWAYNE TROST, AND OTHER BALLADS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.