Produced by Linda M. Everhart, Blairstown, Missouri




The
Accomplished
Muskrat Trapper

A Book on Trapping
for Amateurs

By
A. E. SCHMIDT
CHICAGO

Copyright, 1922, by
A. E. Schmidt.

Boyle Brothers, Incorporated
Printers
606 West Lake Street
Chicago, Illinois



INTRODUCTION.

In placing this booklet before the great fraternity of American
trappers, the author does not propose to exercise any pedagogical
influence upon the truly professional trapper, who, seasoned in the
hard school of experience, knows the animals he is seeking, like a
mother knows her child. It is his wish, however, to assist and guide
the amateur to a greater success.

Practically all text-books written for trappers, treating upon the
subject of trapping and raw furs, heretofore have been neglectful of
two things, namely, how to trap the animals under various conditions,
and the assorting and grading of raw furs.

Of all fur bearers, the muskrat is the most numerous and least wary,
hence very easily trapped--in consequence of this: it has been
neglected by writers of trapping to a greater extent than any other
fur-bearing animals. The author of THE ACCOMPLISHED MUSKRAT TRAPPER
feels that he is instrumental in introducing to thousands of muskrat
trappers a long-felt want. Being a trapper of wide experience, he
early recognized the worth of the methods contained herein. Knowing
that a fair trial will convince the most skeptical as to the merits
and practicability of these methods, the writer feels sure that this
little booklet will meet with the hearty approval of trappers
everywhere.



Chapter 1.

Habits and Nature of the Muskrat.

The rodent quadruped muskrat, also known by the Indian name
"Musquash" is a small amphibious animal of North America, being found
as far north as Labrador and Alaska, and ranging south as far as the
states of New Mexico and Arizona. There is only one species of the
muskrat, but naturalists recognize several varieties or subdivisions,
the differentia lying mainly in the color of the fur, firmness of the
skin or pelt, and the physical dimensions of the animal. For example,
the muskrats of the Atlantic coast states are comparatively large and
of dark color; while those of the Northwest prairie region are
smaller, thin and papery in pelt (except those living in clear or
cold water streams) and of paler color. These variations are no doubt
due to climatic and local conditions under which the animal lives.

Generally speaking, it may be said that the muskrat is a nocturnal
animal, but where they are plentiful they are frequently observed
prowling or swimming about during the day. It is found at home in
rivers, lakes and ponds. When inhabiting the former it lives in
burrows dug in the banks; the entrance to these are usually several
feet under water. They are found to be most numerous in swamps which
are heavily bordered with grasses and thickly strewn with scattering
growths of aquatic vegetation. The roots of these plants compose the
principal diet of the animal, while the tops furnish the material for
the construction of their homes. The marsh 'rat differs in its mode
of living from that of its brother the "river 'rat," by its habit of
constructing dome-like houses. This change in abode is due to the
natural environment in which it lives. In many large swamps scores of
these queer little dwellings can be seen towering above the water.
They average about three feet in height, and are composed of the
roots and stems of grasses, reeds, wild rice and flags. The entrances
are located under water. From four to eight 'rats are generally found
in one house.

The muskrat is a herbivorous animal. Its food consists of the roots
of flags, water lilies, etc. It is also very fond of sweet apples and
vegetables, and will often raid a garden when located near its
haunts. It is also partial to grain, especially corn.

Although the muskrat is herbaceous by nature, it is known to eat the
flesh of clams. These it carries upon shore, deposits them in a pile
in some secluded retreat and leaves them to die, whereupon they are
easily opened and devoured with much avidity. The general assumption
is that the animal eats these clams only when other food is scarce.
This, however, is entirely in discord with the observations of the
author, who has on several occasions discovered 'rats feeding on
clams when their favorite food was plentiful. Therefore, it is only
logical to presume, that it is not the lack of food that attracts the
'rat's attention to the lowly clam, but it is the abundance of the
mussel in itself.

Muskrats are our most prolific fur bearers, producing from two to
three litters in a season, the first making its appearance in the
latter part of April or early May. The period of gestation requires
about forty-five days. The young of the early spring litters will
frequently rear one family during the same season. It is this progeny
of these young females that accounts for the numerous kitts (immature
muskrats) taken during the early part of the trapping season.

Considering the wonderful procreative powers of this little animal,
it appears that they would become as numerous as the proverbial "hair
on a dog's back," but they have many enemies, of which man with his
traps and firearms is the most deadly, with perhaps the mink a close
second. Many a time has the writer in his ramblings come onto a 'rat
house, which had a small round boring at the water-line, just large
enough to allow the long, slender body of a mink to pass through. To
the casual observer this would appear to be merely a hole, but to the
trained eye of the trapper it reveals a tale of woe. He knows that
here, during the long, tranquil hours of the night, another family of
muskrats was sacrificed to satisfy the flagrant craving of this
bloodthirsty member of the weasel tribe. When a mink enters a house
or burrow, in the aforesaid manner, the inhabitants flee by way of
the diving hole. If everything remains quiet, they will return, one
by one, to their home in a very few minutes. The crafty mink, knowing
the nature of the muskrat, crouches near the diving hole, remaining
very quiet, and bounces upon the poor, unsuspecting victims as they
emerge.

Occasionally a trapper may come upon the remains of a muskrat and,
following an investigation, cannot detect any clues as to the
identity of the assailant. When there are no telltale tracks about,
then it is safe to assume that the marauder was an owl or some other
bird of prey.

The otter, fox and coyote can also be listed as enemies of the
muskrat, as they too make an occasional capture.

With the above facts in mind, it can be easily understood that
approximately only fifty per cent of all muskrats born ever reach
maturity. In spite of all this, they manage to hold their own and are
found in fair numbers in the rat producing sections.

The animal instincts of the muskrat are not as keenly developed as
those of the designing fox or the wary mink. Unlike the beaver and
otter, it is not afraid of civilization and thrives in the most
thickly settled sections.

Nature in its entirety is wonderful. It is not unlike a vast panorama
of charm and beauty. Here we find the ancient law--the survival of
the fittest--a reality. Many people surmise the muskrat to be very
uninteresting. But those people who are willing to devote a little of
their time to the nocturnal study of the animal will surely
acknowledge it to be a very interesting little creature. Where can we
find the lover of nature whose heart would not be thrilled as we
quietly make our way along some moonlit stream in the late fall (this
being the time of year when 'rats are very busy) to get a glimpse at
the home life of this little fur bearer? As we approach the familiar
patch of cat-tail flags, we hear the persistent crunch-crunch-crunch
of tireless little jaws, as they grind away at the juicy morsel of
flag or water lily. We pause to listen, our little friend seems to be
no more than twenty feet away. Further upstream we hear another and
another in fact; the rushes seem to be alive with them. Some of them
are cutting down the stems of wild rice and flags, while others are
dragging the material away to build and repair their houses with it.
We stand motionless, as we discern a V-shaped streak of silvery lined
ripples playing on the moonlit waters, heading directly toward us
from the opposite shore. We know that the dark object at the head of
this undulating formation is a muskrat, evidently bound on joining
its friends at their feast in the rushes. Hark! There is a sudden
commotion in the flags, followed by a splash and a plunge; then all
is still, the grinding has ceased, the silvery ripples have faded
away and the water is smooth and reflectent, not unlike a great
mirror. We are surprised and wonder at the cause of the sudden alarm,
which drove the 'rats to the sheltering depths of the river. Had we
not remained perfectly quiet? We turn, just in time to see a
monstrous owl glide noiselessly by the moon.

  [Illustration: Fig. 1]



Chapter 2.

Trapping Muskrats--Open Water Methods.

There are numerous methods employed in trapping the muskrat; most of
them will prove successful when they are used under the proper
conditions, time and place. The muskrat being a member of the
amphibious class of animals, consequently traps must be set in or
very near the water to attain the best results. This, however, does
not mean that traps set at random will bring results, but, on the
other hand, when sets are properly placed at signs, then the novice
can rest assured that he will be rewarded for his efforts.

When a trapper decides to operate on a certain stretch of water, his
first duty would be to study the signs of the animal, from the
abundance or scarcity of which he can closely estimate the number of
animals present in that particular locality, also the size of
territory he can handle, and the number of traps required to cover
the same.

What are signs? They are the visible indications which betray the
presence of the animals, such as tracks in the muddy margins of the
shore (see Fig. 1), feed beds, houses, dens, slides, the freshly cut
stems of aquatic vegetation and excremental matter on logs, drift
wood, rocks, and other objects lying in or near the water. To become
expert at reading signs requires practical experience; theory or book
knowledge alone will not do. The success or failure of any trapper
can be measured by his ability to read the signs of the animals he is
seeking and his knowledge of their nature.

Our next consideration will be the selection of the proper traps.
When trapping muskrats with the common steel traps, never use
anything larger than size No. 1 1/2 nor smaller than size No. 1.

The "Newhouse" is without a doubt the best and most reliable all
around steel trap on the market; the material and workmanship
embodied in its construction, combined with its durability, render it
a product of the highest character.

The "Victor" is the most popular of the cheaper kind of traps and is
generally used by those who follow trapping as a side-line. While
trapping 'rats, many trappers prefer the Victor to the Newhouse, on
account of the latter's powerful spring. The forelegs of the muskrat
are comparatively small and frail and easily broken off; for that
reason too strong a spring is not desired.

The various makes of "jump" traps are rapidly becoming very popular.
They are a very compact trap on account of their feature of having
the spring on the inside of the jaws, which permits them to be set in
places where other traps could only be set with great difficulty.

There are many brands of traps manufactured which possess special
features, such as double jaws, webbed jaws, high grip, etc. All of
these traps are excellent for catching muskrats, as they are made to
prevent the animals from gnawing or wringing off, and thus escaping.

One of the best traps for muskrats ever invented is manufactured by
W. A. Gibbs & Son, Chester, Penn. It is made with two sets of jaws;
the inner set gripping the animal's leg, while the outer set clutches
the body. From this trap there is no escape when once caught, in many
cases killing its victim instantly, which benevolent feature makes it
a favorite of many.

Trapping methods may be classified into two separate groups, namely,
blind and bait sets, ranking in the order named. A blind set is
arranged at signs without the use of bait. Traps placed in position
so as to guard the approach to food and scent decoys are termed bait
sets.

Scent decoys, better known as animal baits, are compounded of various
ingredients which appeal to the inborn and irresistible instincts of
the animals, and which assist in enticing them to traps.

The following methods are recognized to be the best and most reliable
for trapping 'rats when streams are free of ice. They will prove
their merits to the beginner when applied intelligently. While the
muskrat is generally conceded to be one of the easiest of fur bearers
to trap, let no one suppose that the careless trapper who makes his
sets in a sort of hit or miss fashion, will ever achieve much of a
success in trapping them.

Perhaps the most common method employed in the capture of this little
animal, is to set traps at the foot of their slides, in two or three
inches of water. A slide, in the trapper's vocabulary, is a place on
the banks frequented by 'rats, usually extending from eight to
sixteen inches above the water and having a kind of plastic perch or
rest at the top, upon which are generally found excrements of the
animal. These slides are easily recognized on account of their worn
and smooth appearance, which is brought about by the animal's habit
of sliding into the water when leaving them. Do not waste any time in
setting traps at old and dried signs, those that are being used will
appear damp and often sprinkled with fresh mud. Where the water is
not deep enough at the foot of the slide to completely cover the
trap, excavate a bed for the same to the desired depth. This rule
should be followed in all forms of water sets. Whenever possible,
always stake the trap chain into deep water at full length, as the
first impulse of the captured game is to seek shelter by diving into
deep water, where, following a short struggle, the weight of the trap
finally drowns it. The sliding pole is another and more certain
method of drowning the animals (See Fig. 2). Drowning will not only
conceal the captured game from possible thieves, but also secure it
for the trapper against gnawing and wringing off, and last, but not
least, this humane act will do away with a lot of needless suffering.

  [Illustration. Fig. 2]

Another good way to take them is at their feed beds. These are
located near shore among the scattering growths of aquatic
vegetation. They appear to be floating in the water semi-submerged,
and are composed of the refuse of the animal's food, such as the
stems of blue flags, wild rice, reeds and bits of various grasses
found growing near their haunts. When making sets on these beds make
sure that the traps are from one to two inches under water, as this
will allow the trap to get a higher grip on the animal's outstretched
leg. Arrange the set so that the catch will drown.

Often while looking for signs the trapper will come upon a small,
narrow path, which is three to five inches in width, leading from the
water to some other body of water near by, or taking its course
across a peninsula to again terminate in the water on the other side.
Such a trail is commonly made and used by muskrats. When you find
such a place, set a trap in the water at each end of the trail. When
making a set where the water is much deeper than the usual depth
required, take sticks about twelve inches long and twice the caliber
of an ordinary lead pencil, shove these into the bank horizontally
about a third of their length and three inches under water, placing
them an inch apart, six in a row. This will make a platform for the
trap, which will overcome the danger of the animals passing over the
set without getting caught.

In the late fall when 'rats are busy building and repairing their
houses, they can be caught by setting the trap on that side of the
structure showing the greatest slope; because here they ascend when
at their labor. When staking the trap at a set of this nature, it is
advisable to drive another stake about a foot beyond the first. The
animal, when caught, struggling winds the chain around the outer
stake, and is thus hindered from reaching the house, where it
otherwise would do great damage, tearing and digging into it. This
would result in frightening the other inmates away, thus lessening
the trapper's chances of duplicating his catch.

The washes under banks and the undermined roots of trees at the
water's edge, created by the ceaseless toil of the elements, afford
good places to set traps, as every passing 'rat will visit such
places. Traps should be set and covered very carefully, as a place of
this nature is often investigated by the elusive mink and inquisitive
raccoon. As a consequence, the trapper has a fine opportunity of
catching a more valuable animal.

When searching the stream for signs, you will often notice the
droppings of the animals on logs and scraps of lumber lying in the
water. These can be converted into excellent sets by cutting a bed
for the trap with the ax, just far enough under water to completely
cover the trap.

When signs and places as described above are scarce, but muskrats are
known to exist, proceed as follows: At some conspicuous place, dig a
horizontal hole in the bank right at the water-line, which should be
about a foot deep and five inches in diameter. Pin a piece of
parsnip, carrot, cabbage or sweet apple, back in the hole. Some
trappers use a piece of the flesh of muskrat, the scent of which is
attractive to muskrats. Set the trap at the mouth of this hole, in
two or three inches of water, conceal carefully by covering lightly
with water-soaked leaves and thin mud. The above is a set equally
good for mink, as this animal has the habit of exploring every hole
that it comes to in its travels.

Another and most simple method, is merely to fasten the bait on the
bank about eight inches above the trap. In reaching for the bait the
'rat will step into the trap and get caught.

Some trappers prefer to use animal baits in connection with their
'rat sets at all times. This, I believe, is wholly unnecessary,
excepting during mating, which occurs the latter part of February and
extends throughout the rest of the trapping season. At this time, a
good, dependable scent will help considerably in luring animals to
traps.

There are numerous brands of scents on the market, some of which are
reliable, but most of them are a farce, and are merely intended to
pry hard-earned dollars from overalls pockets. The formula used in
the manufacture of most of these baits is kept a secret by the
makers. The purchaser, not knowing what ingredients they contain,
faces the perplexing problem of choosing, or more frankly stated,
guessing, as to their merits, when buying.

But, why worry about buying decoys when you can easily make them
yourself? The musk of the muskrat is the best scent known for
attracting this animal. It is found on both sexes, in two cream
colored glands known as castors, which are located just under the
skin of the belly. Remove these from every animal you catch, and
place in an air-tight bottle or jar until needed. When you are ready
to prepare the scent, proceed as follows: Mash the castors into a
fine pulpy state; to every ounce of this mixture add two ounces of
glycerine to give volume and prevent evaporation, also one grain of
corrosive sublimate. Let stand for about a week and you will have the
best muskrat scent obtainable. Cork tightly and keep in a cool place.
Sprinkle a few drops of this scent at every set during the spring
season.

In the early spring, as soon as the first heavy thaws set in
releasing the muskrats from their natural prison, they are eagerly
sought because their pelts are at their best, being fully prime at
this time of year. But trappers are often hampered in their
operations against the lowly 'rat at this particular time, on account
of the absence of signs. This drawback can be overcome as follows:
Procure pieces of two by six (plank), each about four feet in length.
Set two traps on each plank, one near each end, covering them lightly
with dry grass or leaves. Sprinkle a few drops of scent along the
plank between traps. Staple the traps to the ends of the plank and
anchor the same near shore. Some trappers scatter pieces of bait on
the plank, but this is not necessary, as the scent will draw them
much better than food bait at this time of year.

Another method is to build a small mound in about six inches of
water. This can be made of small stones, plastered with mud, and
should extend about six inches above the water. Sprinkle a few drops
of scent on top of mound and set trap at the bottom, staking into
deep water.



Chapter 3.

Trapping Muskrats Under Ice in Winter.

The hustling trapper generally gathers a fair sized collection of
muskrat pelts in the late fall, as 'rats are very active and move
about a great deal at this time of the year, leaving signs in
abundance at which the trapper may set his traps. Then suddenly some
frosty morning as he makes his rounds, he finds the stream covered
with a thin coat of ice, a sign heralding the arrival of winter.
Under the thin ice the traps are setting and undisturbed just as he
left them the day before. Disgusted he lifts them and quits. Right
here is where many 'rat trappers make a mistake: When they find
streams covered with ice, they pull stakes and quit. If these same
trappers knew how to catch them under the ice, they could greatly
increase their annual catch.

What becomes of the muskrat when its natural highway is covered with
ice? How does it obtain its food while thus imprisoned? How can it
breathe under water? Queries such as these are often put to trappers
by those who are unacquainted with the nature of the animal. When
streams are frozen, muskrats are practically shut off from the
outside world, but nevertheless they are as happy as ever, playing
and frolicking in the water and often traveling great distances from
their burrows. When hungry they seek the beds of wild rice and flags,
from which they procure their food. This they carry to their feed
beds or dens to be devoured. They cannot breathe in the water as fish
do, because they are not endowed with gills, but they do travel long
distances under the same breath, and when the lungs have drained the
oxygen, the 'rat comes up to the under side of the ice and exhales.
The bubble thus formed immediately fills with oxygen and is then
again inhaled, whereupon the animal continues on its journey until it
finds it necessary to repeat the operation.

As soon as the ice is sufficiently strong enough to bear a man's
weight, many muskrats are taken by men and boys who get out on the
ice armed with clubs and pursue the animals as they swim along under
the ice; when a 'rat comes up to the ice to replenish its supply of
oxygen, a sharp blow from a well-seasoned club brought down on the
ice directly above the animal will stupefy it. While the animal is in
this temporary state of coma, a hole is cut in the ice and the victim
taken out. When hunting 'rats in this manner, I prefer to use a
shotgun in place of the club, because it is quicker in action and the
terrific concussion which occurs when the shot strikes the ice often
kills the game outright. As many as a dozen 'rats are often taken by
one man in the course of a few hours, as they seem to move about more
freely during the day, when streams are covered with ice. In their
eagerness to get their share of the pelts, trappers often receive a
wetting while pursuing the animals over thin ice. When operating on
thin ice stay in the shallow places; remember the watchword "safety
first."

Sometimes muskrats are driven from their dens by pounding the bank
with some heavy object directly over the entrance; when the animals
are aware of the thumping, they usually flee from imaginary harm's
way by taking to the water; they are then shot as they emerge. The
above methods of taking muskrats through ice are good, but can only
be used on clear ice, not over five inches in thickness, as the shot
will not take effect in heavier ice.

While open water trapping cannot be excelled, in comparison to
results obtained, under-ice trapping will adequately repay those who
are willing to give it a fair trial. No trapper should attempt to
make sets under ice which is much more than a foot in thickness, as
the task would prove too elaborate. The following methods will bring
results when instructions are followed carefully. They are being used
by expert trappers and are the only practical modes for this sort of
trapping:

Setting traps at the mouth of dens is perhaps the best and most
profitable under-ice method known to the trapping fraternity, as it
will be remembered that the average den contains from four to eight
muskrats, and in some instances even more. Therefore it can be
readily understood that the trapper who will locate dens in his spare
time during the summer and fall will be the most successful. While
hunting dens in open water use either a boat or hip boots; select a
quiet day when the water is calm, travel slowly along near shore,
keeping watch for the mouth of dens. These entrances are usually from
one to four feet under water. If the den is inhabited, the entrance
will be found clear of all rubbish and obstructions of any kind. Many
of these holes have a trench-like trail or run extending a yard or
two towards midstream. Whenever a den is found, mark the same by
shoving a stick on the upstream side of the entrance, the top of
which should extend about ten inches above the water level to allow
for a sudden rise of the stream. When dens are thus marked they can
be easily found after ice forms.

Many dens can also be found through clear ice, as follows: Walk along
on the ice near shore until you see a streak of bubbles under the
ice, which is several yards in length, usually extending towards
midstream; further examination will reveal the mouth of den at the
termination of the bubble stream near the shore. Mark dens with
stakes as described above. The traps are lowered into the mouth of
den at the end of a four-foot piece of wire, said end being shaped
into a hook for holding the trap; or, better still, purchase a
"Triumph Trap Placer," which is manufactured by the Triumph Trap Co.,
of Oneida, New York. This is a very handy instrument, used for the
setting of traps in difficult places, especially under ice. In all
den sets, the trap should be placed inside the entrance as far as it
is possible to get it. A wide entrance often allows the game to pass
over the trap without getting caught. This can be overcome by placing
flat stones under the traps or by obstructing the upper half of the
entrance with a wide trap stake, which is pushed into the side of
entrance in a horizontal manner. This compels the game to dive under
it and pass low enough to get caught. The traps are fastened by
slipping the chain ring on to the stake which marks the den.

When the ice is covered with snow, dens cannot be located as
described above. In that case a fair number of dens can often be
found by sounding. This is accomplished by pounding the ice with the
ax in shallow places along the shore, until you find a place which
produces a hollow sound upon being struck; this indicates a 'rat run.
When you find such a place, cut through and set a trap in the run,
then cover the hole in the ice, using sticks and dry grass as a
foundation and then pack tightly with snow. A run is the trench-like
trail under water which leads to the mouth of den. When these runs
are located in shallow water, the body heat of the animals melts the
ice to the extent of several inches directly above the run. This
creates an air space which accounts for the hollow sound when struck
from above.

The barrier set will capture both the muskrat and mink, traveling
under the ice. Every experienced trapper knows that these animals
swim along near shore in their travels, for various reasons, chiefly
while hunting for food. The set is as follows: Cut a narrow channel
in the ice about six feet in length; begin at the bank and work out
towards midstream. Now take sticks and build a barrier the entire
length of channel, shove them down well into the bottom about an inch
apart, leaving the tops an inch or two above the level of the ice.
Leave an opening about six inches wide, twelve or eighteen inches
from the bank, in about six inches of water. In this opening set your
trap. An animal coming along will find this opening, attempt to pass
through and get caught. This set will bring the best results when
used on small streams and drainage canals, as these can be staked
their entire width. When staking small streams, leave an opening for
a trap on each side of the stream. Fasten traps by slipping the chain
ring into the stake at opening. When the water where the set is to be
made is somewhat deeper than eight inches, place flat stones or
similar objects under traps. This should be done to crowd the animals
into the traps. When the ice gets heavier, thus lessening the water
space, then these obstacles must be removed. Cover the holes in the
ice as stated above. It is advisable, also much easier, to construct
the barriers shortly before the streams freeze up.

On warm winter days muskrats often come forth to sun themselves; they
remain but a few moments at a time, but that is sufficient to catch
them in traps which are properly placed in the water at springs, air
holes and rapids, also at the inlets and outlets of lakes and ponds.

In many lakes and swamps muskrats live in houses instead of burrows.
To trap them in their houses, cut a hole on the south side of the
house, then set the trap inside on the bed or in the diving hole.
Fasten the trap to a clog on the outside of the house, then tightly
close the opening with the material cut away; on top of this freely
pack dry grass or reeds and then snow. This must be done to keep the
diving hole from freezing. The traps should be visited at least twice
a day, preferably in the morning and in the evening, because the
animals do not always drown when caught in this way. Before you
decide to set traps in houses, better look up the statute of your
state in regard to this matter. Many states have now enacted a law
making it unlawful for any person, at any time, to destroy, molest or
set traps in or upon muskrat houses.

Where muskrats are plentiful, they are often taken by lowering the
traps through the ice, in three or four feet of water. These traps
are baited with a piece of carrot or cabbage, which is bound to the
pedal of the traps. The muskrats prowling along the bottom of the
stream investigate the dainty morsel and are caught. The best traps
to use for this method are the "Two Triggers" and "Alligator" game
traps, because these traps clutch the animal's body. Should you use
the common steel trap, be sure you use nothing small than size No.  1
1/2, because the game is usually caught by the head. The trigger of
the trap should be set very lightly, so it will spring at the
slightest pressure. This method is most generally used near muskrat
houses, in states where the law prohibits the setting of traps in
these houses.



Chapter 4.

Opportunity and 'Rat Ranching.

The annual catch of North American raw furs has a monetary value of
approximately twenty-five million dollars. The number of pelts
required to reach such a figure must necessarily be very large.
Trapping is done, more or less, by many people, in many walks of
life, who follow the sport for both profit and pleasure; from the
professional pelt hunter, down to the farmer's boy, who during the
winter indulges in trapping as a side line, tending his traps between
chores.

The fur business is and always has been an important cog in American
industry. It furnishes employment for thousands, from the trapper to
the buyer, manufacturer and retailer; but there is now a cloud of
depression threatening on the horizon of the industry. Fur-bearing
animals, which at one time roamed our prairies, streams and
woodlands, in seemingly unlimited numbers, are now rapidly becoming
very scarce, where a few years previous they were very plentiful. The
beaver and several other species of fur bearers are already
threatened with extinction and are doomed to follow in the wake of
the passenger pigeon and bison, unless something extremely radical is
done in the way of game preservation in comparison to present-day
methods. What has brought about this rapid diminution in the ranks of
fur-bearing animals? It is the rapid advance of civilization which
deprives the fur bearers of their natural haunts. It is the inventive
genius of Americans, who, with highly efficient traps, guns,
especially prepared poisons, smoke-torpedoes and other ingenious
devices, contribute to deplete the ranks of the animals; the numerous
fur houses throughout the country, flooding the mails with their
propaganda urging everyone to trap. We can hardly scan the columns of
a paper or magazine during the fur months but what our gaze will fall
upon an alluring display of raw fur advertisements. These
announcements are continually calling for unlimited quantities of raw
furs; they are ever urging men and boys to push their trapping
operations to the utmost. These concerns are giving free advice to
beginners; they offer free instructions in the art of trapping the
fur bearers. All this has had but one result: The fabulous prices
paid for raw furs and the extensive advertising in recent years have
kindled a crusade on our fur bearers which has developed a crisis.
When trapping is carried on to the extreme folly of taking the
animals which should be left for breeding, then our natural supply of
"wild fur" shall cease to be perpetual.

And that is just what is taking place, in spite of the legislation
passed in favor of the fur bearers--in spite of the laws which have
been enacted for their protection by the various states and
territories. In the light of this fact, the question arises: Where
are the millions of pelts to come from that the world needs each
year? The time is not far off when the demand will exceed the supply.
How can we keep an industry alive that can use millions of dollars'
worth of raw furs annually, thus furnishing employment for thousands
of people? There is only one remedy, and that is--fur farming.

Fur farming is by no means a new idea. Farsighted men experimented
with fur bearers early in the seventies. Many people advance the
theory that the animals will not breed or thrive in captivity; but
this argument is not sound; we need only remember that all our
domestic animals were wild creatures at one time.

True, fur farming, like any other business, has its drawbacks; but
these impediments are rapidly conquered by the persistent and
energetic study and scientific research of enthusiastic men, who are
devotedly interested in the welfare of the animals, and the evolution
of the industry to a higher and better standard. In any case, the
injury is not beyond the remedy. For example, some of the early
pioneers in the business felt very much dejected when they discovered
that the animals did not fur properly in captivity. This was later
found to be due to crowded and improper quarters, improper drainage
and the lack of shade about the enclosures. This has been remedied to
the extent that ranch raised fur now excels the "wild" in quality and
beauty. This testimony is verified by the fact that the sum of $3,800
was paid for the pelt of a single "ranch bred" silver fox; a sum that
has never been realized for the pelt of a wild fox of like variety.

Cannibalism among the animals was another evil fur farmers had to
contend with. This was traced to be due to the feeding of improper
foods, and especially underfeeding.

Abortion must also be guarded against. During pregnancy strangers
must be kept away from the ranch, because during this period females
become very suspicious of them and are nervous and restless, often
injuring themselves when thus excited. This trouble is most common
among animals which were procured in the wilds. Each succeeding
generation of ranch raised stock becomes more and more domesticated;
consequently the keeper finds it much easier to win their confidence.

Practically all the failures in fur farming are due to the lack of
experience of the people thus engaged; their failure to take the
proper interest in the animals, so they may understand them and their
requirements.

There are now numerous fur farms located throughout the northern part
of the United States and Canada. These establishments propagate and
improve the breed of fox, skunk, muskrat, raccoon, mink and opossum.

Fox ranching is the leading branch of this industry. There are many
ranches which specialize in high grade foxes, such as black, silver,
cross and red. Prince Edward Island is the center of this industry;
the most valuable foxes in the world are ranched here, being the
result of careful and selective breeding. John A. Lea, of Summerside,
P. E. Island, is recognized as one of America's leading authorities
on the question. He is a man of wide experience and knows the animals
like a mother knows her flock. In his "Facts About Foxes" Mr. Lea
says:

(a) "Fox ranching is an industry begun in P. E. Island in the 80's.

(b) "Raising domesticated silver foxes is now an established success.

(c) "Since 1909 millions of dollars have been paid in fox dividends.

(d) "The domesticated silver fox is tame and easily cared for.

(e) "Foxes will eat anything the ordinary dog will eat.

(f) "The average litter is from three to four pups.

(g) "The total annual increase is about 100 per cent.

(h) "It is possible to breed up or improve any kind of foxes.

(i) "The foxes now ranched on P. E. Island are valued at $6,000,000.

(j) "These foxes earned $2,500,000 for their owners in 1920.

(k) "The average profit to the fox rancher is about 40 per cent annually."

The above facts show that fox ranching Is not a dream, but an
established success, paying large dividends on the capital invested.
This is also true about fur farming in general. There are many cases
on record showing the wonderful results obtained by men who
experimented with skunk, mink and muskrats.

Especially Is this true of the muskrat. I shall endeavor to set forth
here the possibilities 'rat ranching offers to those of small means.
In the large salt water marshes along the Atlantic coast and
Chesapeake Bay, 'rat ranching has been carried on systematically for
many years. This marsh land which was at one time considered
practically valueless is now yielding large returns annually. The
animals are protected from possible poachers by the authorities and
land owners. They are trapped only when the fur is at its best. The
owners see to it that enough animals are left for breeding. Wicomico,
Dorchester and Sommersett Counties (Maryland) compose the center of
this industry. The value of the catch in any one of these counties
runs Into thousands of dollars yearly. And It must be remembered that
this is from land which at one time sold from state or government at
thirty cents an acre.

The following are extracts from a letter by a well known manufacturer
of game traps, who owns a large muskrat preserve In Maryland. I shall
put down these statements, not to encourage anyone to go there, as
the ground is well occupied and trappers are numerous, but merely to
serve as an Illustration of what can be done with the numerous
swamps, ponds and small lakes scattered throughout the rest of the
United States and Canada, and which are now considered practically
worthless:

"Good muskrat marsh in Maryland, where the writer's place is located.
Is selling now for from twenty to thirty dollars an acre... As a
general proposition the owners lease their marshes to the trappers
for a certain part of the catch, which has up to the present time
been anywhere from one-half to two-thirds to the owners... The
marshes never dry up, because they are only a very few feet above sea
level and a great many of them are overflowed at times by extremely
high tides... My 'rats are in an open marsh and I do not furnish them
any feed, or look after them in any way, except to try to keep the
dogs and foxes out of It and to catch the hawks, owls and eagles that
prey on them. The marsh furnishes plenty of natural feed, and the
only thing that is necessary to do is simply to keep their enemies
away and they take very good care of themselves... There are a gre