Produced by Al Haines.




[Illustration: Cover]




[Illustration: "THERE LOOMED OUT OF THE MIST A THREE-MASTED VESSEL."
(_See page_ 175.)]




                             THE ADVENTURES
                                   OF
                             DICK TREVANION

                 _A STORY OF EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FOUR_


                                   BY
                             HERBERT STRANG



                    _ILLUSTRATED BY W. RAINEY, R.I._



                                 LONDON
                              HENRY FROWDE
                           HODDER & STOUGHTON
                                  1911




                 BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., LD., PRINTERS,
                         LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.




                                CONTENTS


CHAPTER THE FIRST
       THE VILLAGE AND THE TOWERS

CHAPTER THE SECOND
       JOHN TREVANION RETURNS HOME

CHAPTER THE THIRD
       THE BLOW FALLS

CHAPTER THE FOURTH
       THE CAVE OF SEALS

CHAPTER THE FIFTH
       ST. CUBY’S WELL

CHAPTER THE SIXTH
       PENWARDEN DOES HIS DUTY

CHAPTER THE SEVENTH
       THE BREACH WIDENS

CHAPTER THE EIGHTH
       A LIGHT ON THE MOOR

CHAPTER THE NINTH
       DOUBLEDICK’S MIDNIGHT GUESTS

CHAPTER THE TENTH
       THE FIRE BELL AT THE TOWERS

CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH
       SIR BEVIL INTERVENES

CHAPTER THE TWELFTH
       PENWARDEN DISAPPEARS

CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH
       CROSS-CURRENTS

CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH
       DOUBLEDICK ON DUTY

CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH
       ACROSS THE PIT

CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH
       A PACKET FOR RUSCO

CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH
       PETHERICK MAKES A DISCOVERY

CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH
       A HIGH DIVE

CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH
       A BARGAIN WITH THE REVENUE

CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH
       THE LAST DEAL

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST
       THE ATTACK ON THE TOWERS

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND
       JOHN TREVANION IN THE TOILS

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-THIRD
       THE PRICE OF TREACHERY

CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FOURTH
       PEACE AND GOODWILL




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"THERE LOOMED OUT OF THE MIST A THREE-MASTED VESSEL" . . . . . .
_Frontispiece, see page_ 175


"’HALT, IN THE KING’S NAME!’ CRIED MR. MILDMAY"


"’STAND!’ CRIED DICK, DASHING FORWARD. ’LEAVE HIM, OR WE’LL FIRE’"


"AS THE SEAL PLUNGED INTO THE SEA, SAM BROUGHT HIS HAMMER DOWN"


"THERE WAS NO ONE TO HEAR THE SHORT DIALOGUE THAT ENSUED AT THE HEAD OF
THE WELL"


"DICK RUSHED LIKE A WHIRLWIND ON THE MAN"


"PETHERICK’S HEAD APPEARED THROUGH THE HATCH"


"DELAROUSSE RUSHED HEADLONG TOWARDS THE APPROACHING GROUP"




                           CHAPTER THE FIRST

                       The Village and the Towers


The village of Polkerran lies snugly in a hollow between cliffs facing
the Atlantic, at the head of a little bay that forms a natural harbour.
The grey stone cottages rise from the sea-level in tiers, as in an
amphitheatre, huddled together, with the narrowest and most tortuous of
lanes between them. Through the midst a stream flows from the high
ground behind, in summer a mere brook, in winter a swollen torrent that
colours the sea far out with the soil it carries down.  The bay is
shaped like a horseshoe; at low tide its mouth is closed by a reef
except at the northern end, where there is always a narrow fairway
between the reef and the sharp point of land known as the Beal.
Northward of this is another little inlet called Trevanion Bay, whence
the coast winds north-east, a line of rugged, precipitous, and
overhanging cliffs, unbroken until you come to St. Cuby’s Cove, where
they reach a height of three hundred feet, and bulge out over the sea
like a penthouse roof.

One August evening, in the year 1804, a wide tubby boat lay in twelve
feet of water, just outside the line of breakers beneath the cliffs,
about a mile and a half from the village.  The sun had been down some
two hours, but there was enough of twilight to show to any one out at
sea—the boat being invisible from the land—that it contained two lads,
one a tall, slight, but muscular youth of seventeen or thereabouts, the
other a thicker, sturdier boy, who looked older, but was, in fact, a
year or more younger than his companion.

"Well, Maister Dick," said the younger boy, "I reckon we’d better go
home-along; it do seem as if the water be too clear to-night."

"They’re not on the feed, Sam, that’s certain," replied Dick Trevanion.
"But I don’t like going empty-handed.  I’m thinking of supper."

"It do be queer, sure enough.  ’Tis a hot night, and they mostly comes
in close when ’tis hot, and the biggest comes the closest.  I ’spect
what us do want is a bit of a tumble, to stir up the bottom and muddy
the water."

Dick Trevanion had come out at sunset with his companion Sam Pollex to
fish for salmon bass, which at this time of year were usually plentiful
along the coast.  For two hours they had had no luck.  Every now and
then a ripple and spirt on the smooth surface showed that fish were
sporting beneath; but though they changed the bait, trying squid,
pilchard, spider-crab in turn; varied the length of line and the weight
of the lead; trailed the bait where they last saw the surface
disturbed—though they tried every device known to them to lure the fish,
they had not as yet been rewarded with a single bite.  It was
exasperating.  Dick knew that the larder at home was bare, and had set
his heart on carrying back two or three fish for supper and next
morning’s breakfast.

"It will be high-water in half-an-hour," he said. "We’ll wait till then,
and no longer."

Baiting his hook with cuttle-fish, he got Sam to row slowly up the shore
towards a spot where the sea broke gently over a yard or two of
half-submerged rocks.  The air was very still; there was no sound save
the light rustle of the waves washing the foot of the cliff.  As the sky
darkened and the last faint radiance vanished from the west, the stars
appeared and the shade beneath the cliff became deeper.  Sam rowed up
and down for some minutes, Dick hauling in his line once or twice to see
that the hook was not fouled with sea-weed; but still there was no sign
of fish.

All at once, when he was on the point of giving up, he felt a slight tug
at the line, which began immediately to slip through his fingers.

"At last!" he whispered, jumping to his feet so hastily as to set the
boat rocking.

He held the line loosely until a dozen yards had run out, then tightened
his grasp with a jerk. Meanwhile Sam had thrown the anchor overboard.

"He’s a whopper," said Dick, letting his line run again.  "See; there he
goes!"

He pointed to a slight phosphorescent glow on the water about twenty
yards away.  The line was running out fast.  It was only a hundred yards
long, and he must check the rush of the fish, or he would lose line and
all.  Grasping the twine with both hands, he exerted a steady strain, at
one moment being almost jerked out of the boat by the violent struggles
of the fish.  He set his feet against the gunwale and pulled again.
With a suddenness that threw him backwards the tension relaxed.

"He’s gone, Sam!  He’s torn away the hook," he cried.

"Scrounch un for a rebel!" said Sam indignantly. "Why couldn’t he bide
quiet!"

Dick wound up his line rapidly, feeling no resistance until he had
recovered about thirty yards of it. Then once more it began to slip
away.

"He’s not gone yet, Sam, after all.  I’ll have him, sure as I’m alive."

Steadily he worked the fish in.  For a few moments he would draw in the
line without resistance; then there was a jerk; it swerved to right, to
left; and he could merely hold his own in the desperate struggle.  But
gradually, fight as the fish might, it was drawn nearer and nearer to
the boat. At the broken water it spent its last energies; phosphorescent
flashes showed where it was dashing to and fro in the vain effort to
regain its liberty. Then, its strength exhausted, it suffered itself to
be dragged slowly towards the boat.

Sam was eagerly on the watch, bending over the gunwale to seize the fish
as soon as it came alongside. Suddenly he flung out his hands, only to
draw them back with a cry.  He had pricked them against the fish’s sharp
dorsal fin.  Once more he stooped, and as Dick hauled hard on the line,
Sam got his arms beneath the fish, and with a mighty heave cast it into
the bottom, where it struggled for a moment and then lay still.

"A beauty, sure enough," said Sam.

"Worth waiting for," remarked Dick.  "’Tis getting late, and Mother will
have given me up, so we’ll go now.  He’s big enough to give us two meals
at least."

They bent down to disengage the hook and wind up the line.  So intent
had they been on the capture of the bass that neither had noticed, until
that moment, a smack about three-quarters of a mile out at sea, sailing
rapidly across the bay towards St. Cuby’s Cove.  The moon was rising,
faintly illuminating the vessel, but casting a deep shadow on the water
immediately beneath the cliff, so that the boys were invisible from the
smack.  Familiar as they were with all the small craft belonging to
Polkerran, they knew at the first glance, in spite of the dim light,
that the smack was a stranger.

"She’s not Cornish," said Dick, taking a long look at her.

"Nor even English," added Sam.  "Maybe a Frenchman from Rusco, though
’tis early for the running to begin."

"They won’t run a cargo at the Cove, surely. The path up the cliff is
too steep, and Joe Penwarden’s cottage too near.  I think she’s a
stranger that doesn’t know the coast."

They watched the smack until she rounded the headland between them and
the Cove, and then began to row in the opposite direction.  They had
just reached the end of the promontory bounding Trevanion Bay on the
north, and had swung round landward, when, their faces now being toward
the open sea, they saw something that caused them to pause in
mid-stroke.  Perhaps a mile in the offing like a phantom barque in the
quivering radiance of the moonlight, lay a large three-masted vessel
with sails aback.  Through the still air came the sound of creaking
tackle, and the boys, resting on their oars, saw a boat lowered, and
then another, which pulled off in the same direction as the smack.

"This be some jiggery, Maister Dick," said Sam. "Do ’ee think, now, it
be Boney come spying for a place to land?"

Those were the days when the imminence of a French invasion kept the
people of the southern counties in a constant state of alarm.

"Boney wouldn’t come to this coast," replied Dick.  "He wouldn’t risk
his flat boats round the Lizard.  No; he’ll make some lonely quiet spot
on the south coast; Boney won’t trouble us."

"Well, daze me if I can make head or tail o’t," said Sam.

"Pull in a bit, so that we can see without being seen."

From the shadowed headland they watched in silence.  The boats had
scarcely gone a third of a mile across the bay when a shrill whistle
cleft the air.  They at once put about, returned to the larger vessel,
and were hoisted in, whereupon the ship made sail, and in the course of
ten or fifteen minutes disappeared into the darkness.

"There be queer things a-doing, I b’lieve," said Sam, while the vessel
was still in sight.

"Maybe," rejoined Dick, "but we don’t know. Don’t speak a word of it
till I give you leave, Sam. ’Tis a matter for Mr. Mildmay if any one."

"Zackly.  I can keep a still tongue with any man; and now seems to I
we’d best go home-along."

He dipped the oars, and pulled, not towards the Beal, beyond which lay
the village, but towards the head of Trevanion Bay.  It was now
high-water. Below the cliff only a narrow stretch of white sand was
visible.  Within ten yards of this beach Sam shipped oars, and the boat
was carried along until its nose stuck in the sand.  Both the boys then
sprang out, and dragged their craft up to the base of the cliff beyond
high-water mark.

"’Tis lucky tide be high," said Sam, wiping his brow with the back of
his hand, "for ’tis a hot night, and old boat be desp’rate heavy."

"True, she’s both heavy and old," said Dick, as he secured her to a post
driven deep into the sand. "She’s a good deal older than you or I, Sam."

"Ay, true, and Feyther have give her more knocks than he’ve give me.
You can see his marks on her, but you can’t see ’em on me—hee! hee!"

Dick laughed.  Many a time had the planks been repaired by old Reuben
Pollex, the signs of whose rough and ready handiwork were easily
discoverable.

Carrying his tackle, Dick ordered Sam to bring the bass, and led the way
along a steep path that zigzagged up the face of the cliff, being soon
hidden from the sea by knobs and corners of rock.  It was a toilsome
climb; the cliff was two hundred feet high, but the windings made the
path three times as long.  When they reached the top, Sam found it
necessary once more to wipe his brow; then followed his young master
across a stretch of coarse bent towards a large building, mistily lit by
the moonbeams, about a hundred yards distant.

The Towers, at one time a manor house of no little importance, was now
in the stage of decrepitude. It had been for centuries in the possession
of the Trevanions, who, in the time of King Charles I., had been a
family of great wealth and influence, owning estates, it was said, in
three counties.  But the squire of that time had sold part of his
property to provide money for the King, whose cause he espoused with
unselfish loyalty, and from that time the family fortunes had gradually
declined, partly through the recklessness of certain of the owners,
partly through sheer ill-luck.  For many years wealth had been drawn
from tin and copper mines beneath the surface, parts of whose apparatus,
in the shape of ruined sheds, scaffoldings, pipes, conduits, broken
chains, strewed the ground in desolate abandonment.  In the early
manhood of the present squire, Dick’s father, the lodes had shown signs
of exhaustion, and Mr. Trevanion, wishing to keep the mines going as
much for the sake of the miners as for his own interest, had spent large
sums on opening up new workings, which proved unprofitable.  He had
mortgaged acre after acre in this fierce struggle with misfortune,
having more than his share of the doggedness of his race; but all his
efforts were fruitless; the mines were closed and the men dismissed; and
the Squire himself at last had no property unencumbered except the land
on which the Towers stood, and the barren cliff between the house and
the end of the promontory, almost worthless save for the little grazing
it afforded.

To this he had clung with grim tenacity.  He was often hard put to it to
pay the interest on his mortgages as it became due; his little
household, consisting now only of himself, his wife and son, and the two
Pollexes, often had barely enough to eat; many a time he was tempted to
raise money on the little remnant of his property; but for long years,
as often as the temptation came, he had resisted it. Though he would not
admit the fact, even to himself, superstition had a good deal to do with
his determination.  He scoffed at the country folks’ belief in omens and
witches, and professed to think nothing of an old motto which had
attached to his family for near a hundred and fifty years.  In the reign
of Charles II., when the Trevanions owned estates not only in Cornwall,
but the adjoining counties, the spendthrift whose extravagance had been
a partial cause of their ruin had, at some crisis in his affairs,
consulted a wise woman who lived alone in a little cottage on the moor.
He brought nothing from his interview with her but the couplet:

    Trevanion, whate’er thy fortune be,
    Hold fast the rock by the western sea.

Like his forefathers, Roger Trevanion derided the witch’s counsel, but,
like them, too, he had "held fast" until, a year before the opening of
our story, he had been forced to relax his grip.  Now every rood of the
land, to the uttermost extremity of the Beal, was in the hands of
mortgagees, and the dread of foreclosure weighed on the Squire like a
nightmare.

The Towers had been allowed to fall into decay. Only one wing was now
inhabited; the remainder was ruinous, and for the most part roofless.
In the south wing lived the Squire, now past fifty years of age, his
wife, a few years younger, and Dick, their only son.  Their sole
attendants were Reuben Pollex, a widower, who had grown up from boyhood
with the Squire, and steadily refused to leave him, and his boy Sam.
These two did all the household work, grew vegetables, bred poultry and
pigs, the sale of which, together with the small sums obtained by
letting to neighbouring farmers the grazing rights of the cliff, was all
that kept the family from abject poverty.  Dick himself was, to a large
extent, the family provider.  With Sam’s help he snared rabbits, shot
wild fowl, and fished along the coast.  His bronzed skin and hard flesh
bespoke an active life in the open air, and as he went about in his
jersey, rough breeches, and long boots, he would scarcely have been
distinguishable from the fisher lads of the village but for a certain
springiness of gait and a look of refinement and thoughtfulness.


Dick and his companion hastened towards the south wing, where an
unusually bright light in one of the lower rooms proclaimed that the
Squire had company.  While Sam took the fish, which turned out to be a
fine fourteen-pounder, into the kitchen, Dick changed his boots, washed
his hands, and entered the living-room.  His father sat at the head of
the table, his mother at the foot; between them was a man of about the
Squire’s age, dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons, with "seaman"
written on every inch of him.  The table was covered with a spotless but
much-darned cloth; the only viands were a loaf of bread and half a
cheese.  A large brown jug contained ale brewed in the family brew-house
by old Pollex.

"Why, Dick, how late you are!" said his mother.  "We are just going to
begin supper."

"Better put it off for a few minutes, Mother. I’ve brought home a fine
bass.  How d’ye do, Mr. Mildmay?"

"Ah, Dick, glad to see you, my boy!  Good fishing to-night, eh?"

"One catch after two hours, sir," replied Dick. "The weather’s too fine,
I suppose."

"Shall we wait, Mr. Mildmay?" asked his hostess.

"As you please, ma’am."

Mr. Mildmay, a naval lieutenant, now in command of a revenue cutter,
knew very well by the expression of the lady’s face that the
postponement of the meal was welcome to her.  He was an old friend of
the Squire’s—a messmate indeed, for Mr. Trevanion had served for a few
years in the Navy; and his acquaintance with the penury of the household
had neither diminished his friendship nor damped the cordiality of the
Squire’s welcome.  In these days there were few visitors to the Towers,
and those who came knew what they had to expect in the way of
entertainment.  Such as might have looked merely for the satisfaction of
the inner man had long since ceased to call.  Mr. Mildmay could have
supped contentedly on bread and cheese.  The meagreness of the fare
would have troubled Mrs. Trevanion the most, and the look upon her face
told Dick how welcome was his addition to it.

Dick went into the kitchen to see how Sam was getting on, and soon
returned with a portion of the fish broiled and garnished with herbs.

"As fine a bit of fish as I’ve tasted," said Mr. Mildmay, "and well
cooked, upon my word."

"I am glad you like it," said Mrs. Trevanion, giving Dick privately an
approving smile.

"You’ll soon be hard at work, I suppose, sir," said Dick to the
lieutenant.

"Yes, no doubt I shall have a merry winter. But I wish the Commissioners
would make better arrangements on land.  What can I do, with miles of
coast to keep an eye on?  One riding-officer and a few old excisemen
here and there!  I can’t be everywhere."

"Why don’t they, sir?" asked Dick.

"Because every man of muscle is snapped up by the press-gang or the
recruiters.  Upon my word, I wish Boney would come, if he is coming.
When he has had his walloping there’ll be a little time to attend to our
proper concerns.  As it is, with this eternal war going on, the
free-traders play ducks and drakes with law and ordinances."

The Squire said nothing.  His attitude to smuggling was one of
neutrality.  His training in the Navy made him in general adverse to the
contraband trade; but there was a time, not very long since, when the
owners of the Towers were actively engaged in it, or at least accessory
to it, and the landowners along the coast regarded it with sympathy,
open or secret.  Indeed, it is probable that the cask of brandy in Mr.
Trevanion’s own cellar had never paid duty to the Crown, and old Reuben
Pollex, who loved his "dish of tay," would certainly not have been able
to enjoy it in that time of high prices unless he had known a little
back room in Polkerran where it was easy to slip in and out secretly,
and without the knowledge of the exciseman.

"The smugglers are getting bolder and bolder, confound ’em," Mr. Mildmay
went on.  "With the land force so weak, what’s the result?  If I’m
called to a spot, ten to one by a trick, I must leave the rest of the
coast unguarded.  As you know, the only man permanently in this
neighbourhood is old Penwarden, who is zealous enough, but not so active
as a younger man would be."

"No, poor man," said Mrs. Trevanion.  "He has often said to me that he
fears the Government will replace him.  He will cling to his duty as
long as he can for the sake of his old sister.  You know he supports
her, in Truro, Mr. Mildmay."

"I know it, and I’m not the man to put him out of a job, though one of
these days a Commissioner of Customs will make his appearance, and then
I’ll get a wigging."

All this while Dick had been considering whether he ought to tell the
lieutenant about the strange vessels he had seen.  He knew that
smuggling was the only matter on which there was a certain constraint
between his father and Mr. Mildmay.  It was tacitly understood between
them that the Squire would not round on the smugglers.  On the other
hand, the revenue officer knew that anything he told the Squire would be
perfectly safe with him.  He therefore discussed the subject quite
openly with his old messmate, though, like a wise general, he never
spoke about any plans that he had in view.

Dick made up his mind to say nothing.  The lieutenant’s cutter was lying
in the little harbour, and if he mentioned what he had seen, Mr. Mildmay
would certainly hurry away and sail in chase of the stranger.  What the
Squire would not do, his son could not.  But he had scarcely come to
this decision when matters took an unexpected turn.

"By the way, Squire," said the lieutenant, "I’ve just heard from
Plymouth that the _Aimable Vertu_—precious fine name for a rascally
privateer—is showing herself very active in the Channel.  She made two
captures last week, and was sighted two days ago off Falmouth, where a
barque only just managed to escape her.  She’s said to be a vessel of
extraordinary speed.  The Government would give a good deal to catch her
and hang her captain, that daredevil Frenchman, Delarousse; but it’s
with privateers as it is with smugglers: we can’t be everywhere at once,
and while we’re fighting the French on the high seas, I suppose our home
waters must be left to the enemy."

This led to an exchange of reminiscences of privateer-hunting during the
American war, when both were young in the service.  Meanwhile Dick felt
uncomfortable.  What if the larger vessel he had lately seen was this
very privateer, the _Aimable Vertu_?  In that case it was no question of
smuggling, but of piracy.  He felt that he ought at least to mention the
matter, yet hesitated to speak without consulting his father.  By-and-by
there came an opportunity of speaking to him privately. While Mr.
Mildmay was conversing with Mrs. Trevanion, Dick slipped to the Squire’s
side and told him in a sentence or two what he had seen.

"Mildmay," cried the Squire, "hark to this. Dick tells me that an hour
or more ago he saw a strange three-master in the bay.  She lowered a
couple of boats, but recalled ’em, and sailed away westward.  D’ye think
she’s the privateer?"

"Dash my bones, Dick," cried the lieutenant, starting up, "why on earth
didn’t you speak before?  Oh!  I see—I see; I won’t reproach you; but
I’ll be as mad as a hatter if ’tis the rascal and she gets away.  Good
night to you all; you’ll excuse me, Mrs. Trevanion.  Oh, you young dog!"

He shook his fist at Dick, and hurried from the room.




                           CHAPTER THE SECOND

                      John Trevanion Returns Home


About half-an-hour before Mr. Mildmay left the Squire’s supper-table so
hurriedly, a man laboured up the last few feet of the winding path
leading from the beach of St. Cuby’s Cove to the cliff-top, which he
gained at a point rather more than half-a-mile from the spot where Dick
and Sam had previously ascended.  He was a tall man, his build and
figure indicating a capacity for lithe and rapid movement, so that the
heaviness of his gait was probably due solely to the size and weight of
the leathern trunk he carried.  Like Sam Pollex, he paused for a moment
on reaching the top to recover his breath and mop his brow; then,
shouldering his trunk, he struck into a narrow footpath that led over
the cliff.  It branched into two after a few yards, the right-hand
branch going direct to the Towers, the left-hand running away from the
sea to join a rough, ill-made road which led past the gate of the Towers
to the village.

On reaching the fork the pedestrian did not hesitate, as a stranger
might have done, but took the left-hand path.  After proceeding a few
steps along it, however, he made a sudden half-turn, and stopped,
looking across the open ground towards the Towers, where one room on the
ground floor made a patch of light against the dark background of sky
and sea. The man stood but a moment, then resumed his march along the
path in the same direction as before. A smile wreathed his lips, and he
muttered to himself.  He went on at a smart pace over the level ground,
turned to the right when he came to the road, passed the Towers’ gates,
which he observed were broken, and walked for another quarter of a mile
before he again halted.  Then he set his burden down by the roadside,
sat upon it, and wiped his heated face, where the smile had been
replaced by a frown.

"I daresay I’m a fool," he muttered in a growling undertone.  "Why did I
chafe and gall myself with carrying this plaguey trunk?  However, maybe
’tis best."

While he was still resting, he heard footsteps upon his right hand, and
looked round quickly.  The moon was up, and he saw a young fisherman
rolling along a path that ran into the road a few paces distant.

"Ahoy, there!" cried the traveller in a deep and mellow voice.

The fisherman, who had not as yet perceived him, came to a sudden stop
as the silence of the night was broken thus unexpectedly and so near at
hand; then, catching sight of the figure on the trunk, he slipped off
the path on to the grass and began to run.

"Ahoy, there!  What ails you?" cried the man. "D’you want to earn a
groat?"

Reassured, apparently, at the mention of so material a thing as a groat,
the fisherman turned and came slowly towards the speaker.

"Did you think I was a ghost?" the stranger went on with a laugh.  "I
want you to carry this trunk to the village, and I’ll give you a groat
for your pains."

"I’ll do it, maister," replied the fisher, shouldering the trunk.  "But
ye give me a fright, that ye did."

"Why, you never saw a ghost with a brown face, and a black hat, and a
blue coat, not to speak of brown breeches and long boots, did you?"

"I won’t say I did, but the neighbours do say there be ghosteses
up-along by St. Cuby’s Well. Maybe yer a furriner, maister?"

"No, no; I’m good Cornish like yourself," replied the man, who knew that
to Cornishmen all who lived beyond the borders of the duchy were
accounted foreigners.

"Well, I can see plain ye be a high person, and jown me if I know why ye
carry yer own bag and traipse afoot, instead o’ coming a-horseback, or
in a po’chay."

The traveller shot a glance at the lad.  He saw a rugged profile, a brow
on which thought had carved no furrows, a half-open mouth: the
physiognomy of a simple countryman.  Then, after a scarcely perceptible
pause, he said:

"Well, I hate close folks who make a secret of everything, so I’ll tell
you.  I got a lift in a travelling wagon from Newquay, but the wretch
that drove it was bound for Truro, and point-blank refused to bring me
farther than the cross-roads a couple of miles back.  So now you know,
my man, and I daresay you could tell a stranger what I’ve told you."

"Sure and sartin.  You be come from Newquay in a wagon, and when ye got
to cross-roads driver said he’d be jowned if he’d carr’ ’ee a step
furder."

"You have it pat; and now step out; ’tis getting latish."

They proceeded along the silent road at a good pace toward the village,
the traveller dropping a remark now and then from which the fisherman
understood that he was not a complete stranger to the district.  Just as
they reached a spot where the road dipped somewhat steeply, there were
sounds of rapid footsteps behind them, and in a few moments two men came
up, one Mr. Mildmay, the revenue officer, the other an old
weather-beaten fellow in seaman’s clothes.  He wore a black shade over
his right eye, and the unnaturally short distance between his nose and
the tip of his chin showed that he had lost his teeth.  This was Joe
Penwarden, the veteran exciseman who had been mentioned at Squire
Trevanion’s supper-table.  On leaving the Towers, Mr. Mildmay had gone
first to the right, and fetched Penwarden from his little cottage on the
cliff, and then retraced his steps through the Squire’s grounds.  Had he
been a few minutes earlier, he could hardly have failed to see the
pedestrian trudging with his trunk on his shoulder along the path that
ran a score of yards from Penwarden’s cottage.

"Halt, in the King’s name!" cried Mr. Mildmay, as he overtook the two
men who had preceded him along the road.

[Illustration: "’HALT, IN THE KING’S NAME!’ CRIED MR. MILDMAY"]

"I’ll halt if ’ee bid me in the King’s name," said the fisher,
recognising the revenue officer, whom he, like the population of
Polkerran generally, held in detestation mingled with unwilling respect,
"but I bean’t doin’ nowt agen the law, I tell ’ee, carr’in’ a genel’um’s
traps for a groat."

"A gentleman, is it?" said Mr. Mildmay, turning to the traveller.  "I
must ask you to tell me your business."

"And you shall have an answer.  I come from Newquay, and am going to
seek a night’s lodging at the Five Pilchards, if you have no objection,
captain."

Mr. Mildmay looked suspiciously at the speaker, whose accent was that of
an educated man.  He was not the type of person to meet afoot with his
trunk on the high road.  Old Penwarden’s single eye also was fixed on
the stranger’s swarthy, bearded face.

"No more objection, my dear sir, than you will have to my taking a look
at the inside of that trunk of yours.  In the King’s name!"

"With all the pleasure in life.  Amos, or whatever your name is, set
down the trunk for the inspection of this exceedingly zealous officer of
His Majesty’s."

The trunk was opened, and Penwarden turned over its contents, Mr.
Mildmay looking on.  He found articles of apparel, a sword, some bundles
of papers, a bag of money, a large leather-bound book, a brace of
pistols, and sundry insignificant articles, none of which was chargeable
with duty.

"Thank you, sir," said Mr. Mildmay, when the inspection was concluded.
"I am sorry to have detained you, but in these times——"

"Quite so, captain," interrupted the other.  "In these times one cannot
be too particular.  I bid you good-night, and better luck at your next
examination."

Mr. Mildmay hurried on with Penwarden, and was soon lost to sight.

"Who’s that popinjay?" said the traveller, when the lieutenant was out
of hearing.

"That be Maister Mildmay, the preventive officer, and a dratted
furriner," replied the fisher.  "He’ve been in these parts two years
now, and a meddlesome feller he be too.  Hee! hee!  He got nowt for his
pains this time, maister, and if there’s one thing I do like to see,
’tis the preventives fooled. Hee! hee!"

"Old Penwarden looks the same as ever, except for the shade over his
eye."

"Do ’ee know him, maister?"

"I used to, years ago."

"Iss, old Joe be a decent good soul of his trade, and we was vexed,
trewly, when ’a got his eye put out in a fight by Lunnan Cove.  But
there, he shouldn’ meddle with honest free-traders. Lawk-a-massy!  I be
speakin’ free."

"Oh, you’re quite safe with me.  I’m a bit of a free-trader myself, in
my way."

They went on, and in a few minutes came to an inn at the lower end of
the village near the beach. This was the Five Pilchards.  The village
boasted another inn, a hundred yards away, called the Three Jolly
Mariners; but it belied its name, being frequented mainly by farm
labourers.

The traveller paid and dismissed the fisher, and rapped at the closed
door.  It was opened by the innkeeper himself, a podgy, red-nosed,
blear-eyed fellow, with an underhung lip, and a chin like a dewlap.  A
small candle-lamp hung above in the doorway, showing a dim yellow ray
upon the smiling face of the visitor.  The innkeeper started back.

"I startled you, eh?" said the visitor.  "Yes, it is I myself—John
Trevanion come home again. I am getting on in years, Doubledick, and I
felt I should like to die among my friends."

"Ha, ha!  Ho, ho!" laughed the innkeeper. "’Tis Maister John, for sure,
come home with his little jokes.  Come along in, maister, come in; daze
me if I bean’t as pleased as pigs to see ’ee."

"Take me to a room, Doubledick, and get some clean sheets, will you?
And send me up something passable to eat and drink; I’ll sup alone."

"Iss, sure.  I’ll give ’ee the best I’ve got in the house.  What do ’ee
say, now, to collops and fried taties, or a nice bit o’ bass, or a dish
o’ pickled pilchurs, and some real old—you know what, Maister John?
Hee, hee!"

"Whatever you like, Doubledick, only be quick about it."

The innkeeper led his visitor along a passage past the open door of the
bar-parlour.  John Trevanion glanced in as he went by.  A number of
rough fishermen in various garments sat drinking on settles along the
wall.  The most noticeable among them was a man of vast breadth, brawny
and muscular, his strong features tanned copper-colour by years of
sea-faring, his thick hair and beard the hue of ebony. The sleeves of
his scarlet jersey were turned up, revealing brown and hairy forearms
that would have befitted a Hercules.

"Tonkin is still flourishing, I see," said Trevanion in an undertone to
the innkeeper as he passed.

"Iss, Zacky Tonkin be as great a man as ever he wer, and a tarrible
plague o’ life to the preventives. Mr. Curgenven—ye mind of him, Maister
John?—died two year back, and they sent a furrin feller, Mildmay by
name, to look arter us mortals—hee! hee! He be a good feller at his job,
a sight better than Curgenven, who loved an easy life, as ’ee could
remember; but Zacky do know how to deal wi’ un, he do so.  Oh, ’tis a
rare deceivin’ game he plays wi’ un.  He’s up-along and down-along, and
this Mildmay feller atraipsin’ arter un, by sea and land, ’tis all one
to Zacky.  Here’s yer room, Maister John.  Do ’ee set yerself down and
I’ll bring ’ee up a supper fit for a lord in no time."

He looked at his visitor doubtfully for a moment.

"I’d axe ’ee one thing," he said.  "Be I to let ’em know down below as
you be in house?"

"To be sure, Doubledick, there’s nothing to conceal.  You might remember
to say that I’ve come from London—no, hang me, I am forgetting; from
Newquay directly, from London ultimately.  You understand?"

"Iss, I understand.  No matter where ’ee come from, if ’twere from old
Nick hisself, they’ll be glad to see ’ee, that they will."

John Trevanion kept to his room until the morning.  At nine o’clock he
left the inn and made his way through the village by back lanes, to
escape the notice of such fishermen as might remember him, and proceeded
at a quick pace along the road to the Towers.  He was dressed this
morning in a black hat turned up at one side with a rosette, a
bottle-green frock coat, white kerseymere breeches, and long boots.  "He
looks summat older and nearer graveyard, as must we all," remarked
Doubledick to a crony as he watched him depart, "but he’s a fine figure
of a man still."

Arriving at the Towers, John Trevanion lifted the latch of the door
leading to the inhabited portion, and entered with the freedom of one of
the family. The Squire was at breakfast with his wife and son.

"Come in," he shouted, in answer to a tap on the door, and rose from his
chair as the well-dressed visitor entered, thinking, as might have been
gathered from his manner, that it was one of the few friends who had the
freedom of the house. But at a second glance his demeanour altered.

"You have made a mistake, I think," he said stiffly, resting both hands
on the table.  His fine face was flushed, and Dick, looking on in
wonderment, noticed that the riband that bound his queue of grey hair
was quivering.

"Surely, Cousin Roger, you’ll let bygones be bygones," said John
Trevanion suavely.  "’Tis now—I don’t know how many years ago."

"When I last saw you, sir, I bade you never enter my door again.  I do
not call back my words, and see no reason to do so.  You will oblige me
by relieving me of your presence."

The words came sternly from his trembling lips. Dick felt himself go hot
and cold.

"Is there no word repentance in your dictionary, Roger Trevanion?" said
his cousin bitterly. "You’re a good Christian, I suppose—go to church
and say the Commandments, ’love your neighbour,’ and all that; but
you’ll harden your heart against one of your own kin that had the
ill-luck to offend you——"

"Stop!" thundered the Squire.  "The offence to me I make nothing of; you
have shamed your name and put yourself beyond the pale of honest men.
’Ill-luck,’ you call it!  ’Twas no ill-luck—though we Trevanions have
enough of that, God knows!—but the act and nature of a scoundrel.  I am
ashamed you bear my name.  I disown you. Take yourself out of my sight."

His wife laid a gentle hand on his arm.

"A pretty welcome, on my soul, for a man who has lived down the faults
of his youth," said John Trevanion.  "I tell you, Roger Trevanion, I
will not put up with such usage—I will not!  I don’t want your
forgiveness; a fig for your friendship! But I demand decent treatment
from you, and——"

"By the Lord that made me," cried the Squire, "if you do not instantly
remove yourself from this house I will have you thrown out.  Do you hear
me, sir?"

John Trevanion’s eyes glittered as he returned his cousin’s wrathful
look.  He half opened his mouth, closed it with a snap; then an
inscrutable smile stole upon his face.  He shrugged, turned on his heel,
and went silently from the room.

The Squire sank into his chair.  The flush had vanished from his face,
leaving it ashy pale.  His hands trembled with excess of indignation.

"My dear, calm yourself," said his wife soothingly. "He is gone."

He made no reply.  Dick sat silent, every nerve tingling with
excitement.  In a minute his father rose, leaving his coffee half
finished, and strode heavily from the room.

"Mother, what does it mean?" asked Dick breathlessly.  "Was that cousin
John?"

"Yes, my dear.  Do not name him to your father.  I will go to him; I
fear he will be ill. Finish your breakfast, Dick, and go to the
Parsonage. You had better stay there all day; Mr. Carlyon will give you
some dinner."

She followed her husband, leaving Dick to his breakfast and his
wondering thoughts.  He faintly remembered his cousin John Trevanion,
who ten years before had lived in the now empty Dower House, between the
Towers and the village, as his father had done before him.  John
Trevanion had then been a gay, careless, happy-go-lucky young man of
thirty, who lived on the Squire’s bounty, riding his horse among the
county yeomanry, hunting with his neighbours, roistering it with the
most rakish young blades of the adjacent manors, joining in daredevil
escapades with the smugglers. His antics and riotings became a byword in
the country-side, and Dick remembered how, when a young boy, he had
witnessed several violent scenes between his father and John after some
particularly outrageous exploit.  Old Pollex had told him that the
Squire had threatened many times that unless John reformed he would no
longer be allowed to occupy the Dower House, and had forgiven him over
and over again.  At last a day came when John disappeared.  Dick had
never learnt the true reason; the Squire never mentioned his cousin;
Pollex, when questioned, shook his head and pursed up his lips, and said
that John Trevanion was a villain; and Dick had formed the conclusion
from stray hints that the ne’er-do-well cousin had been driven out of
the country by some criminal act.  For ten years he had not been heard
of, and he had wholly slipped from Dick’s thoughts.

Having finished his breakfast, Dick took his cap and set off for his
two-mile walk to the Parsonage, where he went daily to receive lessons
in classics and literature from Mr. Carlyon, the vicar.  He had never
been to school, his father’s resources being incapable of bearing the
expense.  A few years before this time the Squire had been seriously
disturbed about his son’s education.  He was himself a sufficiently
competent tutor in mathematics, but what classics he ever had had wholly
left him, and he was miserable in the thought that the boy was growing
up without the elements of the education of a gentleman.  At this point
the vicar stepped in with a proposal.  He was a liberal-minded, genial
man, a fellow of his college, a student of his county’s antiquities, and
in his ’varsity days had been a notable athlete.  Now, though well on in
years, he would often, on a Sunday afternoon after church, lend his
countenance to wrestling bouts and games of baseball among the village
youths.  He rode to hounds, and judged at coursing matches, these and
similar avocations probably accounting for the fact that a history of
the parish, which he had commenced twenty years before, was still
unfinished.  One day he suggested to the Squire that he should give Dick
lessons in Latin and Greek, to keep himself from rusting, as the worthy
man delicately put it, but really to make good the deficiency due to his
friend’s straitened means. Mr. Trevanion gladly accepted the offer, and
Dick had now been for five years under the parson’s capable tuition.

When Dick returned home in the evening he was met by Sam Pollex in a
state of considerable excitement.

"I say, Maister Dick," he said, "this be a fine mossel o’ news.  Yer
cousin John—a rare bad ’un he be—have come home-along."

"I know," replied Dick.  "I’ve seen him."

"Have ’ee, for sure?  I hain’t seed un, but I heerd tell on un in
village.  Ike Pendry were goin’ along road last night when up comes my
genel’um and axed un to carr’ his bundle for a groat.  He wer traipsin’
along from St. Cuby’s Cove way, about an hour, it do seem, arter we come
up from fishin’."

"Where had he come from?"

"Newquay, ’a said; but ’tis my belief he come out o’ the smack we seed,
and clomb the cliff, same as we."

"That’s nonsense.  He wouldn’t come in a smack, and if he did he
wouldn’t land at the Cove. He has made no secret of his return, and
there’s no reason why he shouldn’t land at the jetty."

"Ah, well, things be as they be; but I reckon he come in the smack, all
the same."

"What is he doing in the village?"

"He bean’t there no longer.  This arternoon he packed up his traps and
rid off on one of Doubledick’s hosses to Trura.  Feyther seed un go.  ’A
called to un as he rid by.  ’Hoy, Reuben!’ says he, ’’tis a cold
country, this!’  That just ’mazed Feyther, ’cos it was a frizzlin’ day.
’Spect he’ve been in furrin parts, wheer what’s bilin’ to we is nawthin’
but chill-off to they.  So ’tis, to be sure."

At this piece of news Dick felt much relieved. He