Transcribed by David Price from the 1891 Hugh Jones, Llangollen, edition,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                                AN ACCOUNT
                                    OF
                           VALLE CRUCIS ABBEY,
                               LLANGOLLEN.


                    _And all the Recent Discoveries_.

                     [Picture: Picture of the abbey]

                             Price Twopence.

                                * * * * *

             LLANGOLLEN: PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HUGH JONES.
                                  1891.




Valle Crucis Abbey.


The venerable ruin of Abbey de Valle Crucis—in other words, Abbey of the
Vale of the Cross, or, as the Welsh call it, Mynachlog y Glynn, Mynachlog
Glynn Egwestl, Mynachlog Llan Egwestl, Mynachlog Glyn Eliseg, and
Mynachlog Pant y Groes—is situated in a lovely and sequestered valley,
about two miles from Llangollen, on the right of the road towards Ruthin,
and is approached by most delightful routes.

We go over the Dee Bridge and follow the road to the left, or we may take
a walk for about a mile along the canal side (reached by the footpath
leading through the wicket nearly opposite the Railway Station), passing
over the third bridge, before reaching Pentrefelin Slate Wharf, into the
road again.  About a quarter of a mile further on there is a gate leading
to a field on the right, through which a path wends right to the grand
old Abbey.  Those more inclined to drive the distance can have their
demands satisfied at reasonable charges at the cab-stand and the hotels;
while to those who would prefer gliding along the smooth water of the
canal as far as Pentrefelin Wharf, ample opportunity is afforded by
pleasure boats, which run at intervals daily in that direction.  Or the
place may be reached by travelling per rail to Berwyn Station, then
crossing the Dee by the Chainbridge, whence the distance to the Abbey is
only half a mile.

The sequestered spot on which was built the Abbey in the year 1,200, by
Madog ap Gruffydd Maelor, Lord of Dinas Bràn, and from which it takes its
name, was known as Pant-y-Groes, or the Glen of the Cross, long prior to
that time.  It was so called from a very ancient inscribed pillar or
cross, the mutilated remains of which stand in an adjacent field.

The Abbey was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and belonged to a community
of Cistercian monks, an order founded in France in the year 1098.  The
remains of the Abbey Church are the most entire and picturesque part; but
adjoining the southern side are the remains of the Abbot’s lodgings,
consisting of the chapter house and dormitories above.

The church was built in the form of a cross, which was contrary to the
form in common use prior to the twelfth century, and it is hence inferred
that Madog availed himself of the aid of the Free Masons, as they were
incorporated about this time, and were the chief undertakers of such
works.  Sir Christopher Wren, in his Parentalia, describes their
government as regular, and they were wont to make an encampment in huts.
A surveyor governed in chief; every tenth man being called a warden and
overlooking nine.  They ranged from country to country as they found
churches to be built, and are supposed to have first introduced the
cruciform style for religious edifices.

The eastern end of the church appears the most ancient, and the three
lancet-like windows have a very peculiar effect.  The northern side has
been almost destroyed, and there is no vestige of the roof except in the
eastern side of the southern transept.  The choir was without aisles, but
each transept had one on the east side, which seem to have been used as
chapels.

The west front of the church affords some admirable specimens of ancient
Gothic architecture.  The chief entrance was through the ornamental
pointed-arch gateway at the west end, over which is a fine window,
consisting of three lancet-shaped arches, surmounted by a circular or
rose window of eight divisions.  Above this window are the remains of a
mutilated inscription, of which the following is probably a correct
translation:—

    “The Abbot Adam did this work.  May he rest in happy peace.  Amen.”

High up in the southern wall is to be seen a small loop-hole,
communicating with a passage which leads over the vaulting of the
southern transept aisle to the abbatial building adjoining the church.
This passage is now blocked up, but it is conjectured to have served
either as a closet wherein the Abbot could attend service privately, or
else as a place of confinement or penitence for the monks.  The
architecture of this portion of the church corresponds in its style with
the date of its erection, the commencement of the thirteenth century; the
lancets, with their mouldings, are strictly of that date, and the
capitals of the shafts, which are worked with great boldness, are of the
late Norman period, rather than of that which is called early-pointed.

The side windows are each of two lights, the principal arch-head being
solid, but pierced with a single aperture divided into six foliations.
Above these three windows run a kind of framework, similar in some
respects to that at the eastern end of the choir.  On the external face
of the western end are two bold buttresses of a single stage, that on the
south-eastern side being pierced for loop-holes for a circular staircase
formed in the thickness of the walls and itself.

From some numerals attached to the inscription before mentioned, it is
inferred that the Abbey was in complete repair in 1500; it is certain
that it was dissolved in 1535, and its rapid demolition shows that there
was not much veneration exhibited by the people of the district for this
once elegant structure, for many of the neighbouring churches benefited
from its spoliation.  This was probably owing to the progress of the
Reformation.  At Porkington, near Oswestry, the seat of Lord Harlech, in
the saloon of the mansion, is a curious painting, part of the altar-piece
of the Abbey; and in one of the dormitories was found a sepulchural
monument, carved with running foliage, with this broken inscription:—

    “Hic Jacet—Arvrvet.”

A perusal at this juncture of the following paper, read at a Congress of
the British Archæological Society, held at Llangollen during the last
week in August, 1877, by Mr. E. P. Loftus Brock, F.S.A., one of the
honorary secretaries, will be advantageous:—

    “The charming valley, surrounded with pleasant hills, which shut it
    out of the world beyond, the hardly audible ripple of the flowing
    streamlet, and the absence of any prospect save of the enclosing
    hills, alike tell us that this is the site of a monastery for monks
    of the Cistercian Order.  They would alone be sufficient to record it
    were the voice of history silent and the architectural arrangements
    untraceable.  At the back of the dormitory fireplace is a narrow room
    parallel with the former.  It is probably the muniment room, while I
    assign to the sacristan another small apartment at right angles,
    since it communicated by a passage over the vaulting of the south
    transept chapels with the niche before alluded to.  The cloister
    space has no trace of the cloister buildings, but from the position
    of the corbels for the roof-timbers, &c., and from the absence of the
    remains, it is probable that here, as in many cases elsewhere, they
    were formed of wood.  The foundation of Valle Crucis Abbey and its
    date have indeed been subjects of much doubt.  Sir W. Dugdale, on the
    authority of Leland, rightly ascribed the foundation to Madog ap
    Gruffydd Maelor, Prince of Powis, and assumed that this was about
    A.D. 1200.  We are indebted to an associate, Mr. Morris C. Jones, the
    active hon. secretary of the Powys Land Club, for a discovery of no
    small importance with reference to the history of the Abbey.  By a
    process of close reasoning he has demonstrated that one of the
    charters supposed by Dugdale to have referred to another building, in
    reality is the foundation charter of this Abbey, granted by Madog.
    We learn by this discovery that Valle Crucis was an offshot from the
    less celebrated but parent Abbey of Strada Marcella, and that a few
    monks of that house were the first occupants here.  Philip is spoken
    of as being then the prior, showing that before the granting of the
    charter much preliminary work had been done.  We may accordingly with
    confidence consider him as the first prior, and place him at the
    commencement of the scanty list of those whose names have been
    recorded.  The foundation charter is undated, and we are therefore
    left no nearer to the verification of Dugdale’s guess, while Mr.
    Jones is led in support of his argument to devote much of his
    reasoning to prove that this spot was known then, and later by the
    old-sounding title of Llan Egwest.  It may be worth while here to say
    that one of the latest seals of the Abbey extant, in the Herald’s
    office of a date early in the sixteenth century, has this name on its
    legend, thus indicating that even at this late date Valle Crucis was
    known by its original name.  The buildings of the Abbey afford a
    perfect model, so far as they remain, of the arrangements of a
    Cistercian House, and we will survey these in order.  But it might be
    as well to announce than since no correct plan of these remains has
    yet been published, the council of this association has determined to
    have engraved one which was carefully prepared by the late Mr. S.
    Buckler, and which exists among many other papers of considerable
    interest which he bequeathed to the British Museum.  The church is of
    the usual cruciform type, an aisleless presbytery, transepts with two
    chapels forming an eastern aisle to each.  There has been a low
    square tower over the crossing, and a nave of six bays with two side
    aisles.  The extreme length is 165 feet, length of transept from
    north to south 98 feet, width of nave and aisles 67 feet 6 inches,
    width of chancel 30 feet, and of transept 30 feet.  It will be seen
    that the east and west gables are all but perfect, and that the north
    and part of the south walls of the chancel still remain.  Also those
    of the south transept and of the north aisle of the nave.  The south
    wall of the nave is almost perfect, but is hidden by the luxuriant
    ivy, which here and elsewhere adds so greatly to the beauty of the
    building in its state of ruin.  The bases of the nave piers are
    traceable—thanks to the careful clearance by Viscount Dungannon and
    Mr. Wynne in 1854.  The east end and the transepts are designed in a
    severe style of the First Pointed architecture, and the peculiar
    plaster buttresses of the exterior are more curious than beautiful;
    the treatment certainly indicates some local influence, but whether
    we should consider it as derivable from Dublin, as a late writer
    suggests, or as evidence of a Welsh school of architecture, is open
    to question.  The Principality is full of evidence of peculiar
    treatment of architectural detail, both of early and of late work,
    which seems to afford evidence that the old Welsh builders were not
    content to copy the style prevalent in England, but impressed upon
    them their own peculiar treatment.  The lofty eastern lancets spring
    from a height, which must always have been, for the size of the
    church, remarkably little above the pavement, and there is just a
    trace of a moulded arched label over the two upper lancets.  This
    arch probably indicated the line of the presbytery, whether of arched
    boarding or of vaulting.  The corbel table around the presbytery and
    transept walls is bold and peculiar, and is of two patterns.  The
    shafts internally afford some evidence probably of an intention of
    vaulting the ceiling, which was never carried out, and the sloping
    line of stone visible inside and out in the walls seems to be
    indicative that the west end of the chancel was once covered by a
    hipped roof.  This could only be prior to the erection of the central
    tower.  The other sloping line crossing is that of the roof of the
    sacristan’s passage to the loop.  The slit on the south side is from
    a curious little room and passage at the back of the monks’
    dormitory.  A great many guesses have been made to determine the use
    of this passage and the loop-hole, probably from the abbot’s oriel in
    St. Bartholomew’s, London; it has been called the abbot’s closet.  It
    is, however, that for the sacristan, from which he would watch the
    perpetual lamp of the sanctuary at night.  The high altar has not
    stood touching the east wall, but away from it, as at Fountain’s
    Abbey and many other places.  The aumbry in the south wall has a
    semicircular arch, and has been double.  The bases of the four altars
    of the transept chapels are very apparent, and they have been covered
    with arcading.  They are attached, as is usual in these positions, to
    the east walls.  The intermediate arches dividing the chapels have
    probably been filled in only to a certain height, to allow of the
    picturesque effect being preserved.  Each of these altars is
    furnished with a piscina.  The northern altar of the northern
    transept has a detached pillar piscina.  The others have lockers in
    the wall in several instances, and the elegant and early carving of
    the brackets of the piscina will be observed with interest.  There
    are two floor drains to the north-east chapel.  The remaining arches
    of the transepts are designed in a very severe style, and the
    capitals are a tradition of some building of earlier date.  The
    borders of the arches are simple rectangles without even a chamfer,
    but the effect is excellent.  We may in the sheltered stonework of
    these chapels observe that the whole surface of the wrought stone has
    been covered with a film of plastering upon which coloured
    decorations are still traceable here and there.  This use of colour
    was forbidden in Cistercian houses, and I am for one glad to think
    that in some cases their rules were sometimes more honoured in their
    breach than in their observance.  The same is observable at Old
    Cleeve Abbey.  These traces of colour have not, I believe, hitherto
    been noticed, and another feature of interest may have attention
    directed to it.  Many of the stones have masons’ marks.  I collected
    readily a dozen or more different examples, besides others slightly
    different or reversed, and they deserve comparison with those that
    have been noted elsewhere.  It has sometimes been stated that all the
    buildings are of the same date, but a small amount of inspection will
    assure us that the east end is the oldest, say of a date within the
    first twenty years following that of the foundation; the transepts a
    little later, and the west front, as represented by its style, about
    1,260.  The ground floor of the conventual buildings is of the same
    date as the transepts, the style possibly older, but the dormitory
    floor above is at least 150 years later than the foundation, since we
    cannot assign an earlier date than the middle of the fourteenth
    century.  The square-headed doorways have the same flowing mouldings
    as the windows; at this time the arches and flowing tracery of the
    chapter-house were added into the older openings.  The western lancet
    of the south transept is filled in with tracery of the fifteenth
    century date into the older opening.  There are traces of the use of
    stonework of earlier date than in these buildings.  The fireplace in
    the muniment room has an inscription which has often been given,
    which shows that it was once part of a tombstone.  The sill of the
    little unglazed niche looking from the room at the end of the
    dormitory into it has been part of an incised slab.  The present
    rough roof of the dormitory is modern, but the water tables in the
    south transept gable show that it is of the same pitch as the
    original one.  The door in the south side of the refectory is an
    unusual feature.  It was probably for hoisting up the trusses of
    straw for the monks’ beds, and for the passage of articles which
    could not be brought up the narrow day stairs.  Several rectangular
    apartments are indicated, and it is probable that the refectory
    extended north and south.  Just a trace of a wall at right angles to
    the day-room going west may be traced among the farm appliances at
    this corner, and also an angle buttress.  All the walls are
    constructed of their dark blue slaty stone, with dressings of reddish
    freestone, all of great durability and excellent workmanship.  The
    main windows of the church are not rebated for glass, and it is
    probable that they were filled in with stained glass secured to the
    iron stanchion bars, which have been numerous, and wedged into the
    stonework.  Since these would not be furnished with open casements,
    the ventilation of the building has been assisted by several small
    square apertures, the original putlog holes of the builders, but
    which are formed quite through the walls.  The income of Valle Crucis
    at the dissolution was £188 clear, and £214 3s. 5d. gross, and the
    largest of any Cistercian house in Wales; that of the parent abbey of
    Ystrad Marchel was only £64 14s. 2d.  The surrender was in the
    twenty-sixth Henry VIII., and was thus among the lesser monasteries.”

Commenting upon the foregoing, a lady well versed in the history of the
Abbey writes that “Valle Crucis Abbey was founded, in 1199, by Madoc ap
Gruffydd Maelor, Lord of Bromfield and Yale, for Cistercian monks.
Powell, in his _History of Wales_, makes no mention of its having any
connection whatever with Strata Marcella, founded by his ancestor, Owen
Cyfeiliog, Prince of Powis, fifty years or more previously; and no remark
is made of Valle Crucis having had any of its revenues, as none of the
charters of Valle Crucis prove in any way that such was the case.  It
would take thirty years at least to build it, and, of course, changes
would occur in that time.  The architecture is in this case an authority
to go by: the east end is the first transition from Norman to Early
English; and a few alterations have been made in the Church, the circular
window at the west end being of a later date and put in by, Adam the
Abbot about 1340.  The lancet window in the south aisle has had tracing
put in subsequently, but not in the fifteenth century.  What remains of
the conventual buildings is the Chapter-House, and the whole barn, and
one of the dormitories.  The Cloisters which formed the square in front
are all destroyed.  The Kitchen, Refectory, and Guest Hall were on the
south side of the Cloisters, which are also destroyed.  The Abbey was
purchased by Mathew Trevor in 1620–1625, not from such a person as
Cneifiwr Glâs, whom Mr. Pennant calls a low-lived partizan of Cromwell’s
(I don’t believe that Cromwell, as Protector of England, would have
companionship with such a low fellow).  I have seen the conveyance for
purchase between Sir Thomas Trevor, his Majesty (James I.), Lord Chief
Justice, and Mathew Trevor, of Trevor.  I have this moment the panels of
the pew doors in Llantysilio Church, dated M.T. 1630, in my possession.
The Abbey was not dissolved before 1538, and it was destroyed at the same
time.”

By the removal of the rubbish in 1851, under the praiseworthy
superintendence of Viscount Dungannon, by which the whole of the area was
cleared, leaving the pavement and sides as they formerly existed, some
interesting discoveries were made; among others, the tombs of benefactors
buried in front of the high altar; a half-length figure of a knight in
chain armour—Jenaf ap Adam of Trevor—and some fragments of his wife
Myfanwy’s tombstone.  Another of a lady, with the following inscription:—

    “Hic Jacet Gweirca filia Owein cuj.  Animæ propicietur Deus.  A.M.
    1290.”

Another tombstone has a wolf on a shield, with an imperfect inscription:—

    “Edwardus filius Yo.”

This stone is curiously carved with a chase.  A stone coffin was also
found in one of the side chapels; the bases of five altars; a stone
pulpit base, also those of the pillars that divided the nave and aisles;
a few pieces of painted glass, and encaustic tiles.  A double benetoir,
or holy water-vase, is in the arch near the tomb in the north transept.

Previous to these discoveries, while digging in the farm-yard adjoining
for drainage purposes, at a short depth from the surface, were found the
remains of eleven men, in a very small compass of ground, which goes far
to prove that this was the common cemetery of the monks; and also a
wedge-like stone, having carved on its front a hand, holding a vine or
olive-branch, bearing fruit.  This stone was removed to Plas Newydd.

In this Abbey was also buried Iolo Goch, Lord of Llecryd, Owain Glyndwr’s
bard.

The conventual buildings were re-roofed in 1878, after having been sadly
neglected for many years.

In the year 1879 the whole of the modern out-buildings in close proximity
to the Abbey were demolished, by which a far better view of the ancient
structure is now obtained.

Another improvement was commenced in the year 1883—the clearing out of
the chapter house, a part neglected and used as a farm house for many
generations.  These excavations brought to light the bases of the
pillars.

There are some fine old trees on the grounds, dating, we should say,
three hundred years back, if not more; and hovering always about this
hallowed spot will be seen a number of jackdaws, birds proverbially said
to have a more than ordinary regard for old ruins, an ascription which
may account for the fact that Valle Crucis Abbey is the only place in
this part of the country where they make their home.

The following were some of the endowments of the Abbey:—Half the tithes
of Wrexham, bestowed on it by Reyner, bishop of St. Asaph, who died in
1224; and the other half by his successor, Bishop Abraham, in 1227.  And
Howel ap Ednyfed, another bishop, endowed it with those of Llangollen.
The monks also obtained the patronage of many other livings, such as
Wrexham, Rhiwabon, Chirk, Llansantffraid, and Llandegla; but their title
to these, as well as to Llangollen, was disputed by Bishop Anian,
commonly known by the name of _Y Brawd Du o Nannau_, or the Black Brother
of the House of Nanney, a dominican consecrated in 1268, who brought his
cause before the Pope’s delegate, the official of Canterbury, and the
Abbot of Taley, in Carmarthenshire, and obtained a decision in favour of
himself and his successors; but as there was some doubt as to the
patronage of the church of Llandegla, they allotted in lieu of it to the
Abbey a third of the tithes of Bryneglwys.  In the year 1291, the abbot
was found to have, near the monastery, a grange, with three plough lands,
a mill, and other conveniences, valued at £3; the grange of Bodëang,
Tregam, Rudrym, and Backeton, set for £5 10s.; the dairy farm of Nant,
and the grange of Nystroyz, Convereth, and Grenny-champt, set for £3 19s.
8d.; also the grange of Wyrcesham, consisting of one plough land and some
pasture, valued at 15s., and thirty cows at the expense of 30s.

The freemen of Llangollen made a grant of a fishery to the monks, in a
part of the Dee near the town, and, for want of a seal of their own, they
affixed to their grant that of Madoc, the founder of the Abbey.  The
monks soon afterwards erected new works on the river, for the purpose of
taking the fish; this caused a dispute between them and the freemen; and
these last referred the matter for decision to the abbot and five monks
of their own choice, who were to determine the matter upon oath.  Madoc
and his secretary, John Parvus, appointed a day for the purpose; the
assembly was held, the oaths solemnly administered, and the abbot and
monks made the decision (as might have been expected), in their own
favour.  They alleged they had bought the right of erecting what works
they pleased, and of repairing them, from the heirs of Llangollen.  Madoc
confirmed the decree, and the donation of a fishery, by an instrument
dated 1234.

The revenues of the monastery at the time of its dissolution, in 1535,
were £188 per annum according to Dugdale, but Speed reckons them at £214
3s. 5d.  The last abbot was John Hern, who received an annuity of £23 on
his surrender.  This, together with £10 13s. 4d. to some of the brethren
or surviving monks, were the only charges remaining in 1553.  It remained
in the crown till the 9th of James I., who granted it to Edward Wotton,
afterwards created Lord Wotton.  In 1654, we find a lady, Margaret
Wotton, a recusant, to have been in possession, and that it was put under
sequestration by order of the commissioners of the ruling powers.  The
Abbey now belongs to Rice Thomas, Esq., who is the proprietor of the
Trevor Hall Estate, and is under the charge of the Rev. H. T. Owen, by
whose kind permission the visitor, on the payment of the small fee of
6d., may inspect the interior.

Through the exertions of the Rev. H. T. Owen, some very interesting
excavations have been made of late years.  During the summer of 1888, Mr.
Owen caused some investigations to be made in the Monks’ Dormitory, for
by removing surface earth that accumulated there during the time it had
been in ruins, five very interesting sepulchral slabs were discovered of
very early date, not later than the tenth century.  There is one which
has a Norman sword on it, and also an inscription which cannot be
deciphered but with some degree of uncertainty.  It can be read as
follows:—

    “Jacet Oidus Madoc . . . Insignis Cele Ominu Crucis,”

which may be translated:—

    “Here lies Owi dus Madoc, a distinguished Warrior of the Cross of
    Heaven.”

Another stone contains a beautiful floriated cross with a circle, which
may be taken for the tombstone of an Abbot or Bishop.  There is another
floriated circle, in splendid condition, with no inscription whatever.
The other two are simply fragments, one having the point of a spear very
distinct, and on the other the old Grecian ornament.  As these stones
form part of the vaulting of the slype, and are of much earlier date than
the present Abbey, and were inserted there when the vaulting was erected,
it is a certain proof that there must have been a religious house here
long before this edifice was erected.  Some antiquarians make out one
stone to be Anglo-Saxon or Anglo-Hibernia.

During the year 1889, which was the year of the Queen’s visit to
Llangollen, Mr. Owen started again to make further excavations.  This
time he turned his attention to the excavation of the exterior of the
north transept and aisle, and here he came upon the buttress of the north
transept in splendid condition, also the plinth and buttresses of the
north aisle, and at the north-west corner was found a magnificent
buttress like a turret tower, and all in excellent state, as sharp as if
they had been newly erected, although they had lain buried for centuries,
and would have been still buried only for the exertions of Mr. Owen to
make this noble ruins interesting to visitors.

In these excavations, between two buttresses, close to the foundations,
was discovered a very interesting stone, about 5 ft. 6 in. long,
containing a Knight Templar’s sword, or rather a double-handled sword,
beautifully sculptured at the foot.  This was a very interesting find,
and well worth any one’s inspection, especially antiquarians, to whom it
must be of great interest, for this shows at once that the Knight
Templars must have had something to do with the Abbey either in its
erection or as Pilgrims.  Or there is another theory respecting this
interesting stone:—Knight Templars were usually regarded as the military,
and it is possible that a Knight Templar might have been killed in
defending the Abbey in those troublous times, and possibly was buried
close to the foundations, and this stone, which has no inscription,
erected to his memory.

In this excavation was found some beautiful specimens of old stained
glass of the thirteenth century, a few tiles, and several pieces of
molten lead, which is a certain proof that it had been burnt down at some
time or other, probably the same time as the Castle of Dinas Bràn, during
the last struggle of the Welsh for their independency.

Valle Crucis now contains three things which are not found in any other
Abbey, viz., the oldest Stone known to antiquarians, with a date on;
Knight in Armour; and a Knight Templar’s tombstone.

Admission can be obtained by ringing the bell at the west entrance, which
will bring the custodian to the door, who, with every courtesy, will
conduct the visitor among the ruins and answer any queries respecting the
same.




The Pillar of Eliseg.


Leaving the Abbey, let us now proceed through the adjoining meadow to the
Pillar of Eliseg, to which we have previously referred.  It is situated
in a field opposite the second milestone from Llangollen, and stands on a
slight elevation, called Llwyn-y-Groes, or the Grove of the Cross.
Similar monuments were generally erected on a tumulus or sepulchral
mound, and inclosed in a grove.

It is among the first lettered stones that succeeded the Meini-Hirion,
Meini-Gwyr, and Llechau, and was erected by Concenn ap Cateli, in memory
of his great-grandfather Eliseg, whose son, Brochmail Ysgythrog, Prince
of Powys, grandfather of the founder of this rude monument of filial
veneration, was engaged in the memorable border wars at the close of the
16th century, and was defeated at the battle of Chester in 1607.

It remained erect and entire until the civil wars, when some of
Cromwell’s ignorant zealots, mistaking it for some Popish cross,
overthrew and broke it, and it remained for more than a century in a
prostrate state, until the Rev. John Price, Bodleian Librarian, uncle to
the late Dr. Price, formerly of Llangollen, wrote to Trevor Lloyd, Esq.,
of Trevor Hall, who, with praiseworthy zeal, had its mutilated remains
reared again into its base, which had not been removed, and placed upon
it this Latin inscription:—

    Quod hujus veteris monumenti superest diu ex oculis remotum et
    neglectum tandem restituit.  T. Lloyd, Trevor Hall, 1779.

Translated as follows:—

    T. Lloyd, of Trevor Hall, at length, in the year 1779, restored what
    remains of this ancient monument, that had been for a long time
    removed from sight and neglected.

The Cross, or rather Pillar, was formerly twelve feet high, but at
present is little more than eight feet, and is inscribed all round with
letters.  It has a round band, resembling a cord, arranged as if in
drapery, round an altar, with a ring in each compartment, part of which
is either broken or worn away, but the form is clearly defined.  The
inscription is now much defaced, but when the monument was restored, the
characters were carefully copied by Mr. Lloyd, the great antiquarian of
that period, who gives them as follows:—

    Concenn filius Cateli—Cateli filius Brochmail
    Brochmail filius Eliseg—Eliseg filius Cnoillaine
    Concenn itaque pronepos Eliseg edificavit hunc
    Lapidem proavo suo Eliseg.

The following seems to be the exact translation:—

    Concenn, the son of Cateli; Cateli, the son of Brochmail;
    Brochmail, the son of Eliseg; Eliseg, the son of Cnoillaine;
    Concenn, therefore, the great-grandson of Eliseg, erected this
    Stone to his great-grandfather Eliseg.




ADVERTISEMENTS


                               ESTAB. 1838.

                                BEDFORD’S,
                                FRITH’S, &
                                POULTON’S

                             PHOTO. PICTURES.

                                * * * * *

                             _MAPS & GUIDES_.

                                * * * * *

                 Innumerable Fancy Articles for Presents.

                                * * * * *

                         ESTAB. 1860.  ONE PENNY.

                              The Llangollen
                               Advertiser,
                         AND SOUTH WALES JOURNAL.

                                * * * * *

During the Season it contains a List of Visitors.

The only paper published in the District.  ‘Wants’ and ‘Lost’
Advertisements, 24 words for 9d.

                                * * * * *

                            NOTE THE ADDRESS—
                          HUGH JONES, CASTLE ST.

                                * * * * *

                               DEPARTMENTS.



Stationary.


This Department contains all the leading lines, at popular prices.



Book.


A large and varied stock, the best of Welsh books in Wales.



Artists’ Materials.


District agent for Winsor and Newton.



Spectacles.


Hy.  Laurance’s celebrated improved spectacles and eyeglasses.

                                * * * * *

                               ESTAB. 1838.

                              _Letterpress_,
                                _Colour &_
                           _Artistic Printer_.

VISITING, Wedding, and Memorial Cards, and all descriptions of Printing
executed with good taste, cheapness and despatch.

                                * * * * *

                    _Bookbinding in all its branches_.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ACCOUNT OF VALLE CRUCIS ABBEY, LLANGOLLEN, AND ALL THE RECENT DISCOVERIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.