MARCH, 1887.

                     THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

                            VOL. XLI.

                             NO. 3.




                            CONTENTS


                           EDITORIAL.

                                                            PAGE

  FINANCIAL--A GOOD IDEA,                                     65
  EXTRACTS FROM CORRESPONDENTS,                               66
  THY KINGDOM COME--PARAGRAPH,                                68
  WE ARE VERILY GUILTY CONCERNING OUR BROTHER,                69
  DOES THE HIGHER EDUCATION BEFIT THE NEGRO?                  71
  SOME CHANGE NEEDED,                                         73
  NEW LIGHT IN THE SOUTH,                                     74
  PARAGRAPH--DEATH OF MR. WEIR,                               75


                           THE SOUTH.

  NOTES IN THE SADDLE. Supt. C. J. Ryder,                     75
  DEDICATION OF BALLARD BUILDING,                             77
  OUR SCHOOL OF OBSERVATION--CHARLESTON, S. C.,               79
  CUMBERLAND MOUNTAINS,                                       80


                          THE INDIANS.

  A VISIT TO THE DAKOTAS,                                     82


                          THE CHINESE.

  FROM REV. F. B. PERKINS,                                   84


                     BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

  EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS--LETTER FROM JENNIE COX,             86


                        FOR THE CHILDREN.

  LETTER FROM A COLOURED BOY TO HIS TEACHER--LETTER
    FROM MRS. A. A. MYERS,                                   88


  RECEIPTS,                                                  89

       *       *       *       *       *

                            NEW YORK:

        PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                    =Rooms, 56 Reade Street.=

       *       *       *       *       *

               Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association.


PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N. Y.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


_Corresponding Secretary._

  REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Treasurer._

  H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER MCCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

    S. B. HALLIDAY.
    SAMUEL HOLMES.
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
    CHARLES L. MEAD.
    ELBERT B. MONROE.

  _For Two Years._

    J. E. RANKIN.
    WM. H. WARD.
    J. W. COOPER.
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.
    EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For One Year._

    LYMAN ABBOTT.
    A. S. BARNES.
    J. R. DANFORTH.
    CLINTON B. FISK.
    A. P. FOSTER.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
  Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


_Field Superintendent._

  Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


_Bureau of Woman’s Work._

  _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting
fields, to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries;
letters for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New
York Office.

DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes
a Life Member.

FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ----
dollars, in trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my
decease to the person who, when the same is payable, shall act
as Treasurer of the ‘American Missionary Association,’ of New
York City, to be applied, under the direction of the Executive
Committee of the Association, to its charitable uses and
purposes.” The Will should be attested by three witnesses.




                    THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  VOL. XLI.               MARCH, 1887.               No. 3.




American Missionary Association.


The receipts published this month bring us to the end of
one-third of our fiscal year. They are $17,712 less than
one-third of $350,000, the total amount recommended by the
National Council and the Annual Meeting. Our payments have been
in excess of receipts $9,130. Add this excess to the $5,000 debt
with which we began the year, and you have the condition of our
treasury. We have borrowed the money to meet the deficit. Our
missionaries are all paid, our work is being pushed and sustained
at every point. It is evident that there must be a large increase
in contributions from churches and individuals. The contributions
are voluntary. As a generous contributor to our treasury says
in a letter just received, “Resolutions of annual meetings are
not collectable taxes.” Our work is entirely dependent upon the
free-will offerings of our supporters. We appeal to them with
this understanding. We invite their thoughtful attention to all
the facts in the case. The next few months are the best in the
year to collect money. People are all at home and about their
business. Pastors are all in their pulpits. All the machinery
of church and Sunday-school activities are in operation. We
earnestly beseech pastors and church officers, and all friends,
not to let this harvest-time pass without making special effort
to put the finances of the A. M. A. on an assured foundation,
before the summer months with their vacations and interruptions
of church work come.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GOOD IDEA.

This little missive shows the way in which one pastor works the
cause of benevolence in his parish:

  “_Dear Friends_:

  The American Missionary Association is the Hand we have extended
  toward the seven million of colored people in the South, toward
  the two hundred and seventy-five thousand Indians in the West,
  and to the one hundred thousand Chinese on the Pacific Slope, to
  help lift them to Christian character and citizenship.

  The accompanying leaflet shows us what the Association is doing,
  while the envelope is to receive the annual offering which we are
  to make the coming Sabbath, ----.

  Shall we send a prayer with our gifts?
                       Faithfully yours.”

We have a supply of leaflets, collecting cards and envelopes
which we will furnish gratis on order to any who request them for
use in taking up contributions.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Report for 1885-’86 is now ready, and on application
will be mailed to any one who wishes it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A precious revival of religion has been enjoyed in the Atlanta
University, of which a full report will be given next month.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRACTS FROM CORRESPONDENTS

SELECTED FROM NUMEROUS LETTERS RECENTLY RECEIVED.

“Our contributions, though not large, are larger than they would
be were it not for the copies of the magazine read by the people.”

“We are doing better for you than ever before, though not half
what we ought to. Hope you will get your $350,000 and $150,000
more added to it.”

“The magazine is of interest, and is enjoyed always. It is doing
a noble and appreciated work.”

“We are glad to be able to send this year the largest collection
the church has ever taken for the work of the Association. We
shall hope even to improve on this next time.”

“I will see that the matter of looking up subscribers for your
magazine is placed in proper hands. I am much interested in your
work.”

“The magazine does good. We love the Association, and do not fail
to give our little.”

“I will do what I can to increase interest in our work, and, if
possible, extend the circulation of your magazine.”

“The information furnished by the magazine is used freely in
our monthly meetings by those who receive it. We regard the A.
M. A. as one of the most useful and sacred of the benevolent
organizations to which we contribute.”

“I do wish that more of our people would take your magazine. I
shall recommend it to their notice.”

“The last number of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY is worth its weight
in gold. I wish it could be found in every one of our families.”

“We are thoroughly interested in your work, and will give you a
better collection this year than we did last. I can say so much
with confidence.”

“That your magazine is a power in your behalf is evident from
a glance at our record, as our little country church averages
nearly $200 a year in support of your work. As long as I remain
pastor of the church, it will not be my fault if this good record
is not continued.”

“The copies of THE MISSIONARY which come here are all used, and
profitably so. Our parish is thoroughly interested in your work,
and we have one of our best reporters to represent your field at
our monthly concerts.”

To those who will help in extending the circulation of THE
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, we will, on order, send sample copies. The
subscription price is 50 cents. Send orders to H. W. Hubbard,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York city.

       *       *       *       *       *

We do not desire to have the money that rightfully belongs to
other missionary boards find its way into our treasury; yet we do
rejoice that there are many noble men and women in the different
denominations who were among the constituents of the Association
in its early days, and who have remained its constituents down to
the present time. One of them attended our last annual meeting,
and enclosing $30 to make a Life Membership, which makes the
thirty-first Life Member that he has constituted, writes in
regard to that meeting as follows:

“The meeting at New Haven was the best I ever attended;
everything moved so easily, and there seemed to be such a
good spirit. But of all the papers read, there was none that
interested me so much as Rev. Dr. Strieby’s, from the fact that
it carried me back to those dark days when I, as an Abolitionist
and a Presbyterian, united with the Society. He brought all the
historical facts of those days out so clearly that I had to say
amen, and amen, and thank God that I had lived to see the great
change in our beloved America. I have never left a stone unturned
for the A. M. A., for I have always found it true to humanity and
working for the interest of the Master. Therefore I have stood
by it, and at the same time never have forsaken the Board of my
own church. I am sure that meeting brought me a little nearer to
Heaven, and I rejoice that I was spared to enjoy its blessings.
Push on until all men of all nations of the world are brought to
the knowledge of the truth as it is in our blessed Jesus.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When we offer the prayer, “Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven,” it is simply a petition that the
kingdom of heaven become the kingdom of earth. The kingdom of
heaven, in so far as it is in the earth, is in the hearts of
men. When it shall be in the hearts of all men and call forth
their loyal service, the prayer will be answered. As Christians
we are bound not only to pray but to help answer our prayers.
Into what a field for self-culture membership in Christ’s church
introduces the believer! Large thoughts tend to make large
souls. It is not merely the local church or community in which
one happens to be, for whose interests he prays and plans and
works; it is the kingdom of God in the earth. The local church
may be small and limited in the opportunities that it offers for
soul-growth, but the kingdom of God has no limit. In its reach
it is wide as humanity. “Christ sees in every man, even in the
poorest and most miserable, a human being whose privilege it is
to become a member of the kingdom of God.” The vision of the
disciple should be like that of the Master. High and low, rich
and poor, ignorant and learned, are words that mark degrees and
conditions in human society, but in the Divine sight all are low
and poor and ignorant and lost who have not by the regenerating
power of the Holy Ghost, through faith in Jesus Christ, been born
into the kingdom of God. The Gospel is to be preached to every
creature. If we cannot go in person we can in purse and prayer.
Representatively we can preach in the ends of the earth, heal
the sick, feed the hungry and clothe the naked. Obligations to
the particular home field that the individual church to which we
belong cultivates, absolve us not from the obligations we owe
to the world-field into which the kingdom of God is coming by
the extension of the church universal. This large view of our
personal relation to Christ’s kingdom as a whole, this faith that
sees in every man a brother for whom Christ died, compel us to
an interest in missions. The triumphs of the gospel in the South
and at the West and in foreign lands, will be just as precious to
us as the triumphs of the gospel in our own community. We shall
desire to have a part in winning them, for wherever the scenes
are laid the triumphs are Christ’s, and therefore ours.

       *       *       *       *       *

President Cleveland not only believes that the Indian can be
civilized, but that it is the duty of the Government to help. He
says the Indians “are a portion of our people, are under the
authority of our Government, and have a peculiar claim upon, and
are entitled to, the fostering care and protection of the Nation.
The Government cannot relieve itself of this responsibility until
they are so far trained and civilized as to be able wholly to
manage and care for themselves. The paths in which they should
walk must be clearly marked out for them, and they must be led
or guided until they are familiar with the way, and competent to
assume the duties and responsibilities of our citizenship.”

Let Congress make these sentiments the basis of Indian
legislation, and let all the servants of the Government who have
to do with the Indians work with these truths in view, and in a
very few years the wisdom and economy of the policy will appear
in such a light that all will be compelled to approve it. And yet
all this will fail unless the Gospel be brought to the Indians at
the same time. The particular value of this Government movement
in behalf of the Indian is, that it will not only prepare the way
for the coming of the Gospel, but will also protect the effects
of the Gospel from the evil influences of wicked men. Had the
hindrances which have shut out Christianity from the Indians been
removed, as they could and ought to have been by the Government,
the Gospel long ago would have solved the Indian problem, and the
Gospel must solve it now.

       *       *       *       *       *


WE ARE VERILY GUILTY CONCERNING OUR BROTHER.

BY MRS. A. McDOUGALL.

From the day when we come to Him for rest, taking His yoke upon
us, we give assent to the oneness of God’s people in Christ,
and to the oneness of the work given them to do. We sing of the
sacred tie that binds our hearts into one, we preach about it, we
pray over it, in a theoretic way we believe it; but it seems as
if it requires something like the fountains of the great deep to
be broken up to make us practically realize all that the singing,
preaching, praying and believing involve. Our loyalty to the
Union slumbered and slept, as securely as the ten virgins, till
the trumpet blew all over the land. Who then felt his life too
dear to offer it for the Union? What lady’s hand was too delicate
to scrape lint, make bandages, or pack boxes of home comforts
for the boys at the front? How many timid hearts made themselves
brave to endure the sight of horrible suffering, that they
might minister and so help; but now we have grown careless and
secure, as if we had no part in the work which the war left for
us to do. In travelling through the southern part of this great
commonwealth, along the highways and byways, over long reaches of
dark country, the between places, outside and beyond the centres
where mission and educational work is being done, we see the
vast crowds of people “who have not come to their own;” people
who have a triple hunger consuming them, the hunger of poverty,
the hunger for knowledge and the hunger after righteousness.
We are compelled to see ignorance, helplessness and consequent
shiftlessness, contending hopelessly with the might and
meanness of greed. This great need in a professedly Christian
land--people perishing for lack of knowledge, where knowledge is
a birthright--causes our hearts to burn within us, and we say,
how long until the whole body of Christ feels this pain? Oh, if
they only knew! And we take the task willingly of telling of it.
Alas, they are so busy, the farm, the merchandise, the different
enterprises of ecclesiastical masonry and millinery, and we find
that the need is too far away for general sympathy.

I am reminded of an incident in the lumber country. One of the
workmen, an exceedingly tall man, cut his foot with an axe,
literally splitting his great toe. A sympathetic little one
inquired anxiously, “Will it be long till you feel it? It is so
far away from your head, you know,” she added apologetically. The
pain in the Southern limb of the body politic has not reached all
the members yet. If it had, the fair hands that erstwhile scraped
lint would do as much as the women of Brittany did for the ransom
of Bertrand Des Guesclin, spin one day’s spinning; the men, who
gave themselves, would give a crumb of their cake to preserve
the fought-for Union. On the Church of the living God this work
must fall, by the people of God it must be done, if it is done at
all. There are people who have given themselves, who are in the
forefront of this battle. We do not all recognize that we, who
hold the Head and are all members one of another, live under the
rule of the Beloved, our New Testament David. “The part of those
who go forth to battle and they who tarry by the stuff shall be
alike”--alike in the cost, the danger and the glory of triumph.
Then, when we restore that which we took not away, the blessing
that multiplies falls upon us until we have not room enough to
receive it.

We must have our eyes touched with His eye-salve to see clearly
the Christ in these helpless ones whose hands are stretched out
to touch our hearts. Human nature, even renewed human nature,
has some queer inconsistencies. The way in which we fulfill
Scripture by turning everyone to his own way is wonderful. One
of our own ways is how much readier we are to give charity than
to pay debt. One of the best men I ever knew paid the new hands
in his establishment less than they could hire their board for,
and subscribed liberally to a home where boys could get plain
board at half price. Now, God’s way is: “The worker is worthy of
his meat.” This dear, good man believed he was doing something
religious when he gave the part he kept back from wages in
charity. This is an instance of a widely-spreading delusion.

Give, and give liberally, for the conversion of the polished
Japanese, the philosophical Brahmin, the filially-trained
Chinese, the monotheistic Mohammedan, the heathen of distant
Africa and the isles of the sea. You are right. The marching
orders of the Grand Army are: “Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature.” “All” and “every” cover
every inch of ground. Go on and prosper and the Lord magnify thy
work.

But, stay, there is here a debt to be paid, restitution to be
made. “Leave there thy gift before the altar, go thy way, first
be reconciled to thy brother, then come and offer thy gift.”

Thy brother in black has a controversy with thee. And his
Advocate is thy Judge. Listen to the plea: “All the fields
cleared and tilled in this broad south land, we cleared and
tilled them. The roads that are made we made them, the bridges
built we built them. We have been like Joseph in Egypt, whatever
has been done here we have been the doers of it. We are American
citizens. We have bought our citizenship dear with the sweat of
our bodies and the blood of our backs. We have waded the red
sea to freedom. The hands that reaped your fields for nought
are held out to you for knowledge. We ask for our share of your
civilization and your Christianity.” Fellow Christians, the back
pay must be made up.

       *       *       *       *       *


DOES THE HIGHER EDUCATION BEFIT THE NEGRO?

BY PRESIDENT H. S. DE FOREST, D.D.

It was once believed that a little learning was a dangerous
thing, but it is now held that much learning is perilous to the
negro. His risk is in over-education. Manual training is good for
him, of course. He has a natural talent for that which came down
from inheritance and has been worked in with both care and pains.
He also needs moral training, though this is not an ancient
heir-loom in his family. But for his mental development, the
fundamental branches, few and simple, are thought to be enough.
The higher range of study, even if he be capable of reaching it,
would only harm him and unfit him for his place. This opinion,
held by not a few, has been stated by Bishop Pierce as follows:
“The negroes are entitled to elementary education the same as
the whites from the hands of the State. It is the duty of the
church to improve the colored ministry, but by theological
training rather than by literary education. In my judgment,
higher education, so-called, would be a positive calamity to
the negroes. It would increase the friction between the races,
producing endless strifes, elevate negro aspirations far above
the station he was created to fill, and resolve the whole into
a political faction, full of strife, mischief and turbulence.
Negroes ought to be taught that the respect of the white race can
only be obtained by good character and conduct. My conviction
is that negroes have no right in juries, legislatures, or in
public office. Right involves character and qualification. The
appointment of any colored man to office by the Government is
an insult to the Southern people, and provokes conflict and
dissatisfaction, when if left as they ought to be, in their
natural sphere, there would be quiet and good order.”

The argument then is briefly this: The negro is a low order of
man, fit only for a low place, and therefore best trained by a
low order of studies. The error is two-fold, embracing both a
falsehood and a fallacy: a falsehood, for as far as inherent
nature is concerned, the negro is no lower than the rest of the
human race; and a fallacy, for if he were, or so far as he has
become so from the force of circumstances, the more urgent the
demand for superior training. The negro is a man, and, like any
other man, is profited by choice mental culture. Furthermore,
the disabilities of the past make his higher education specially
necessary, and as fast as possible the most promising of the
black race should attain the best and choicest culture. In bare
outline some of the reasons for this opinion may be thus stated:

(1.) The negro has ability for the highest range of studies,
and to debar him therefrom is to sin both against the man and
his Maker. Many, especially those who cannot spell his name
without putting in one “g” too many, doubt the intellectual
power of the negro. It is true that heredity holds with him as
with other men. A race scarce one and twenty years removed from
enforced ignorance does not climb the hill of science as nimbly
as those who inherit the brain, will and spiritual forces which
generations and centuries have accumulated. But twenty-one years,
and of wretched environment too, have sufficed to show that souls
clad in the blackest African setting are capable of the highest
thought and most difficult studies. The evidence on this point
is abundant and conclusive. To deny the negro this ability is
only to advertise one’s ignorance or prejudice. And since God
has written his truth both in his word and works, and also given
to the black man aptitude and thirst for the highest and most
hidden, it does not become a race longer out of darkness and
further removed from heathenism to say “thus far and no farther”
in the culture of immortality. The negro should receive the
higher education because God has made him capable of it, and he
is profited thereby as much as any other man.

(2.) The higher range of studies is necessary to supplant
self-conceit with self-reliance. Measuring themselves by
themselves, an ignorant people are always inflated by the merest
modicum of knowledge. Broad scholarship gives modesty, but the
sciolist everywhere is a braggart. None are so satisfied with
their acquisitions as the valedictorians of very poor schools.
Where gold is scarce, a little metal, and chiefly alloy, will
serve for many a big spangle, and the greater the darkness the
brighter it shines. The serene satisfaction with which the
African novice will misapply and mispronounce grandiloquent
speech can only be cured by the presence of some scholarly men
who have climbed far enough to see the heights and to know that
the low-land is a bog.

But wise self-reliance is as rare among an ignorant people as
conceit and folly are abundant. One part of the problem before
us is to develop manly courage. Slavery cut the hamstrings of
independence and sapped very manhood. As a rule the negro is
not certain of his rights nor is he heroic in maintaining them.
He has long been habituated to wrong, and the passive virtues
have become disproportionate. From the days of the Cyrenian
he has ever borne the cross, and naturally his back is bent
and his knees are weak. Probably there is no other man in this
country who can be wronged with such impunity and success as the
negro. He is outraged in business, in society and in politics.
He knows his wrong, but he does not know of his power to repel
it. He needs a manly self-reliance, and that he must have or he
will always be victimized. As Franklin said, “If we make sheep
of ourselves the wolves will have us.” It is true the virtue
needed is largely moral. Scholarship alone cannot give it, but
scholarship is a prime ingredient. The step of one walking
in darkness is of necessity halting and hesitant. The higher
education is essential to that higher courage without which right
and privilege are insecure.

(3.) The negro needs well-trained leaders and they must come from
his own people. Race prejudice is an uncomfortable fact, and
there are two sides to the color line. The Moses of the future
cannot, in general, be an Egyptian, whether teacher, preacher or
politician. But the future Moses will need all the learning of
Egypt. A task is before him. The Red Sea indeed has been passed
and God is going before. But the wilderness is simply terrible,
and many are falling by the way. Leaders must be trained, and to
do this is now our chief work. Every regiment certainly needs a
competent colonel, and among every one thousand men there surely
ought to be one well bred and well read, broad and thoughtful and
scholarly, trained to thought, enriched with varied knowledge,
and able either to cope with men or to grapple with difficulties.
By this meager percentage, seven thousand liberally trained men
are needed for the nearly seven million Africans in our country.
We conclude then, that while all should have the lower education,
a great many should receive the higher. Every man may need
silver, but the best commerce of the world requires that some
should also have gold, and a good deal of it.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOME CHANGE NEEDED.

We publish the following as evidence of the necessity for
Congregational Churches among the colored people. There are some
kinds of religion from which intelligent people wish to get
away. Of these kinds it can be truthfully said that a “special
religious interest” is not a blessing.--ED.

“The church here was organized in April, 1882. From the beginning
we have held worship in one room of the Knox school building,
which is owned by the A. M. A. This room is not large enough
to accommodate the people when there is anything like a good
interest, as we cannot seat, comfortably, more than one hundred
persons. We are, therefore, put to great inconvenience at times.
Again, there is not the air of sacredness in worshiping in a
school-house as there is in an out-and-out church edifice. At
least it is so among the people here.

“Great as these reasons are for a church building, yet there is
another still greater. It is this; we are holding our services
not farther away than thirty steps from a colored Baptist church
whose congregation is immense. Moreover, our meetings are held at
the same hour as theirs. Their great demonstrations and shoutings
are destructive to the solemnity and comfort of our quiet and
orderly congregations. When there is special religious interest
among that people--and it is almost a perpetual thing--the good
effect of our services is almost as good as none.

“Now, to carry out our building plan we need fifteen hundred or
two thousand dollars. We hope our Northern friends will give us
at least one thousand dollars of this amount. Please respond as
soon as possible, as we are very anxious to complete our church
by next April when our fifth anniversary will be held. We wish to
hold that service in the new edifice.

“The future good of the work here will depend very much upon our
ability to build within the year 1887.”

And the following is an evidence of the necessity for
Congregational ministers:

“DEAR SIR: I hav been infome buy Some of you brothren. As I
wished to Change my Relation Ship with the Church to Some other
branch of Church. I. hav. come. to. the. conclusion to Join.
with. you. Church. as. a. Colord. Missionarie. in you church
with. my. peopl. I. Am. in. the. best of. Good. Standing. in.
the. Church. And if. you. Dought. this frase. you. can. Rite to
the Rit Rev Bishop in Regard. to. my. Standing in the. Church,
but Dont. Say to him what. I. say. to. you a bout. Joinen you
Church. if. you. please. not as. I. am tring. to Run. off but. I
Like to. no what. I Am Going. to. Do. first I hav been a Elder
in the Church for. 9 years and for five years I. hav. not. Got.
3000. Dollars, for. my Laber. not as. I. Dezier riches of this
Earth. but. a Enought. to Live. with. in this. Life. I. Am
thinking to tak. up. a home Stide, on Goverment. Land. in Kansas.
or. in Alabama. or Some plase where Grate meny of our people is
but if. I. am Blesst. to Join. with you Church. I. will Do. as
you. Law Says. I. m. familey. wife. and one. neace. And. I Expect
my. neace will. not. be. with. us. Long please be So Kine. as. to
answer this Soon as. you. Get. it.”

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW LIGHT IN THE SOUTH.

The two sections began life together and formed a government.
The South had the advantage of soil, climate, and wealth. At the
end of eighty-four years the two grappled and fought. The Yankee
section came to the fight richer and stronger than our Southern
section, and beat us into the earth while we did our best.
To-day these Yankees are rich in everything, and we are poor in
everything but manhood and womanhood, and have less than we began
with one hundred years back. These same Yankees furnish the bulk
of the capital we use, the food we eat, the clothes we wear,
the books we read and study, and the high-grade teaching in the
normal schools of the Southern States. Almost every convenience
of life and invention of art and science we know, came from these
same people, who have in ten years done more for Florida than
the Florida natives have done in fifty. Almost any one of their
large communities could buy the whole South for a park if they
liked it for that purpose. In a fight they could crush us like
eggshells. In politics they are masters, and we have to hold
our breath in every big campaign to avoid offending them. Their
percentage of ignorance is one-tenth of ours. When trouble comes
on us we depend on them for most of the help, and get it. The
world knows them as America, and us as outlying and unconsidered
provinces.--_Greenville, (S. C.) News._

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE W. MONISTY was a slave, and was sold from his parents
in 1853, being taken to Mississippi. He subsequently served
as a Union soldier all through the war, and finally settled
at Lafayette, Ind. While at the Wabash depot recently, George
fancied he recognized two colored women who were passing, _en
route_ to Iowa. The recognition was mutual, and with tears,
cries of joy, and embraces, the mother, brother and sister came
together after a separation of thirty-three years.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. W. W. WEIR, pastor of the 2d Congregational Church in
Eureka, Kansas, died Nov. 21st, in his fifty-first year. He
had been sick some time with consumption, and his death was
not unexpected. He began his ministry in the African Methodist
Church, and was ordained as a Congregational minister in Eureka
in 1881. In an obituary in a local paper it is said of him:
“Considering the limited privileges which he had in his youth, he
was a man of superior qualifications, and each year has increased
the esteem in which he was held by the community.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J RYDER.

The Lincoln Memorial Church at Washington, D. C., are rejoicing
in their remodeled building. Various branches of missionary work
are carried on with increased vigor. The industrial training is
now under the direction of the _pastoress_, Mrs. Moore, and is
reaching a large number of women and girls. The outlook of this
work at Washington was never so bright as now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dudley, N. C., is a smart little village, having in its entire
population only four white families. The two saloons in the
town, however, are kept by white men--a pretty sorrowful
and disgraceful comment upon the white race. The County
Superintendent of schools spoke in the highest praise of the A.
M. A. school and church at Dudley. Congregationalism here, as
elsewhere, is the synonym for intelligence and purity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wilmington is still saddened by the death of Rev. D. D. Dodge,
for a long time the active pastor of the Congregational Church in
that city. But the work goes on with continued prosperity.

       *       *       *       *       *

A little nine-year-old daughter of the pastor of the A. M. A.
church at Beaufort, N. C., has used her time so wisely between
school hours that she sat down to the organ and played ordinary
music readily. Can any other little A. M. A. girl no older show
better use of her time? This little girl has had only a few
weeks’ instruction in music.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one who has not visited Charleston, S. C., can form any idea
of the terrible results of that awful earthquake visitation.
The citizens have accomplished wonders in repairing the ruins
of their homes and churches and shops, but it will be months
yet before the fearful desolation can be overcome. Poor
Charleston, what with war and cyclones and earthquakes has she
not suffered! Is it Divine punishment for her rash and fearful
sins of the past? Who can say it is? Who dare say it is not? The
Congregational Church was uninjured by the “quake.” Extensive
repairs had just been made in the building, and the services of
re-dedication came immediately after that night of earthquake
horrors, and were very impressive. Many conversions have taken
place since the re-opening of the church.

Avery Institute suffered seriously from the earthquake. Extensive
and expensive repairs were made necessary before the school could
be opened. These are now completed. I learned of some two hundred
pupils who were waiting to enter Avery as soon as it should be
opened.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Savannah, Ga., I found a most delightful state of religious
interest. More than a hundred have been hopefully converted
during the few weeks just passed. Many interesting incidents have
occurred. One young man, who has been rather a wild young fellow,
became a Christian. He was at once anxious for his mother, who
was not a Christian. One night she refused to come to evening
service. The friend who went to invite her gave up in despair.
But God did not give up. His spirit still strove with her, and
she came into the church and took the very back seat. But she
was the first to come forward when the invitation was given to
those who desired prayers for themselves. She sat with bowed
head a long time. Her son was there praying for her. There was
no excitement. At last this mother, rising to her feet, walked
across the house, and taking the preacher by the hand, said: “I
will venture.” There was joy in many hearts. The mother and son
are now praying that the aged grandmother may find her way into
the fold of the Good Shepherd, even in her trembling old age.

       *       *       *       *       *

McIntosh is also rejoicing in a spiritual harvest. Twenty-eight,
all on confession of their faith, joined the A. M. A. church
on the last communion Sabbath. Dorchester Academy is full, and
more than full. The enrollment for January was 250, and _sixty
pupils had been turned away because there was no “room to receive
them.”_ Miss Plimpton, with three young lady assistants, does
this tremendous work with marvellous success. The pastor had been
ill for a few Sabbaths, and the Sabbath duties fell upon these
overworked and heroic women. As I looked into the schoolrooms,
crowded to their very doors, hot and oppressive, it seemed to me
that if anywhere on this continent the Master’s work is being
done, it is right here at McIntosh, Ga. They are indeed Sisters
of Mercy. A little girl in one of our schools was asked what
the feminine of Friar was. She replied, “Fricassee.” In that
hot school-room it seemed almost possible that these Protestant
teachers might be unwillingly converted into female Friars,
according to the little girl’s definition.

The teachers are reaching out in every direction. In a little
tumbled down, or tumbling down, log cabin, Miss Robertson holds
mission service every Sabbath. From seventy to ninety, mostly
men and boys, gather to sing, hear God’s word read, and gather
useful lessons from the wise and loving counsel of this earnest
Christian soul. One hundred dollars are needed at once to put
this cabin into such shape as shall make it suitable for these
services.

In pushing out through the swamps that lie all round Dorchester,
the teachers not infrequently see great, venomous snakes (water
moccasins) tumble off the path before them into the water. And
yet these are timid ladies, and shrink just as you do, gentle
reader, from such monsters. They are there for Christ’s sake, and
in His name they go forward.

Will not some earnest Christian at the North increase his
contribution, so that the school facilities at Dorchester Academy
may meet the demand another year, and so that the hearts of these
Christian heroines may be comforted and cheered?

       *       *       *       *       *


DEDICATION OF BALLARD BUILDING.

The first Sunday in this New Year was a memorable day with
us at Tougaloo, having been looked forward to with eager
expectancy for months--especially by the carpenter’s apprentices
and other wood-working students, who, no doubt, next to Mr.
Stephen Ballard himself, of New York, feel a sense of personal
proprietorship and joyful interest in “Ballard school-house,”
which was dedicated that day.

The new school-house is not only a monument to Mr. Ballard’s
philanthropy, but also to the value and success of the mechanical
training given here, as the work was almost entirely done by the
students.

The day of dedication was the third of a succession of days
unusually cold for us, and the air was full of snow-flakes,
so that few of the expected guests from a distance made their
appearance, and the extreme unpleasantness of the day kept most
of even our near neighbors at home. However, besides the students
and their immediate friends, we had as guests Miss Dickey, the
honored head of Mt. Hermon Seminary at Clinton, with two of her
assistants; Rev. J. B. Oliver, of the Congregational Church at
Greenville, and Rev. C. L. Harris, of the Congregational Church
at Jackson; also Mr. Moses Folsom, of Iowa, a representative of
“_The Burlington Hawkeye_,” with a friend of his.

Probably none of the _special days_ in the annals of the school
have passed off with more unity and spontaneity of feeling, nor
left a happier consciousness behind. The Sunday-school lesson
had for its title “The Beginning,” and besides its regular and
ordinary teachings, was specially and happily applied, and, at
its close, ten persons were received into church membership.
The regular dedicatory ceremonies and services took place in
the afternoon and were good throughout. Rev. C. L. Harris,
of Jackson, delivered the address. Always energetic and
enthusiastic, and ready for whatever word or work his day and
opportunity bring him, he gave us a really excellent address.
He gave in the outset a sketch of the life of the Christian
merchant who had considered himself the Lord’s steward of the
funds required to build this school-house and the shops required
for our trades. He then spoke at large upon the three-fold work
to which this institution was dedicated,--the education of head,
hand and heart, all tending to the firm and right establishment
of the home and fitting for the widest usefulness.

The last thing in the service supplied an outlet for the
manifestation of the loving and joyful interest with which the
service had been participated in by the congregation, and was
apparently at least _as much_ enjoyed as any part of it, namely,
the taking of a collection. The subscription, started with the
thank-offering of Thanksgiving Day, for seating the new chapel,
had reached $36.50. The collection at the dedication service
brought it to $97.35, additional free-will offerings next morning
making up the hundred. At this writing a beginning has been made
on the remaining $66.25. About one-fourth of this has been given
by our own students, and nearly one-half by the colored people
connected with, or interested in, our school.

A sermon from Rev. J. B. Oliver in the evening closed the
exercises of the day.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR SCHOOL OF OBSERVATION.

BY MISS ANNA M. CAHILL, FISK UNIVERSITY.

Sixty bright faces welcomed me as I took my place with
other visitors, this afternoon, in the school-room of our
practice school. These faces are the property of as many happy
children--children with no more weight of years upon them than
properly belongs to pupils in a primary school. As I looked
down the rows of little seats on this my first visit for the
year, I saw at once that many new pupils had taken their places
in this company since the first of September, but some of the
little folks have grown so familiar that I realize they are soon
to “graduate” into the English department of the University.
At least half a dozen of those before me are the children
of parents, one or both of whom were pupils at Fisk at some
time during the first ten years of its work. They come from
comfortable and well-regulated homes in the city, as do the
majority of those primary pupils.

The special occasion that drew us together to-day was the public
exercise of the practice teachers who taught in the school
during the fall term. Every member of the senior normal class
spends six weeks, at some time during the year, in practice
work, under the direction and criticism of the principal of the
school. To-day each of the four teachers taught three classes
ten minutes apiece, and in the two hours thus occupied, not only
the regulation studies, reading and number, were presented, but
very interesting lessons were taught in elementary grammar,
geography of Tennessee, form, color and physiology. When the
bright sunlight gave its aid by flashing through a prism the
rainbow colors on the wall, the little people were quick to tell
how these colors might be combined and others formed; and when to
the physiology class there were shown the heart, lungs and liver
of a sheep, they gathered with so much interest around their
young teacher that spectators and school were forgotten in their
childish eagerness to ask and answer questions.

In one of the motion-songs that varied the exercises of the
afternoon, these little people sang of the shoemaker, “All he
wants is his elbow room,” and as I came away impressed with a
sense of the power developing in that school-room and thought of
the future of its pupils, I said gladly to myself, “All they want
is their elbow room.”

These public exercises are held semi-annually, in order that all
members of the normal class may have opportunity to show the
result of their practice work.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLESTON, S. C.

A young man who recently united with our church on profession of
faith, in his first prayer at the Wednesday night prayer meeting,
said: “Help us young men to pray a little faster and a little
better, for you know how slow and imperfect we are. We cannot
help ourselves. You are our only help. Lead us in the way that we
should go, and help us to withstand the temptations which come
every day.” It is the same idea which St. Paul gives us when he
says: “Not as though I had already attained, either were already
perfect, but I follow after.” “A little faster and a little
better.” What a lesson for Christians generally. If we all would
be a little faster in doing good, in giving to aid in this work
of raising up fallen humanity, there would be no need of constant
appeal from the treasury department of the A. M. A. and the other
great missionary organizations, and if Christians would pray a
little better, that is, with more earnest desire for a literal
answer to their prayers, His Kingdom would speedily come in the
hearts of men. His _will_ would be more generally done “on earth,
as it is in Heaven.”


VOLCANO AND TIDAL WAVE.

A good sister recently came into the parsonage very much
exercised in mind. After a while she said: “Well, it’s just as I
expected. One of them things has broke out in Summerville.” We
asked: “What is it? The smallpox?” “No.” “The cholera?” “No.” “A
riot?” “No. Not any disease or anything like that. It is one of
them things. I think they call it a _volcano_, or something like
a _tidal wave_, you know.”

There is nothing new under the sun, says the wise man,
but I hardly think he saw in his day and generation--a
volcano--something like a tidal wave! And yet the idea is a good
one, typical, I think, of the American Missionary Association,
which, years ago, began in a humble way to pour forth--not fire
and smoke and ashes--although the outcome of its work was fire
and smoke and ashes to false opinion and wrong. Like a volcano,
it sent forth material which moulded itself into the public
sentiment of years ago, and since, like a tidal wave, this
sentiment has continued to sweep over the continent until all
the nationalities represented in this country are beginning to
recognize the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. GEO.
C. ROWE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CUMBERLAND MOUNTAINS.

BY REV. B. DODGE, PLEASANT HILL, TENN.

What have you done? This is a fair question for friends of this
mission, North, West and East, to ask. I propose briefly to
answer it. I left my pastorate in the “Pine Tree” State, and,
with my wife and daughter, entered upon the work here October
1st, 1884. To leave a New England home for these mountain wilds
is much like entering a new world. But, coming not to _play_, but
_work_, duty said: “Look about you--East, West, North and South.”
It was done, and the outlook showed a large amount of illiteracy
in every neighborhood, many living so far away from school as to
be totally beyond their reach, and many young people growing up
with no knowledge of books.

What could be done? More impressively the answer came than I can
tell it: Build a house for school and worship which may bless
present and future generations. But, from a human standpoint, to
erect such a building as was needed seemed extremely difficult,
if not impossible, with limited means on every side, no market,
no railroad, and 2,000 feet above the sea level. But, being used
to hard work from early life, and not easily _scared_, I grappled
with the idea of building a house for the double purpose named.
I laid the matter before the A. M. A., and was by them requested
to undertake the building of such a house as, in my judgment, was
needed.

I began the work March 1st, 1885. A good lady donated five acres
of land (a lovely spot) for church and school purposes, and
deeded the lot to the A. M. A., and also contributed $50 to the
building. I then headed a subscription paper with $50, and the
people here added enough by timber and labor to make in all $300.

I then employed a man to put in a good foundation of split stone,
laid in masonry and elevated twenty inches above the ground, the
size of the building to be 50×47 feet, including tower.

What next? It was to hew a white oak frame in the forest and haul
it to the building spot, then have it framed. At length I invited
men to raise it, and women to bring a dinner.

When gathered we sought, with uncovered heads under the blue sky,
the blessings of heaven on the future of the house and freedom
from accident during its erection.

At 11 A. M. the school, marshalled by its worthy teacher, Mrs.
Lord, came and marched around the walls and waiting timber with
songs of greeting, and when the song ended, the men responded
with three lusty cheers for the school. At sunset the frame stood
on its solid base.

There stood the bones, but where was the _flesh_? I took my men,
and, with axes and saws, we went to the forest to fell the trees
for logs; but when a few were sawed the mill failed. Must we
give it up? Not yet. In the saddle I went down the mountain to
Lost Creek, sixteen miles, and to Sparta, seventeen, for lumber.
Through much hardship it was hauled, it taking two days for a
good team to make one trip, and sometimes getting a thorough
soaking in a storm by a night camp-fire. Some forty loads were
dragged up the steep mountain and on to Pleasant Hill. This
coming up the Cumberland Mountains with a load means much more
than a stranger can comprehend. When it takes three hours to go
two miles we may suppose there is some pulling. You can find some
hills in Western Massachusetts and in Maine, but they are mole
mounds as compared with the brow of these mountains. But the men
who had the hauling in charge were patient and faithful to the
last.

The work went slowly on for lack of funds. Twice it stopped, and
no sound of saw or hammer was heard. Some prophesied it would
take seven years to complete the building. Troubled dreams and
wakefulness came, and sleep said, “If you don’t go on with the
work I will not come to you.” I then said to the carpenter:
“Come Monday morning, and I will be responsible for your pay.”
He came, and Monday’s mail brought me $6 from the Sunday-school
in Edgecomb, Me. I paid the carpenter Saturday night, and said,
“Come again.” He came, and Monday’s mail at 11 A. M. brought $7
from the Sunday-school in East Orrington, Me. Rebuked for my
lack of faith, I said, “Come again,” and the third Monday at 11
A. M. brought $25 from that noble man, Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, of
Marblehead, Mass., who always sells honest seed, and has also
recently sent us a fine bell and paid the freight on it.

Slowly the building grew, till, by much tug and toil, where
markets and railroads were far away, and even money absent,
to-day the house stands finished.

The last thing, the furnishing, is being done. So we are planning
to christen it with services there next Sabbath, and on Monday
enter it with our growing and promising school, which, ere long,
if friends stand firm to its interests, is to be one of the
bright lights in the State of Tennessee.

So much for the new house on the Cumberland Mountains.


HOW HAS IT BEEN DONE?

“Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it.”

It is the _Lord’s_ work, through his dear children. He has
awakened in the hearts of Christian men, women, young people,
and even _little_ children, an interest in this work, so that,
by closest attention and careful application of funds, God has
enabled me to engineer the work till I can see that He means the
house shall stand complete, without so much as a nickel of debt
upon it.

We have also organized a Congregational Church, and have
in connection with our work another church at Pomona, and
Sabbath-schools in all three.

I preach twice each Sabbath, riding twelve miles in the saddle.
With increasing faith in God and this mountain work, which
demands much grace and not a little grit, I ask the prayers of
those who pray.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


A VISIT TO THE DAKOTAS.

BY SECRETARY J. E. ROY.

In 1871, on a tour of home missionary supervision in Dakota,
I came over the Missouri in a canoe, the only mode then of
transportation to this Santee Agency School. I found here Rev.
A. L. Riggs, who had come the year before to take up the newly
initiated work of Rev. J. P. Williamson, who removed up the
river thirty miles to open a mission upon the reservation of the
Yankton Sioux. At that time Mr. Riggs had already displaced the
cabin home and cabin school-house by a frame residence and a
frame chapel school-house about 30×50. Now I find that the chapel
has been spread out upon the sides and elongated in the rear,
with sliding doors to shut off each of the several new parts into
additional recitation and Sunday-school rooms, and the whole to
be crowded for morning prayers and Sabbath service. There have
also come on, the Dakota Home for Young Women, the Bird’s Nest
for Little Children and the Cottage for Little Boys, each of the
three under a matron, and the Dakota Hall for Young Men, with
one of the teachers’ families there in charge. Then come the
well-built shops for shoemaking, carpentry and blacksmithing;
and lastly, the three-story dining-hall, with accommodation for
a hundred and fifty at the tables, with rooms for teachers and
workers, and a whole story yet to be finished off, when funds
are in hand, to accommodate more girls. The whole is heated
by furnaces and supplied with the most approved apparatus for
cooking, baking and laundry work.

But, beyond this expanding of the shell, I find the inner
institution matured into a good deal of character and strength.
Though it has grown by itself, it has come to be very much
like our best boarding-schools at the South. The course of the
year makes up more than two hundred pupils, and there are now
here one hundred and thirty. The mass of them have learned the
English, and the classes are taught in it. Many of them have
been advanced in English studies. The régime everywhere takes on
the Christian type. A great majority of the scholars have been
brought to a personal acquaintance with Christ. A good number of
teachers and preachers have already been sent forth. Music--vocal
and instrumental--brings in its refining influence. A splendid
corps of teachers is employed. Every pupil, male and female,
has some work to do. The shops for blacksmithing, carpentry and
shoemaking have each a competent workman as instructor, and those
departments are run under the closest inspection. I have seen one
Indian doing a fine job of shoeing horses, that most important of
all work in blacksmithing.

Mr. Riggs, the father of the Theological Institute of Chicago
Seminary, has brought the same feature in here. And so for
two weeks, about twenty-five men, young pastors and divinity
students, coming in from their fields, are drilled in the
practical Bible doctrines and methods of preaching and pastoral
work. The lectures have run from two to four in a day. Clearly
it has been a season of stimulus and of replenishment to the
young brethren. Those who were pleased with the young people from
this school, who sang at the Chicago Council, at the New Haven
Anniversary and over the East, last fall, will be glad to learn
that at least half a hundred of equal cultivation could be sent
out as specimens. Three native teachers are here employed, and
they can use either language. It has been a great delight to me
to hear Pastor Artemas Ehnamani preach in his own pulpit in the
presence of his church, that numbers a couple of hundred, and
without the chopping up of his address by the intervention of an
interpreter.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

BY REV. F. B. PERKINS.


Mr. Pond has just left for San Francisco, after a week of
exhausting toil for the Chinese missions here and in Santa
Barbara. For his relief, I have undertaken to write this letter,
that his vacation--for so he calls it--may not be altogether
farcical. I do it the more readily for the opportunity it gives
me of saying some things which your readers would not be likely
to learn from him.

It has long been my conviction that, in proportion to the means
employed, no form of Christian work on this coast yields so large
a revenue as Chinese missions. I am sure this is so as regards
that carried on under the direction of the A. M. A. And the
explanation I find largely in the Christ-like devotion of your
superintendent and his coadjutors.

It is but a single illustration of this spirit which Mr. Pond’s
recent visit offers. Both at Santa Barbara and San Diego the
missions have lost their rented premises, and are literally
homeless. It seems imperative that, if the work is to go on,
they should no longer be subject to the disabilities of rented
buildings. But it is a fixed principle of this mission, on
no account to incur a debt. So it is of Mr. Pond, as regards
himself; but for Christ’s needy ones he has more than once
accepted the burden. This he has now again done. In Santa Barbara
he purchased a lot for $600, for which land he is personally
liable, but which he holds in trust for the mission. On that
lot, by the close of this week, a chapel will be erected by a
Christian friend, at a cost of $340. For this property a moderate
rental is to be paid by the mission, and when the sums thus paid
shall amount to the price of the land it, together with the
building, (toward which the little Chinese band have already
paid $150), becomes the property of the mission. In San Diego
the course pursued has been the same, only that here, owing to
the rise in real estate, the amount assumed by Mr. Pond and one
other friend of the work, is $2,500. By similar acts of Christian
self-sacrifice in the past, the mission has already become
possessed of property to the value of $10,000, all without the
burden of debt, or an even temporary diversion of its funds.

But is the mission work worth all this toil and sacrifice? Mr.
Pond, in a carefully guarded statement, says, that since the
establishment of this mission the Chinese converts number over
600, at least fifty having been added during the past year;
and this statement, you observe, makes no mention of results
wide reaching in their beneficence which do not involve this
radical heart work. If this statement be accepted as correct, the
question is answered. But is there really any such a character as
a Christian Chinese? Many persons say, “No.” It is but a day or
two since a Christian man denied it, in my hearing. My reply to
him was to ask for his standard of judgment. If his demand was
that Chinamen should cease to become Chinese, and, abandoning
all their associations, habits and prejudices, become simply
Americans, doubtless they are not Christians; but in that case,
neither are converts from many another nationality to be reckoned
as Christians. Or if absolute freedom from infirmities and faults
be made the test, this would shut them out, but it would shut
out many others also. Alas! it would be fatal to the hopes of
the writer. But if the test be the same we apply to ourselves,
love more or less enthusiastic, loyalty true, even if troubling,
to our Divine Master, and our judgments be according to the law
of charity, then we have no more reason to look askant upon a
Chinese than upon a Bohemian, or a negro brother. The grace of
God works out in these and in those alike, encountering similar
obstacles and being triumphant in about an equal degree.

_Ex uno disce omnes._ He was a house servant, and naturally not
of amiable disposition or agreeable ways. But some twelve months
ago his employer began to notice a change in his bearing, a more
cheerful observance of his duties and a generally pleasanter
manner. Awhile ago he came to the lady, and said: “Mrs. B., I’m
a Christian. I don’t know as you have thought it, but I am.”
“Yes, Jim,” was the reply, “I have seen it for some months past.”
Yet he is as much a Chinaman now as ever, and no more faultless
perhaps than an American Christian. But he is “following on,”
reaching out after likeness to the Master, and that is about as
much as most of us can claim.

“But so much of the work seems fruitless owing to the migratory
life these people live.” Well, twelve years ago I was among the
prospectors of Southern Colorado. During one of our meetings,
I noticed a Chinaman enter the room. Through all the service
he maintained a respectful and interested attitude, and at the
close, taking his hand, I asked him; “You sabe (understand)?
You know our Jesus, our Saviour.” “Yes, I know.” “Where did you
learn?” “San Fis.” “Who taught you?” “Miss Loomis (Rev. Dr.
Loomis).” So I had come across one of these waifs in the heart of
the Rocky Mountains, and two years after he had gone out from his
Christian teacher. I don’t know how clear his views of sin and
salvation were, nor how hearty his trust in the atoning Saviour.
That could only be learned by longer intercourse, and I have
never seen him since. But he knew enough to find his way into
that little cabin in the wilds of Colorado, and to speak with
apparent intelligence and sympathy of the things of the kingdom.
Nor could I doubt that he stood as the representative of very
many who go out from these mission schools, and are lost to all
but the all-seeing eye of Infinite Love.

The work in their behalf may seem to be, but it is not,
fruitless. From this number let us not doubt it, many will
stand forth at last, redeemed unto God, monuments alike to the
unspeakable grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the patient
fidelity of Christ’s disciples.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


Please remember to renew the “shares” in the support of teachers.
Those who desire it can have their shares transferred from year
to year to new fields, thus obtaining more varied knowledge of
the work from the missionary correspondence.


EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.

_Missionary._--I am happy to write you that the $25 pledged for
the support of a teacher is again ready for you. The letters
received were enjoyed very much in the Society and I know greatly
increased our interest and membership.

_New York Missionary Union._--Our auxiliaries voted the $1,100
the coming year for the A. M. A. (support of three missionaries.)
I have promised, as last year, bi-monthly letters from each
of these teachers. Our auxiliaries much enjoy the letters and
greatly miss them if anything delays.

_Local Church Society, Conn._--The amount of our pledge is
collected and will be forwarded. We have received the missionary
letters monthly and we take them into our Mission Circle, and
read them, and frequently they are read from the pulpit so that
all may hear the good results of help given. We wish the good
work God-speed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be remembered that after the Annual Meeting in New Haven
the Indian students from the Santee Normal Training School made
a short campaign among the churches. The writer of the following
letter was one of the students, and in it she tells a friend what
she saw and thought as she went from place to place.

  _Dear Friend_:

  I will now try to tell you how much I enjoyed our trip East. We
  had good and hard times, too. We left Santee Oct. 12th. We were
  gone for eight weeks. It seems very nice to get back to Santee. I
  think more of the school every time I go away and come back.

  We stopped over Sunday at Chicago; then we took train for New
  Haven, Conn., and it was a very tiresome journey, for we never
  had been on the train for such a long distance. We reached New
  Haven Tuesday evening; then the next afternoon we went to the
  meeting. The church was just packed, so they had the meeting in
  two churches and we had to go back and forth to sing. We sang in
  Dakota and English.

  I want to tell you some of the places we went to. It will take
  me too long if I try to tell you all. We met a great many of our
  teachers’ friends.

  We went to Essex and had a very pleasant afternoon at Miss
  Pratt’s home. We felt as though we were going to see some of our
  old acquaintances when we knew that we were to meet our teachers’
  friends. As we went in Boston I thought of you and wondered how
  many times you had been in that depot. I like Boston very well,
  but not as well as I like our old home Santee.

  At Providence I met one of my teachers, Prof. Wilson, and I went
  home with him and spent the night at his house and had a very
  good time.

  At Northampton, after the service was out, two young ladies
  invited us to go with them the next morning to Smith College, so
  we went around and saw the most of the buildings; then again we
  went to South Hadley Seminary, and I could not make out which
  school I liked the best. I think I never saw so many young ladies
  at once as I did that morning.

  When we were in Newport one thing we wanted to see very much was
  the ocean; but it rained when we reached the city, so we were
  afraid that after all we could not see the ocean; but some kind
  friends sent their carriages and drivers to take us out to the
  beach, and we girls got in one carriage, and we all enjoyed that
  ride very much because we saw the great waters we had heard so
  much about. As we went along and saw the large, beautiful houses
  closed, I wondered why the people built such beautiful houses
  just for the summer. I think they might have used their money
  some other way just as well as to spend all on houses like that.
  Perhaps it was wrong for me to wish it, but I did, when I saw so
  many right along the beach. I wished we had some of that money
  for our work out here, and if we did it would do more good than
  just to stand as those houses did, just for the looks.

  At Groton we had a very pleasant evening with some young ladies
  who invited us to take tea with them. Many of them got so
  interested in our people that they kept asking us about one
  thing or another all the time. On our way home we stopped at New
  York and Brooklyn, and we saw the Suspension Bridge and we were
  surprised to see it; I wanted to see it very much; and one more
  thing too, and that was the Niagara Falls. We went across on
  Canada side and when we saw the Falls it seemed as though there
  never could be so much of water falling down at once. I think it
  is just grand to see it, and to hear the great noise it makes.

  At Southport we had a very pleasant place to stay and we enjoyed
  being there with such good kind friends and to know that we had
  such friends at the East. One morning while we were staying there
  we had a very hard storm, but in the afternoon it cleared off
  and we went to the shore and gathered some shells and stones to
  take home with us. We were there for two or three days, while
  Miss Ilsley, Mr. Shelton and Mr. Riggs went to other places. At
  Norwich, Miss Ilsley wasn’t with us, so John played for the short
  time she was away. We missed her very much.

  Sometimes the people asked us such funny questions. At Boston we
  had service Sunday evening, and after the close of the meeting
  one lady came up and said, “Is your teacher Indian?” It seems
  she would have known the difference between us and our teacher,
  for she was not Indian at all. Then again at one place--I don’t
  remember just where--one lady said to me, “How is it you all have
  such good teeth?” I told her “I don’t know.” Then again she said,
  “Do the Indians ever have the toothache?” I told her yes, and I
  think she was surprised to hear my answer.

  Since I have come back I want to help more in this work, and I
  hope I will be able to do so in the future by God’s help.

                          Your friend,

                                                  JENNIE W. COX.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOR THE CHILDREN.


(_Letter from a colored boy to his teacher._)

  _Dear S. S. Teacher_:

  I want to extend my thanks and gratitude to you for that _bright
  light_ you presented to me yesterday (I mean that Bible). For
  God says it is a lamp and a light, and I believe it. I have been
  wanting one for a long time, because I am trying to be one of the
  _very best_ Christian boys, and I need God’s word to teach me
  and instruct me how to be the _best_ boy. I hope you will have
  a large attendance in your class to-morrow, and I hope they all
  may be on time. As God has given me the Bible I will make it my
  lamp and my light and also my rule to live by. And I will ask God
  to help me as I read it, to understand it, and I do want to walk
  “Even as He.” I know God’s word can make me whiter than pop-corn
  and sweeter than candy.* I would ask of thee to teach me all you
  can.

                                                        Good Night.

  * At the Christmas Festival pop-corn and candy were referred to
  by one of the speakers in illustration.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Letter from Mrs. A. A. Myers._)

We read in the old story that every mamma crow thinks her own
little crows are the whitest of birds. And I think no one will be
surprised that, having worked with the little folks in Kentucky
for five years, I should have a little weakness toward them, and
if I repeat some of their wise sayings and doings it is only what
might be expected.

Little Elbert, between three and four years of age, with his
golden text in mind, took his kitty on his knee and very gravely
said to it, “Kitty if you lack wisdom, ask of God and he will
give it to you.” Looking at the new moon one evening he said,
“There’s a piece broken out of it;” and one evening when the
setting sun cast out those rays peculiar to it when the air is
full of moisture, he exclaimed, “Mamma, the sun is sticking its
feet at us.” Little Ernest, three years old, was awakened in the
night by hearing our church bell ring a fire alarm. He began to
cry, saying “Our Sabbath-school is burning up.” Little Johnny,
five years old, was so interested in class over the story of
the blind man going with clay on his eyes to the pool of Siloam
to wash, and returning seeing, that when in the general review
before the school, he sitting in the middle of a full house, the
question was asked, “What did Christ tell the blind man to do
after anointing his eyes,” Johnny could wait no longer but spoke
out in a clear ringing voice, “I dess the blind man was glad
of it, don’t you?” Callie’s answer, in the same review, to the
question, “Where did Christ tell the blind man to go and wash,”
was, “Go to the mud-puddle and wash.”

I will try soon to tell you something about our Band of Hope
little folks.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JANUARY, 1887.


MAINE, $646.11.

  Bangor. W. S. Dennett, _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._                                                  $6.00
  Bath. Central Ch. and Soc.                                42.00
  Bridgton and Bath. Packages of work _for
    Selma, Ala._
  Brownville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV.
    WILLIS LERMOND, E. W. STICKNEY and Hon. A.
    H. MERRILL L M’S.                                      102.61
  Brunswick. Two bbls. of C. _for Selma, Ala._
  Castine. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Castine. Class No. 9, Trin. Cong. Ch. Sab.
    Sch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                     1.05
  Cornish. Cong. S. S., _for Mobile, Ala._                  10.00
  Dennysville Cong. Ch.                                     10.38
  Farmington. Pastor’s Bible Class of Cong. Ch.,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega, C._                         2.00
  Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard                                2.00
  Gorham. One bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._,
    2.50 _for freight_                                       2.50
  Hallowell. Mrs. F. C. Page, _for Indian M._               10.00
  Machias. Miss Sara P. Hill’s S. S. Class, _for
    Indian M._                                               1.50
  North Bridgton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
    freight_                                                 2.87
  North Edgecomb. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                             5.00
  Orland. “Friends,” by S. E. Buck                          40.00
  Portland. High St. Ch. (35 of which _for the
    Debt_)                                                 226.97
  Portland. Williston Ch.                                   59.68
  Portland. Brown Thurston’s Class, High St.
    Sab. Sch., _for Hampton N. and A. Inst._                25.00
  Portland. By Miss D. P. Lord, 10; Mrs. Nowell,
    1; _for Louisville, Ky._                                11.00
  Portland. Bbl. and box of C., _for Wilmington,
    N. C._
  Rockland. Cong. Ch.                                       41.40
  Skowhegan. Ladies’ M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                    7.40
  Wells. B. Maxwell                                         20.00
  Wells. Young People’s Miss’y Soc. of Second
    Ch., _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                          5.00
  Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                          6.75


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $729.04.

  Amherst. “A Friend”                                       $2.00
  Antrim. “Friends,” by John E. Hastings                    12.00
  Concord. “Friends”                                         1.00
  Derry. One bbl., _for McIntosh, Ga._, 2 _for
    freight_                                                 2.00
  Exeter. Mary E. Shute                                     25.00
  Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     10.50
  Franklin Falls. Mrs. Walter Aiken, _for
    Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
  Hampstead. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                25.60
  Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.08
  Harrisville. Mrs. L. B. Richardson                        10.00
  Jaffrey. “Lillies of the Field,” Box of
    Bedding, etc., _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta,
    Ga._
  Keene. Second Cong. Ch., 19.76, and Sab. Sch.,
    46.65                                                   66.41
  Keene. S. S. Class, Cong. Ch., by Mrs. K. L.
    Wright, _for Woman’s Work_                              20.00
  Lebanon. C. M. Baxter, _for Woman’s Work_                 75.00
  Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               23.00
  Lebanon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 8; Miss Mary
    Choate, 4; _for Student Aid, Straight U._               12.00
  Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           34.50
  Manchester. Franklin St. Ch.                             113.11
  Ossipee Center. Cong. Ch.                                 35.00
  Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thomson.                            7.00
  Plainfield. Mrs. Hannah Stevens, _for Indian
    M._, and to const. TOM S. WOTKYNS, ARTHUR E.
    RICHARDSON and CHARLES S. HORTON, L. M’S.               96.00
  Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                          2.23
  Temple. Cong. Sab. Sch. (12.59 of which _for
    Indian M._)                                             36.69
  Tilton. Cong. Ch.                                          4.30
  Troy. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                     10.87
  Walpole. Member of Cong. Ch.                              20.00
  Wolfboro. Rev. S. Clark                                    5.00
  By George Swain:
        Amherst. Cong. Ch.                        8.00
        Brookline. Cong. Ch.                      5.25
        New Boston. Presb. Ch.                    1.50
        New Ipswich. Cong. Ch.                    7.00      21.75


VERMONT, $543.32.

  Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                              45.27
  Braintree. Ladies and Sab. Sch., _for
    McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                    8.44
  Brattleboro. Mrs. F. C. Rice, _for Student
    Aid, Talladega C._                                      78.00
  Brattleboro. By Mrs. F. A. Wells, Sec. Ladies’
    Soc., 3 bbls. of C., _for Talladega C._
  Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.,
    “Christmas Gift”                                        15.00
  Burlington. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._                               50.00
  Burlington. Ladies of College St. Ch., _for
    McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs Henry Fairbanks                   5.00
  Castleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh,
    Ga._, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                            3.50
  Chester. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., to const.
    MRS. IRENA MARTIN BREWER and MISS LIZZIE E.
    ROUNDS, L. M’S.                                         64.72
  East Hardwick. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. JOHN
    ELLSWORTH HANCOCK, L. M.                                35.00
  Fair Haven. Christmas Cards, _for Athens, Ala._
  Granby. Infant Class, by H. W. Matthews, _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                  0.50
  Hubbardton. Mrs. James Flagg                               5.05
  Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 3.59
  Norwich. “A Friend”                                       10.00
  Pittsford. Mrs. Nancy P. Humphrey                         10.00
  Poultney. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
  Randolph. Mrs. Isaac Nichols                               1.50
  Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                         134.52
  West Randolph. Miss Susan E. Albin                         7.00
  Windsor. Mrs. Mary J. Wyman                               25.00
  Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                      16.25
  ----. “A Friend”                                           5.50
  Ladies of Vermont, _for McIntosh, Ga._:
        Charlotte. 1 Bbl., _for Freight_        2.00
        Cornwall.    “         “
        Coventry.    “         “                2.00
        Derby.       “         “                2.50
        Hartland.    “         “                2.00
        Middlebury.  “         “                2.00
        Newport.     “         “                2.00
        Rutland.     “         “
        Springfield. “         “
        St. Johnshury. 1 bbl., “
        Stafford.      1 Box,  “                3.00
        West Glover.   1 Bbl., “                2.00        17.50


MASSACHUSETTS, $7,406.39.

  Amherst. Miss Mary H. Scott, Bbl. of C., _for
    Tougaloo U._
  Amherst. First Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Fisk U._
  Andover. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                             25.00
  Andover. “A Friend”                                       20.00
  Andover. Miss L. G. Merrill, _for Mobile, Ala._            8.00
  Andover. I. Starbuck, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            1.00
  Andover. Package of Christmas Cards, _for
    Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._
  Ashby. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                52.35
  Attleboro. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      60.00
  Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           270.11
  Beverly. Washington St. Ch. and Soc.                      53.16
  Boston. Mount Vernon Ch. and Soc., 223.02;
    Homeland Circle of Park St. Ch., 100 _for
    Woman’s Work_ & 54 _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._, and to const. MRS. JACOB
    FULLARTON, MRS. DAVID H. BREWER, MRS. CHAS.
    HOUGHTON, MISS EMMA NEWTON & MISS ISABELLA
    H. HOBART, L. M’S. “A Friend,” 30; Miss M.
    A. Willard, 4; Union Ch., ad’l, 2; Benjamin
    Cutler, 1.--Dorchester: Second Cong. Ch. and
    Soc. 134.55; Village Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Atlanta U._, 50, and _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._, 12.67; “Friend,”
    $5; “Friend,” _for Greenwood, S. C._, Bbl.
    of C.--Jamaica Plain: By Miss I. Blake, 2
    Bls. of C.; Miss I. Blake, _for Freight_, 2,
    _for Talladega C._--Roxbury: Immanuel Cong.
    Ch., 35.36.--West Roxbury: South Evan. Ch.
    and Soc., 20.75                                        674.35
  Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc., 75.02; “E.
    P.” 1                                                   76.02
  Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch.                               19.27
  Cambridge. Hannah E. Moore                                 8.00
  Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch. and Soc.,
    215.62; Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Pilgrim Ch.,
    30, to const. MRS. REV. GEORGE A. TEWKSBURY
    L. M.; Pilgrim Ch., M. C. Coll., 2.97                  248.59
  Chelsea. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
  Chelsea. Miss E. Davenport                                 5.00
  Clinton. First Evan. Ch.                                  12.11
  Clinton. Mrs. E. K. Gibbs, _for Freight_                   0.50
  Coleraine. MRS. PRUDENCE B. SMITH, to
    constitute herself L. M.                                30.00
  Concord. Mrs. E. Hunt                                      5.00
  Curtisville. Mrs. Frances M. Clark                         4.50
  Dalton. Mrs. James B. Crane                              100.00
  Dedham. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Straight U._                                       25.00
  Dracut. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
  East Billerica. Mrs. A. R. Richardson                      5.00
  East Bridgewater. Union Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                              25.00
  East Douglas. Cong. Ch.                                   52.72
  Easthampton. Payson Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
  East Somerville. Mr. and Mrs. Henry Howard                50.00
  Fitchburg. Mrs. Mary C. Whittier, 5; J. C.
    Moulton, 5, _for Student Aid, Straight U._              10.00
  Fall River. First Cong. Ch, (44.04 of which
    _for Indian M._)                                        99.29
  Fall River. Third Cong Ch.                                10.37
  Falmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                  8.46
  Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                         31.72
  Framingham. Plymouth Sab. Sch.                            24.00
  Gardner. First Cong. Ch.                                  28.89
  Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.00
  Gloucester. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                           108.00
  Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch., 15 _for
    Woman’s Work_, 15 _for Student Aid, Straight
    U._, Miss’y Soc. of Sab. Sch., 5 _for
    Woman’s Work_ to const. MRS. LAVINIA
    STODDART L. M.                                          35.00
  Gloucester. Miss C. A. Lyle, _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                 5.00
  Great Barrington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Santee
    Indian M._                                              12.00
  Greenfield. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
  Hadley. Member of Russell Ch.                              3.00
  Harwichport. Pilgrim Ch.                                  18.00
  Haverhill. West Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
    Indian M._, 6.43; “Harvest Festival,” 3.32;
    Rev. Mr. Lowell’s Class, 3.71; Mrs. Lowell’s
    Class, _for Talladega C._, 6.44; Dea. Amos
    Hazeltine’s Class, 6.92; Dea. Eben Webster’s
    Class, 4.70
  Haverhill. West Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        20.00
  Hingham. “A Friend”                                        0.25
  Holliston. Primary Class Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                               8.50
  Holliston. Class of Young Ladies’, Cong. Sab.
    Sch., Bbl. of C.; “A Friend,” Side of
    Leather and Shoemakers’ Supplies:
    Cranberries, Quinces and Clothing, _for
    Talladega C._
  Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             73.14
  Hopkinton. Cong. S. S., by Ellen Brewer, 8;
    Cong. Sab. Sch., by Miss J. L. Bridges, 8,
    _for Mobile, Ala._                                      16.00
  Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
  Ipswich. South Ch. and Soc.                               35.00
  Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch. and Soc.                       87.96
  Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 10.00
  Leicester. J. W. Brown, _for Talladega C._                 3.95
  Lenox. “Do What You Can Soc.,” _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                            25.00
  Leominster. Ortho. Cong. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._                                        60.64
  Littleton. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                              5.00
  Littleton. J. C. Houghton                                  5.00
  Loudville. Mrs. Mary E. Rust                               1.50
  Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch., 210; First Cong.
    Ch. and Soc., 47.98, to const. SIDNEY A.
    DREWETT L. M.; John St. Cong. Ch.,
    28.88; Mrs. Geo. C. Osgood, 1                          287.86
  Lynn. Cong. Ch., _for Freight_                             3.00
  Malden. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
  Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            25.28
  Maplewood. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C.,
    80c. _for Freight, for Wilmington, N. C._                0.80
  Marlboro. Members Un. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                  2.50
  Marlboro. T. B. Patch                                      1.00
  Medford. “A Woman to the Rescue,” _for Debt_              50.00
  Medford. McCullom Mission Circle of Mystic
    Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                      25.00
  Medford. Mrs. Alfred Tufts, 10; Ladies of
    Mystic Ch., ad’l, 50c.                                  10.50
  Medway. Village Ch. and Soc., 31.63; “A
    Friend,” 5                                              36.63
  Merrimac. Cong. Ch.                                       50.00
  Millbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 52.08
  Monson. Miss Sarah E. Bradford                             4.00
  Natick. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
  New Bedford. Trin. Ch. and Soc.                           22.89
  Newton. Eliot Ch., 45.92; Woman’s Gift, 1,
    _for Debt_, 1 _for Atlanta U._, 50c. _for
    New Building_                                           48.42
  Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   70.52
  Newton Upper Falls. S. D. Hunt                             5.00
  Newtonville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           82.06
  North Amherst. Cong. Ch., 1/2 Bbl. of C., _for
    Fisk U._
  Northampton. “Friends,” 6; “A Friend,” 1.50,
    _for Indian M._                                          7.50
  Northbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
  Northfield. Mission Band, 4.20 _for Marie
    Adlof Sch’p Fund_, and 5 _for Woman’s Work_,
    by Mrs. E. R. Drake                                      9.20
  North Leominster. Miss Annie Herrin’s S. S.
    Class of Boys, _for Student Aid, Straight U._            5.00
  North Weymouth. Pilgrim Ch., 1.20; Miss Hunt,
    _for Charleston, S. C._, 1                               2.20
  North Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.97
  Oakham. Cong. Ch.                                         22.01
  Oxford. Cong. Ch., 50, and Sab. Sch. 20.75                70.75
  Pepperell. Y. P. S. C. E. of Ev. Cong. Ch.                 1.25
  Pittsfield. James H. Dunham                               50.00
  Quincy. Girls’ Mission Circle of Ev. Cong. Ch,
    _for Student Aid, Straight U._                           8.70
  Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.91
  Royalston. Ladies’ Sew. Circle, 2 Bbls. of C.,
    etc., value 10.20, _for Greenwood, S. C._
  Salem. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          108.02
  Shelburne Falls. “American Missionary Aids,”
    by Mrs. A. N. Russell, _for Woman’s Work_               20.00
  Shelburne Falls. E. Maynard                               10.00
  Shelburne Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch. Class, No. 4,
    3.32; Class No. 13, 1, _for Woman’s Work_                4.32
  Shelburne Falls. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Cong.
    Ch., Bbl. of C., value 30.84, _for Tougaloo
    U._
  Somerville. Prospect Hill Ch., _for Woman’s
    Work_                                                  103.00
  Somerville. E. Stone, (50 of which _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._)                                 100.00
  Southampton. Miss S. S. Edward’s Sab. Sch.,
    Infant Class                                             0.70
  South Framingham. R. L. Day, _for Mountain
    Work in Ky._                                           100.00
  South Hadley Falls. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by
    Miss Lizzie Gaylord, _for Debt_                          5.00
  South Weymouth. Member of Second Ch., to
    const. MRS. MINOT GARDNER L. M.                         30.00
  South Weymouth. Ladies’ Praying Circle of
    Second Ch.                                              14.00
  Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        224.33
  Springfield. Memorial Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
  Springfield. Miss M. A. Dickinson, _for
    Freight_                                                 1.00
  Springfield. Miss M. A. Dickinson, _for Debt_              0.50
  Springfield. Five Classes in Sab. Sch.,
    Christmas offering, by Miss M. A. Dickinson,
    Box of C., etc., value 10.35, _for Oaks, N.
    C._
  Stoughton. Mrs. Betsey E. Capen                            1.00
  Sudbury. Ladies of Ev. Un. Ch., ad’l, _for
    Debt_                                                    0.60
  Warren. Cong. Ch.                                        113.00
  Warren. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
    Straight U._                                            40.15
  Watertown. Phillips Mission Band, 50, _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._, 90c. _for Freight_           50.90
  Watertown. “Friends,” 1.50; “Friend,” 50c.                 2.00
  Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.66
  Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             80.27
  Wellesley Hills. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       55.00
  West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    7.40
  West Boxford. “The Gleaners,” _for Student
    Aid, Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                             10.00
  Westfield. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                             20.00
  Westfield. B. B. Adams, Jr., _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                 5.00
  Westhampton. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Mrs. E.
    P. Torrey, Sec., _for Woman’s Work_, and
    bal. to const. MRS. A. E. TODD L. M.                    10.00
  Westhampton. Grace J. Edwards, T. B. Card
    Collection                                               5.00
  West Medway. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                            1.00
  West Newbury. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                      13.22
  West Newton. Second Cong. Ch.                             23.31
  West Newton. By Capt. S. E. Howard, Clothing,
    etc., _for Talladega C._
  Woburn. Mrs. S. S. Greenough                               4.50
  Worcester. Salem St. Ch., 30.01, Piedmont Ch.,
    17; “A Friend,” 10                                      57.01
  Worcester. Primary Dept. Piedmont Sab. Sch.,
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         48.00
  Worcester. Pilgrim Ch., _for Indian M._                   17.53
  Worcester. Nettie Orr, 10; “Friends,” 2, _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                              12.00
  Worcester. Mrs. Jennie J. Ware, _for Macon,
    Ga._                                                     5.00
  By Chas. Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass’n:
        Huntington. Second                    10.57
        Monson                                32.86
        Springfield. First                    32.08
        Springfield. South                    62.24
        Springfield. Olivet                    3.32        141.07
                                                          -------
                                                        $5,306.39


LEGACIES.

  Whitinsville. Estate of Frances A. Batchelor,
    deceased, by her mother, Mrs. Mary A.
    Batchelor                                            2,000.00
  Boston. Hollis Moore Memorial Trust, by E. K.
    Alden, Residuary Legatee                               100.00
                                                          -------
                                                        $7,406.39


CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

  North Bridgeton, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2
    Bbls., _for Williamsburg_ and _Louisville,
    Ky._
  South Berwick, Me. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl.,
    _for Wilmington, N. C._
  Hancock, N. H. “Cheerful Workers,” Bbl., _for
    Oaks, N. C._
  Warner, N. H. W. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 2
    Bbls., _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
  Bedford, Mass. Case, _for Charleston, S. C._
  Brimfield, Mass. Ladies’ Union of Second Cong.
    Ch., Bbl., _for Oaks, N. C._
  Cambridgeport, Mass. By Mrs. R. L. Snow,
    Reading Matter, _for Straight U._
  Fitchburg, Mass. H. H. Dole, 1 year’s No’s.
    “Youth’s Companion.”
  Framingham, Mass. Ladies of Plym. Ch., Bbl.,
    value 71, _for Tuskegee, Ala._
  Framingham, Mass. Ladies of Plym. Ch., Bbl.,
    value 38, _for Kittrell, N. C._
  Holyoke, Mass. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., Case,
    _for Citronelle_.
  Lynn, Mass. Chestnut St. Ch., 2 Bbls., _for
    Marion, Ala._
  Milford, Mass. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., 3 Bbls.,
    _for Talladega C._
  Newbury, Mass. First Parish, Bbl., _for
    Straight U._
  Newton, Mass. F. A. Sew. Circle, 2 Bbls., _for
    Macon, Ga._
  Somerset, Mass. M. C. of Cong. Ch., Bbl., _for
    Straight U._
  Somerville, Mass. Y. P. M. Band, Day St. Ch.,
    Bbl., _for Marietta, Ga._
  Somerville, Mass. Primary Dept. of Prospect
    Hill Ch., Box, _for Straight U._
  Watertown. Mass. Ladies of Phillips Ch., 2
    Bbls., _for Athens, Ga._
  Watertown, Mass. Phillips Mission Band, Bbl.
    and Box, _for Louisville, Ky._
  Waverley, Mass. Mrs. Wm. H. Chany, Pkg.
  Westboro, Mass. L. F. Soc., Bbl., value 22,
    _for Straight U._


RHODE ISLAND, $454.78.

  Bristol. First Cong. Ch.                                  39.18
  Bristol. Mrs. Hope Walker, _for Rosebud Indian
    M._                                                      5.00
  East Providence. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._               31.00
  Little Compton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 20.00
  Newport. Mrs. S. L. Little, _for McIntosh, Ga._            6.00
  Pawtucket. Mrs. Maria E. Edwards                         200.00
  Providence. Union Cong. Ch., ad’l                        152.60
  Providence. Miss C. Danielson, _for Indian M._             1.00


CONNECTICUT, $5,027.71.

  Abington. Package of Christmas Cards, _for
    Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._
  Berlin. “Golden Ridge Mission Circle,” by Mrs.
    W. S. Brandeyn, _for Avery Inst._                       10.00
  Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
  Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         59.68
  Birmingham. Miss Hattie A. Curtiss                         2.00
  Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                     12.87
  Bristol. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Storrs
    Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                                     10.00
  Canterbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       2.64
  Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.06; Rev. T. A.
    Emerson, 10; Mrs. Frances H. Emerson, 10                50.06
  Deep River. Cong. Ch.                                     23.47
  Durham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.00
  East Canaan. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
    _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                             14.00
  East Granby. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
    Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                         5.00
  East Hampton. Mrs. L. A. Skinner, _for Student
    Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.00
  East Wallingford. Mrs. Benj. Hall                          5.00
  East Woodstock. Roll of Patchwork, by M. M.
    Paine, _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._
  Ellington. Miss S. K. Gilbert                              5.00
  Enfield. “Be True Soc.,” by Miss A. Johnson,
    2; Mrs. S. W. Winch, 25c., _for Macon, Ga._              2.25
  Fairfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., 30, _for Santee
    Indian M._, 25, _for Tougaloo U._                       55.00
  Fairfield. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                     10.24
  Falls Village. First Cong. Ch., to const.
    MYRON H. DEAN and MISS HATTIE M. MILLARD, L.
    M’S.                                                    64.64
  Hadlyme. Jos. W. Hungerford, 100; R. E.
    Hungerford, 100; Miss Nellie A. Hungerford, 3          203.00
  Hampton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   8.42
  Hartford, Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., 269.12;
    Second Ch. of Christ, 100.50                           369.62
  Hartford. Windsor Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
  Hartford. Mrs. M. C. Bemis, 20; Windsor Av.
    Cong. Ch., 12.50; Park Cong. Ch., ad’l, 8               40.50
  Jewett City. Second Cong. Ch.                             23.00
  Kensington. Wm. Upson, 10; Edward Cowles, 5;
    Mrs. Edward Cowles, 2; Miss Eliza Cowles, 2;
    Sidney M. Cowles, 1                                     20.00
  Lakeville. Mrs. G. B. Burrall’s S. S. Class,
    _for Conn. Ind’l Sch Ga._                               20.00
  Lebanon. First Cong. Ch.                                  11.01
  Ledyard. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               23.65
  Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                     45.08
  Meriden. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
  Middletown. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Indian Sab. Sch. Work_                                  25.00
  Milford. Ladies’ Soc. of First Cong. Ch., Bbl.
    of articles _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._
  Mystic Bridge. Cong. Ch.                                  19.00
  New Britain. “Friends,” First Ch., _for
    Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    7.00
  New Britain. First Cong, Ch. Sab. Sch.,
    Primary Dept., _for Rosebud Indian M._                   5.00
  New Haven. Cong. Churches, _for Expenses of
    Annual Meeting_, by T. H. Sheldon, Treas.
    Local Com.                                             242.04
  New Haven. Humphrey St. Cong. Ch., 53.22, and
    Sab. Sch., 75.28; College St. Cong. Ch.,
    57.82                                                  186.32
  New Haven. Three Sab. Sch. Classes in First
    Ch., and other friends, 3 Bbls. and 1 Box of
    Goods, and _for Freight_, 11.08, _for Jones
    Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                             11.08
  New Haven. Dwight Place Ch., Box of C., _for
    Fisk U._
  Newington. Cong. Ch.                                      97.99
  New London. Second Cong. Ch.                             711.32
  New Preston. Ladies, by Mrs. F. S. Child, _for
    Conn. Ind’l Sch Ga._                                    14.00
  Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                       149.65
  Norfolk. Rev. John De Peu, _for Chinese M._               13.00
  Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., 216.45; First Cong.
    Ch., ad’l, 1.59                                        218.04
  Norwich. Francis E. Dowe, _for Indian M._                  5.00
  Old Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.14
  Old Saybrook. Mission Band of Cong. Ch., _for
    Indian M._                                              10.00
  Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          8.00
  Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                                  35.50
  Prospect. B. B. Brown                                     20.00
  Putnam. Mrs. A. S. Fitts, _for Student Aid,
    Fisk U._                                                17.50
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      37.20
  Salisbury. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 10; T. L.
    Norton’s S. S. Class, 5; Home Class, 5; Miss
    Roraback’s Class, 5; L. W. Harvey’s Class,
    3; Mrs. M. H. Williams and Mrs. Lyman, 3,
    _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              31.00
  Sherman. Ladies, by Mrs. A. G. Herrick, _for
    Conn. Ind’l Sch Ga._                                    10.00
  Somers. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                13.50
  South Haven. First Cong. Ch.                              10.00
  Southington. Cong. Ch.                                    75.00
  South Manchester. Ladies’ Sewing Soc., _for
    Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                  22.00
  Southport. “Friends,” _for Indian M._                     36.00
  Thomaston. Ladies of First Ch., _for Conn.
    Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        30.00
  Tolland. Mrs. Lucy L. Clough                               5.00
  Torrington. “Valley Gleaners,” _for Fort
    Berthold, Indian M._                                    50.00
  Torrington. Mrs. A. E. Perrin, Bbl. of C.;
    Contents of Toy Banks, 56c., for Talledega C.             .56
  Wallingford. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                   63.43
  Wapping. Cong. Ch.                                        21.41
  Warren. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Debt_                    3.50
  Watertown. Mrs. F. Scott’s Class, _for Fort
    Berthold, Indian M._                                    10.00
  West Hartford. Anson Chappell                             10.00
  Wethersfield. M. J. Amidon, 5; Others, 5, _for
    Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   10.00
  Wethersfield. Cong. Ch.                                    1.00
  Wethersfield. Friends by Rev. G. J. Tillotson,
    3 bbls., of C. etc. val. 110; _for Pleasant
    Hill Tenn._
  Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                         70.00
  Windsor. Cong. Sab. Sch., 35; “A Friend” of
    Cong. Sab. Sch., 35, _for Student Aid,
    Indian M._                                              70.00
  Winsted. W. L. Gilbert, _for Pleasant Hill,
    Tenn._                                                  10.00
  Winthrop. Mrs. M. A. Jones, 1.50; Miss C.
    Rice, 1                                                  2.50
  Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                         5.10
  Woodbury. Mrs. E. L. Curtiss                              10.00
  ----.----.                                               500.00
  ----. By E. W. Hazen _for Debt_                            4.00
  By Mrs. S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec W. H. M. U. of
    Conn., _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._:
      New Haven. Ladies’ H. M. Soc. of
        College St. Ch.                     35.00           35.00
                                                          -------
                                                        $4,138.91


LEGACY.

  Greenwich. Estate of Israel Peck, by Daniel S.
    Mead, Jr., Ex’r.                                       888.80
                                                          -------
                                                        $5,027.71


NEW YORK, $1,026.08.

  Albany. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                        56.00
  Albany. Chas A. Beach                                     25.00
  Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 29.75; John M.
    Stearns, 5; Mrs. M. L. Hollis, 3                        37.75
  Brooklyn. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, _for Woman’s
    Work_                                                   20.00
  Candor. Pastor and Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of
    Bedding, etc., _for Talladega C._
  Churchville. Union Cong. Ch.                              25.32
  Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                      2.50
  Connecticut. Mrs. R. Kimball, _for Debt_                    .50
  Fairport. Children’s Soc., Contents of
    Birthday Box, _for Woman’s Work_                         4.65
  Franklin. S. G. Smith                                      5.00
  Galway. Delia C. Davis, _for Atlanta U._                   5.00
  Havana. J. F. Phelps                                       4.00
  Homer. Cong. Ch., Picture and Two Books, _for
    Talladega C._
  Hudson. Mrs. D. H. Jones                                  15.00
  Ithaca. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student’s Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           35.00
  Lebanon. Cong. Ch., Box of C., etc., _for
    Athens, Ala._
  Lima. Mrs. O. Warner                                       1.50
  Lockport. Miss E. B. Balliott, Sec. W. H. M.
    Soc., 2 Bbls. of C., _for Talladega C._
  Lowville. Mrs. L. C. Hough                                20.00
  Malone. Mrs. Mary K. Wead                                100.00
  Marcellus. Mrs. L. Hemenway                                5.00
  Massina. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Papers,
    _for Talladega C._
  Morrisville. Cong. Ch.                                    10.15
  Newark Valley. Mrs. H. B. Loveland, _for
    repairs on Lincoln Mem. Ch., Washington_.               27.00
  New York. A Member of Broadway Tabernacle, by
    Dr. Wm. L. Taylor, 100; W. Jennings Demorest
    (30 of which to const. himself L. M.), 50;
    Pilgrim Ch., ad’l, 27; “Good Cheer Ass’n,”
    by Miss Agnes E. Warner, 5                             182.00
  New York. John R. Ford, _for Fisk U._                    100.00
  Norwich. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
  Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.23
  Norwich. Agnes McCann, Box of Thimbles, _for
    Athens, Ala._
  Oneida. “Hattie’s Pennies,” _for Marie Adlof
    Fund_                                                     .13
  Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Ch., “A Friend,”
    _for Indian M._                                         20.00
  Rome. Rev. Wm. B. Hammond                                 10.00
  Saratoga. Woman’s Soc. Plym. Ch., _for Student
    Aid, Talladega C._                                       4.40
  Syracuse. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              88.75
  Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                 5.00
  Vernon Center. Rev. G. C. Judson                           1.00
  Warsaw. Indian Soc. of Boys and Girls, by S.
    V. Lawrence, _for Dakota Indian M._                     15.00
  Waterville. Mrs. Julia Candee, 5; Mrs. Wm.
    Winchell, 5                                             10.00
  Waverly. Anna A. Merriam, _for Marie Adlof
    Fund_                                                     .20
  West Camden. E. W. Curtis, _for Debt_                      1.00
  By Mrs. L. H. Cobb, Treas. W. H. M. U. of N.
    Y., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Albany, L. H. M. S. to const. MRS. SARAH J.
          SMART and MRS. JUDITH A. POLLARD, L. M’s. 60.00
        Brooklyn. Infant Class, Puritan Ch.          3.00
        New York. “The King’s Daughters”             7.00
        Poughkeepsie. Ladies’ H. M. S.              25.00
        Sherburne. Ladies’ Aux.                     19.00
        Smyrna. L. H. M. Aux.                       25.00
                                                           139.00


NEW JERSEY, $219.22.

  Arlington. Herbert Overacre, True Blue Card
    Collection, 5; “A Friend,” 5                            10.00
  Arlington. Mrs. G. Overacre, _for Charleston,
    S. C._                                                   2.00
  Colts Neck. Reformed Ch.                                   6.78
  Lakewood. “G. L.”                                          3.00
  Montclair. “S. S. Class,” 8; “S. S. Class,” 5
    _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         13.00
  Paterson. Benj. Crane                                     20.00
  Roselle. Miss Betsey B. Tenney, _for Pleasant
    Hill, Tenn._                                            25.00
  Upper Montclair. Sab. Sch. of Christian Union
    Cong. Ch.                                               13.55
  Vineland. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 11.01
  Woodbridge. First Cong. Ch.                               14.88
  ----. “A Lady from New Jersey.”                          100.00


PENNSYLVANIA, $2,056.51.

  Carbondale. “Thank-offering.”                              2.50
  Center Road. J. A. Scovel                                 10.00
  Coudersport. John S. Mann                                  5.00
  Nanticoke. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                 9.01
  Scranton. Thomas Eynon                                    25.00
  West Alexander. John McCoy                                 5.00
                                                          -------
                                                           $56.51


LEGACY.

  Philadelphia. Estate of James Smith, by Frank
    P. Pendleton, Ex.                                    2,000.00
                                                          -------
                                                         2,056.51


OHIO, $1,321.92.

  Akron. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
    U._                                                     50.00
  Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         9.10
  Ashtabula. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
  Atwater. _For Freight_                                     1.50
  Atwater. Willing Workers, Roll of Carpet, _for
    Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
  Berea. James S. Smedley                                    5.00
  Chardon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.53
  Cincinnati. Mrs. Ruggles, _for Louisville, Ky._            2.00
  Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch. (10 of which
    _for Indian M._)                                       170.00
  Cleveland. “A Lady of Jennings Av. Cong. Ch.,”
    50; Madison Av. Cong. Ch., 6.29                         56.29
  Cleveland. Ladies’ Home Miss’y Soc. of Euclid
    Av. Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s Work_                       20.00
  Cleveland. Mount Zion Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                            9.50
  Cleveland. Mrs. C. A. Garlick, _for Indian M._             1.50
  Delaware. Wm. Bevan                                        5.00
  Dover. Christmas Dinner, _for Athens, Ala._
  Fredericksburg. First Cong. Ch.                           12.00
  Huntsburg. Cong. Ch., 5, and Sab Sch., 10; A.
    E. and M. E. Millard, 15                                30.00
  Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                400.00
  Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           16.80
  New Lyme. A. J. Holman                                    10.00
  North Benton. Margaret J. Hartzell                         2.50
  Oberlin. Rev. E. P. Barrows, 10; Harris Lewis,
    5                                                       15.00
  Painesville. First Ch.                                    44.78
  Perrysburg. Mrs. P. W. Warriner, 50c; Rev. J.
    K. Deering, 50c                                          1.00
  Radnor. Edward D. Jones                                    5.00
  Rockport. Cong. Ch.                                        0.50
  Saybrook. Wm. C. Sexton                                    3.00
  Strongsville. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for
    Debt_                                                    3.00
  Tallmadge. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                            27.74
  Unionville. Mrs. J. C. Burnelle                            5.00
  Windham. Wm. A. Perkins                                    5.00
  ---- “An Ohio Friend.”                                     10.00
  By Mrs. Ella J. Mahony, Treas. O. W. H. M. U.,
    _for Woman’s Work_:
        Ohio Woman’s H. M. U.                               68.18
                                                         --------
                                                        $1,021.92


LEGACY.

  Cleveland. Estate of Brewster Pelton, by John
    G. Jennings, Ex.                                       300.00
                                                          -------
                                                         1,321.92


INDIANA, $29.27

  Kokomo. Cong. Ch.                                         19.27
  Michigan City. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 10.00


ILLINOIS, $794.94.

  Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                        54.30
  Beaver Creek. Joseph Pike                                  1.00
  Belvidere. Mrs. M. C. Foote                                4.00
  Belvidere. Mrs. M. C. Foote, _for Woman’s Work_            3.00
  Camp Point. Mrs. S. B. McKinney                           11.00
  Chicago. New Eng. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              80.55
  Chicago. New England Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
    24.89; Y. L. M. S. of New Eng. Cong. Ch.,
    12.33; Mrs. J. H. McArthur, 5                           42.22
  Creal Springs. Rev. P. W. Wallace                          2.50
  Elgin. Ladies Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C., etc.,
    _for Macon, Ga._
  Englewood. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch.                30.00
  Galesburg. Mrs. S. P. M. Avery                            10.00
  Galesburg. First Church of Christ, Box of
    Christmas Gifts; Mrs. Ridley, S. S. Papers,
    _for Athens, Ala._
  Ivanhoe. “Sunbeam Band,” _for Student Aid,
    Tougaloo U._                                            15.02
  Lombard. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Mobile, Ala._               3.00
  Lowell. V. G. Lutz                                         5.00
  Maywood. H. W. Small, 1; L. V. Ferris, 1                   2.00
  Millburn. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
  Normal. Mrs. P. E. Leach                                   2.00
  Peoria. First Cong. Ch. to const. MRS. MARY E.
    BAILEY, MRS. ABBY BLAIR, MRS. HELEN BRIGGS,
    MRS. MARY CLARK, MRS. AGNES M. HANSEL and
    MRS. MARY MEALS, L. M’s.                               200.00
  Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                      20.70
  Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                             86.15
  Ravenswood. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. HELEN M.
    LLOYD L. M.                                             31.03
  Ridge Prairie. Rev. Andrew Kern                            2.50
  Sterling. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
    Aid, Fisk U._                                           20.00
  Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell                                    5.00
  Turner. Mrs. R. Currier                                    4.50
  By Mrs. B. F. Leavitt, Treas. W. H. M. U. of
    Ill., _for Woman’s Work_:
  Ashkum. Aux. and Y. L. M. C.                   0.65
  Chicago. W. M. S. of Lincoln Park Church      21.50
  Chicago. L. M. M. of New England Cong. Ch.    12.00
  Oak Park. L. B. S. of Cong. Ch.               32.25
  Port Byron. W. M. S.                          16.00
  Rockford. W. H. M. U. of First Ch.            26.27
  Rockford. H. M. U. of Second Ch.              10.80
  Rockford. Y. L. M. S. of First Cong. Ch.,
     _for Indian M._                            25.00
  Springfield. Mrs. C. S. Post                   5.00
                                               ------     $149.47


MICHIGAN, $572.97.

  Adrian. C. C. Spooner                                      5.00
  Alpena. Member of Cong. Ch.                               25.00
  Ann Arbor. Mrs. R. M. Cady                                 1.00
  Banks. Cong. Ch.                                          .8.65
  Bay City. Mrs. A. P. Lyon                                  5.00
  Calumet. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           40.00
  Covert. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., by Mrs. E. F.
    Grabill, Treas. W. H. M. S. of Mich., _for
    Woman’s Work_                                           10.00
  Detroit. “A Friend”, First Cong. Ch., _for
    Kreutzer Marie Adolf Sch’p_                            100.00
  Detroit. First Cong. Sab. Sch., 25; Rev. J. D.
    McLaulin, 9.22                                          34.22
  Detroit. Rev. J. D. McLaulin, _for Student
    Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       25.00
  Grand Rapids. South Cong. Ch.                              2.50
  Hancock. Woman’s M. Soc. Cong. Ch., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                              25.00
  Kalamo. Mrs. S. E. Slosson                                 1.60
  Northville. D. Pomeroy                                     5.00
  Portland. Fanny Wadsworth Miss’y Soc., by
    Sadie Hinman, Treas., _for Debt_                         4.50
  Romeo. Miss E. B. Dickinson                               50.00
  Stanton. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
  Union City. I. W. Clark                                  200.00
  Union City. Mrs. S. M. Lucas                               0.50
  Wheatland. N. R. Rowley                                   10.00
  White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00


WISCONSIN, $620.16.

  Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                        12.72
  La Crosse. Cong. Ch.                                     100.00
  Lake Geneva. Cong. Ch.                                    20.78
  Madison. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                             40.00
  Menominee. John H. Knapp (100 of which _for
    Indian M._)                                            200.00
  Milwaukee. Gr. Av. Cong. Ch., 40; Hanover St.
    Cong. Ch., 11.13                                        51.13
  Prairie du Chien. “Friend,” _for Student Aid,
    Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                               5.50
  Racine. Mrs. D. D. Nichols                                 0.50
  Ripon. Union Fair, College and Sab. Sch., _for
    Macon, Ga._                                              6.00
  Ripon. Mrs. C. T. Tracy                                    5.00
  Sheboygan. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Macon,
    Ga._                                                    15.00
  Stoughton. Mrs. E. B. Sewall                               1.00
  Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                       8.93
  Waupun. Cong. Ch., 21.90; and Sab. Sch., 10               31.90
  Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
  Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wis., _for
    Woman’s Work_:
      Alden. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                     1.75
      Baraboo. W. M. S.                             25.00
      Decorah. L. M. S.                             25.00
      Eldora. “                                      6.50
      Elk Horn. “                                    7.00
      Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                          3.14
      Madison. W. M. S.                             25.00
      Marion. Y. P. M. S.                           20.00
      McGregor. W. M. S.                            10.87
      Osage. “                                       4.45
      Stacysville. “                                 5.00
      Polk City. Collected by Minnie Stubbs and
        Dolly Egleston                               0.74
      Windsor. W. M. S.                              5.00
                                                  -------  114.70


IOWA, $423.67.

  Anamosa. “A Friend,” 5; _Juv. Miss’y Soc._, 5;
    _for Student Aid, Straight U._                          10.00
  Burlington. Cong. Ch., ad’l                                7.29
  Cedar Rapids. Mrs. R. D. Stephens, _for
    Student Aid, Straight U._                              100.00
  Cedar Rapids. Birthday Box, Mission Sab. Sch.
    of Cong. Ch.                                             2.65
  Danville. Cong. Ch.                                        9.00
  Davenport. Young Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                              75.00
  Des Moines. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                           143.08
  Edgewood. N. G. PLATT, to const. himself L. M.            33.00
  Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student
    Aid, Straight U._                                       11.70
  Independence. By Rev. W. S. Potwin, _for
    Student Aid, Talladega C._                               6.00
  Newton. Wittenberg Sab. Sch.                              14.05
  Sheffield. Mrs. Agnes Floyd, _for Fort
    Berthold, Indian M._                                     5.00
  Tabor. Cong. Ch.                                           9.90
  Washington. Ladies of Franklin Cong. Ch.,
    Bedding, _for Talladega C._


MISSOURI, $131.32.

  Meadville. Ladies Soc., by Mrs. J. W. Abell,
    _for Woman’s Work_                                      13.11
  Saint Louis. First Cong. Ch.                             118.21


KANSAS, $9.50.

  Chetopa. Mary E. Pinkerton                                 1.00
  Hampton. Rev. I. T.                                        0.50
  Sabetha. First Cong. Ch.                                   8.00


DAKOTA, $28.05.

  Fort Berthold. Wm. Kirkwood, _for Indian M._              10.00
  Harwood. Cong. Ch.                                         1.50
  Plankinton. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., by C. G.
    Black, Treas A. C. U., _for Woman’s Work_                8.00
  Plankinton Mrs. C. G. Black’s S. S. Class, 2;
    W. M. Soc., 2.80, _for Indian M._                        4.80
  Redfield. Cong. Ch.                                        3.75


COLORADO, $75.00.

  Boulder. Geo. L. Gibson                                   25.00
  Denver. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
    Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 50.00


NEBRASKA, $54.39.

  Beatrice. First Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
  Crete. Mrs. F. I. Foss                                    10.00
  Greenwood. Mrs. C. A. Mathis, _Freight for
    Macon, Ga._                                              2.00
  Omaha. W. N. McCandlish, to const. MISS
    CHARLOTTE J. HOWELLS, L. M.                             30.00
  Ponca Agency. Ponca Mission                                7.39


CALIFORNIA, $46.00.

  National City. J. E. Cushman                              25.00
  Oakland. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
    Indian M. and Freedmen_                                 15.00
  Riverside. John P. Fisk, Jr., _for Macon, Ga._             1.00
  San Jacinto. Mrs. L. N. Suydam, 3; Nellie and
    Keith Suydam, 1 each                                     5.00


WASHINGTON TER., $11.26.

  Houghton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Birthday
    offerings, _for Talladega C._                           11.26


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $16.00.

  Washington. Rev. W. W. Patton, D. D., _for
    Charleston, S. C._                                      15.00
  Washington. “Little Rills of Llensmary”                    1.00


KENTUCKY, $136.25.

  Berea. Ch. at Berea                                        1.25
  Williamsburg. Tuition                                    135.00


TENNESSEE, $870.85.

  Grand View. Tuition                                       32.50
  Jonesboro. Tuition, 3.50; Rent, 2                          5.50
  Memphis. Tuition                                         338.15
  Nashville. Tuition                                       489.70
  Nashville. Prof. F. A. Chase                               5.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $195.52.

  Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                          15.00
  Wilmington. Tuition                                      175.00
  Wilmington. Miss Hyde’s S. S. Class, 3.52;
    Miss Farrington’s S. S. Class, 2, _for
    Indian M._                                               5.52


SOUTH CAROLINA, $1.00.

  Columbia. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                              1.00


GEORGIA, $683.71.

  Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                            220.10
  Macon. Tuition, 166.10; Rent, 3.75                       169.85
  Macon. “Missionary Birthday Box,” Cong. Sab.
    Sch.                                                    13.21
  McIntosh. Tuition                                         57.50
  Savannah. Tuition                                        187.50
  Thomasville. Tuition                                      35.05
  Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, _for Debt_            0.50


FLORIDA, $10.00.

  Orlando. M. Marty                                         10.00


ALABAMA, $375.00.

  Athens. Tuition                                           41.75
  Mobile. Tuition                                          224.45
  Talladega. Tuition                                        88.80
  Talladega. Woman’s Miss’y Ass’n, _for Indian
    M._                                                     20.00


LOUISIANA, $292.00.

  New Orleans. Tuition                                     242.00
  New Orleans. S. B. Steers, _for Student Aid,
    Talladega C._                                           50.00


MISSISSIPPI, $66.70.

  Canton. Mrs. Hattie C. Garrett, _for Debt_                 5.00
  Columbus. Women of Pine Grove Ch., _for Debt_              0.30
  Tougaloo. Tuition, 7.50; Rent, 51.90                      59.40
  Tougaloo. Helping Hand Soc., _for Indian M._               2.00


TEXAS, $229.62.

  Austin. Tuition                                          217.62
  Austin. Miss J. A. Condict, _for Student Aid_             12.00


INCOME, $602.55.

  Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               602.55


CANADA, $10.00.

  Montreal. “C. A.”                                          5.00
  Sherbrooke. Mrs. H. J. Morey                               5.00
                                                      ===========
  Donations                                             17,528.99
  Legacies                                               5,288.80
  Incomes                                                  692.55
  Tuition and Rents                                      2,719.87
                                                      -----------
  Total for January                                    $26,140.21
  Total from Oct. 1 to Jan. 31                          86,914.18
                                                      ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  Subscriptions for January                               $187.76
  Previously acknowledged                                  251.42
                                                      -----------
        Total                                             $439.18

                           H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                           56 Reade St., N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *




                 1850 Thirty-Seventh Year. 1887

                         Manhattan Life

                          INSURANCE CO.

                          OF NEW YORK,

                      156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                         AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as
to ability, integrity, etc.

        Accumulation                     11,155,000
        Surplus, by New York standard,    2,254,000

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years.
Very liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New
York._


                   JAMES M. McLEAN, President.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
                H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                               H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                                          S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.

       *       *       *       *       *


                            INDELIBLE

[Illustration]

Mark your Clothing! Clear Record of half a Century.

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.” Use
a common pen.

Sold by all Druggists Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                            PAYSON’S

                         Indelible Ink!

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

You Can Have The Phila. LADIES’ HOME JOURNAL AND PRACTICAL
HOUSEKEEPER, mailed to any address for 6 months, for only 25
cents, either stamps or silver--a small sum of money. If you will
read it 6 months you will not be without it afterward.

Elegantly Illustrated AND Handsomely PRINTED.

[Illustration]

MRS. LOUISA KNAPP, Editor; Mrs. E. C. Hewitt, and Mrs. J. H.
Lambert, Associate Editors.

Pure and Safe Fiction only. Domestic Stories by Elizabeth Stuart
Phelps, Josiah Allen’s Wife, Marion Harland, Rose Terry Cooke,
Harriet P. Spofford, Mary Abbott Rand, Ella R. Church.

A Series of Poems by Will Carlton.

_Author of “Betsy and I Are Out,” “Over the Hills to The Poor
House.”_

Practical Fashions, with Illustrations, by Jenny June.

Practical House keeping matters by CHRISTINE TERHUNE HERRICK.

Cottage Dinners, Dainties and Desserts for afternoon teas, or
evening companies, with table manners and Etiquette, methods of
serving and garnishing. A whole page for Mothers, and care of
children, &c. Artistic Needlework Department, fully illustrated,
and edited by MISS MARY KNAPP. =OVER 400,000= copies printed each
issue.

[Illustration]

_WE SEND FREE_ Our own special new & original STAMPING OUTFIT
To any person sending us only four subscribers for six months,
at 25 cents each; or we will send this Outfit _and_ the LADIES’
HOME JOURNAL one year for only $1.00. Our new, 1887 Outfit was
designed expressly for our subscribers only, by MRS. KNAPP,
Editor of the LADIES’ HOME JOURNAL.

The outfit contains patterns for every branch of needlework and
flower painting, and _every pattern is the full working size_.
The several Flannel Skirt patterns are each long enough to stamp
a breadth of flannel at once without removing the pattern, and
the scallops have the corners turned. The outfit contains (new)
a beautiful Spray of Roses wide enough for the end of a Table
cover; an entirely new design for Tinsel work; several bouquets,
each long enough for the corner of a Table spread, or a Tidy; and
the alphabet is large enough for Towels, Napkins, Handkerchiefs,
or Hat-bands.

Each outfit is accompanied by directions for doing Stamping by
_Parker’s new patent method without paint or powder_. Address:

CURTIS PUBLISHING CO., Philada., Pa.




Transcriber’s Notes


Punctuation missing from the scan was added. Period and
well-known alternate spellings retained (e.g. mamma for mama).

“Presideent” changed to “President” on page 64. (President, Hon.
Wm. B. Washburn)

“collectable” left uncorrected on page 65 as part of the
quotation “are not collectable taxes”

“aud” changed to “and” on page 75. (and is reaching a large
number of women)

“philanthrophy” changed to “philanthropy” (a monument to Mr.
Ballard’s philanthropy)

“règime” changed to “régime” on page 83 (The régime everywhere)

“Talledega” changed to “Talladega” on page 89 under the first
entry for Farmington.

“Talladga” changed to “Talladega” on page 90 under the first
entry for Holliston.

“25.00” added on page 95 to the entry for Boulder. Geo. L.
Gibson. A smudge near the number indicates a probable scanning or
page damage error, and 25.00 fills out the total for Colorado.

“Orlanda” changed to “Orlando” on page 95 in the section for
Florida.

“boquets” changed to “bouquets” on page 96 (several bouquets,
each long enough)








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 03, MARCH, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.