The Adventures of Squirrel Fluffytail

[Illustration: “‘Go straight there and come straight home before
dark!’”]




                           The Adventures of
                          Squirrel Fluffytail

                   A Picture Story-Book for Children

                               Story by
                            Dolores McKenna

                              Pictures by
                            Ruth H. Bennett

                            [Illustration]

                      Frederick A. Stokes Company
                       New York      Publishers

                        _Copyright, MCMXXI, by_
                   THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY

                         _All Rights Reserved_




CHAPTER ONE


Once upon a time, on a beautiful island that stood in the center of a
great big lake, there lived in the heart of a kindly old oak tree a
dear little squirrel family. There were three in all; Father, Mother
and Fluffy-tail, and they were just the happiest family one could
imagine.

Father Squirrel worked hard all day long gathering nuts to store away
so that they would all have enough food in the larder for winter, and
when Mother Squirrel was not too busy doing her housework she too
helped to gather nuts, which she would tuck away in all sorts of places
so that no lazy squirrels could find them. She knew that there were
some lazy little rascals who would play all summer long and that when
the winter came their poor babies would ofttimes cry because they were
so hungry.

Not that she would not help any one in need, for she was a good, kind
mother, but she knew from experience that those little squirrels who
would not work and gather nuts when they were plentiful, would help
themselves to other folks’ supply if they had a chance to do so.

One day while Mrs. Squirrel was ironing some pretty petties for
Fluffy-tail she heard a knock at the door. It was a messenger from Mrs.
Squire Squirrel inviting Fluffy-tail to a surprise-party to be given
to her little daughter Furrikins. When Fluffy-tail came bouncing in
to dinner that day and saw something pink peeping out from under her
plate, you can just imagine how delighted she was when she pulled it
out and found it was an invitation to a party, for parties were few and
far between on the Island.

They had to be just after the summer visitors left the place, as it
would not be very safe while they were there. With summer visitors
there was sure to be a boy with a gun who was always just so hungry
for squirrel pot-pie. In the winter it was too cold, and in the spring
there was seldom enough food left for regular meals, much less a party.
So now the time was just right and Fluffy-tail thought she was never so
happy in all her life.




CHAPTER TWO


After lunch, on the day of the party, Mrs. Squirrel washed, brushed
and combed Fluffy-tail until it hurt so she thought she would have to
squeal once or twice; then dressed her in one of the prettiest little
party dresses one ever saw. Fluffy-tail even had new slippers with
fluffy pink bows. “You must live up to your name, my dear,” her mother
said, as she tied her pretty pink bonnet strings, “and too, my dear,”
as she kissed her for at least the twentieth time, “be very careful
of your manners; don’t lose your present (the cutest lace trimmed hanky
with blue birds in the corners); go straight there and come straight
back home before dark. You know Old Tabby Cat just loves little
squirrels for dinner and she wouldn’t care even if you did have on your
party dress. Cats are such prowling creatures sometimes,” she added.




CHAPTER THREE


[Illustration: “Mrs. Squirrel followed Fluffy down the path.”]

Mrs. Squirrel followed Fluffy a little way down the path and at the
corner Fluffy turned, waved goodbye with her little fan, and then was
gone out of sight. Mrs. Squirrel sighed as she went back into the
house, hoping all would be happy for her darling that day.

Fluffy herself was surely happy, and after waving goodbye to her
mother, her thoughts were filled with the good time and the good things
she knew she would get to eat at the party. Her little brown eyes
seemed to just dance whenever she would think of the pleasures in store
for her. She had not gone very far along the road when she heard a wee
voice crying, “Oh, please help me! It hurts so!” and looking around
she saw a poor little mouse whose tail was caught between two stones.

[Illustration: “‘Oh, please help me!’”]

“Just a minute,” said Fluffy, and after carefully putting down her
hanky and fan, she tried to move the stones between which little Timmy
Mouse’s tail was caught. At first she thought she would not be able to,
but at last she got a good sized stick and raised the stone just enough
for poor little Tim to get loose. He was so glad to be free, he said,
not only because the stone hurt him dreadfully but because he feared
that Old Mrs. Tabby Cat was liable to be along any minute. “I can’t
tell you how much I thank you,” he said, “but maybe some day I can do
something for you.”

“That’s all right,” said Fluffy, gathering up her things. “Tell your
mother to put some arnica on your tail and it won’t hurt any more,” and
she was gone out of sight. “I must hurry a little more,” she thought,
“as I would hate dreadfully to be late for the party.”




CHAPTER FOUR


“Oh dear me! What a narrow escape!” exclaimed Fluffy, as she stooped
down and picked up a tiny little woodpecker that had fallen to the
ground. “Your mother must be very careless to let you fall.” “No,” said
the little chap, “Mother has gone for food for us and I played too near
the edge of the stump and fell off.” Just then the woodpecker’s mother
returned, and being alarmed that something was happening to her babies,
came flying toward Fluffy screaming, “What are you doing here?” “I am
not harming your children,” said Fluffy. “I was just putting your
little baby back in your nest. He had fallen to the ground and could
not get up himself. It was lucky for him that I saw him when I did, for
I almost stepped on him.” By this time Mrs. Woodpecker was over her
alarm and was very sorry she had spoken so crossly. “Please forgive
me,” she said, “I was so terribly frightened I hardly knew what I was
saying. I thank you a thousand times; should you ever need a friend,
let me know and I will do all I can to help you.” Fluffy did not wait
to talk longer; she knew it was getting nearer party time every minute,
so she hurried on.

[Illustration: “Fluffy knew it was getting nearer party time every
minute.”]




CHAPTER FIVE


“Now,” thought Fluffy-tail, “I shall not stop again, no matter what
happens--I’ll just hustle along and not stop until I reach Squire
Squirrel’s house. Why, it must be time for the party now!” she thought,
as she looked at her tiny little wrist watch. While looking at her
watch she heard a fluttering and rustling in the leaves along the
roadside. “I’ll not stop,” she thought, “I’ll just pretend I don’t
hear anything.” She had only gone a few steps though when she had to
turn back to see what was wrong. She was such a tender-hearted little
creature, she could not go to a place where she knew she was to have
a good time and feel that she might by any chance have passed by some
suffering little person.

“What is it?” she asked rather impatiently, as she glanced to where the
noise seemed to come from. “You needn’t be so cross about it!” said a
little Bat that was lying alongside the path. “Won’t you please pick me
up and hang me on that old tree? I guess I must have fallen asleep and
loosed my hold on the bark. No! No! Not that way!” he said, as Fluffy
was trying to place him on the branch. “Hang me upside down. That’s the
way I sleep.”

“Very well,” said Fluffy, “There you are, upside down. Now I hope
everything is all right.” “Yes, thank you,” said Mr. Bat, “I can go
to sleep again now, and I’ll try to be more careful. Before you go,
though,” he went on, “I wish you would give me your name and address.
I’ll put it in my vest pocket and maybe some day I’ll be able to be of
some use to you for your kindness in helping me out today.” Fluffy told
him in as few words as possible, her name, where she lived, and where
she was going; then bidding him goodbye, she picked up her packages and
hurried along faster than ever.




CHAPTER SIX


“Oh dear!” she sighed, “I might almost as well go home now. It’s so
late. I’m sure the ice cream and cake and all the goodies will be eaten
before I get there. I do wish people would not be so careless and make
so much work for other people to do. I’m all tired out now and I do
hope that I’ve had my last delay.” With this thought she hurried along
just as fast as her little feet would go. So excited was poor Fluffy
now that she made a turn to the left instead to the right, and she had
gone quite a distance before she discovered that there was something
wrong. She did not know just what to do and became so dreadfully
frightened that she sat down and cried as though her little heart
would break. How long she had been sitting there she could not tell;
she went over the happenings since her dear mother kissed her goodbye,
and wondered if she would be able to find her way back home without
being caught by that awful Old Tabby Cat.

“If ever I get out of this trouble,” thought she, “I’ll never again
stop any place to help anybody. If I had only gone straight to the
party and let other folks take care of themselves I would be safe now.”
With the thought that she was now the most unhappy creature in the
world, she burst into tears again.

[Illustration: “‘Won’t you please give me those tears?’”]

“Won’t you please give me those tears?” Fluffy heard a tiny voice ask.
“I am withering away and must die soon if somebody does not give a
me tiny drink.” Looking down, Fluffy saw a tiny little Bluebell all
wilted, and looking so sad. “The trees are so thick here,” it said,
“I cannot get the rain or dew, and the fairies are having a big party
today and have forgotten poor little me.” By this time Fluffy’s tears
were all dried up, seeing some one in distress made her forget her
own troubles. “I can’t give you my tears,” she said, “for they have
all dried now, but I can get you some water from the brook,” so again
putting down her dear little fan and hanky she skipped off to the brook
to get the water. She had nothing in which to carry it so she made a
cup of her tiny hands and was stepping from one stone to another when
her little foot slipped and splash into the water it went. “Oh, my dear
little shoe!” wailed Fluffy as she looked down and saw the pretty bow
all wet and muddy, “I can never go to the party now.”

She tried her best to wipe off the mud and fluff up the bow and then
got more water which she took back to the little Bluebell who was
eagerly waiting for her to return. “There now, raise up your head and
be happy,” said Fluffy as she poured the water around its tiny roots.
“If you want more I shall get it for you, then I must try to find my
way home, as I have lost my way to Furrikins’ party.” By this time the
little Bluebell was refreshed after its hearty drink and told Fluffy
the way to reach Furrikins’ home.




CHAPTER SEVEN


Thanking the little flower, she again started out and was just making
the last turn when who should she see in her path but Old Tabby Cat.
Fluffy looked but for an instant. She knew she must move quickly to
escape, so she turned about, yelled for help as loudly as she could,
and ran just as fast as her little legs would carry her. She was tired
already after her long walk and could not make very good time. Old
Tabby was gaining on her rapidly when Mrs. Woodpecker, who had heard
Fluffy’s first cry for help, flew at once to the rescue. She jumped on
Mrs. Tabby’s head and began pecking for all she was worth. This was
such a surprise to Old Tabby that she fell head over heels into a hole
by the roadside and it was quite a few minutes before she recovered
herself enough to peep out to try to discover just what had attacked
her. As she did so a big stone dropped from some place down in the
hole beside her, pinning her tail fast. It was some time before little
Timmy Mouse (for it was he who had rolled the stone on Old Tabby’s
tail) dared to look over the edge of the pit to see how well his plans
worked. “So it was you?” said Tabby, glaring at Timmy.

One look was enough for little Timmy and he scurried off home as fast
as he could go.




CHAPTER EIGHT


By this time it was quite late and poor little Fluffy was still running
thankful to have escaped Old Tabby, but fearful of some new danger at
every step.

Suddenly a voice beside her said, “Don’t be frightened, follow close to
me for I can see quite well in the dark. You did me a good turn once in
the daylight and now I can help you in the dark.” With these words, Mr.
Bat (for it was the same one she had helped that afternoon when he had
fallen from the tree) took hold of her hand and led her to Furrykins’
home where they were all waiting to greet her. After Mrs. Woodpecker
had jumped on Mrs. Tabby, she flew on to tell the little folks at the
party all about poor Fluffy’s experience, and to ask them to keep the
party waiting just a little longer.




CHAPTER NINE


[Illustration: “It was surely a grand party.”]

It was surely a grand party. They had it on their beautiful lawn and
the moon had come out so brightly that the little folks played all
their games they had arranged for the daytime. There were nuts, apples,
candies, and all sorts of goodies to eat, nice games to play, and they
danced around in the moonlight till the Whip-poor-will called, which
was the curfew for all.

As it was so late when Fluffy arrived at the party, Mrs. Furrykins sent
a message to her mother telling her that she would keep her all night
and send her home early next morning. So after the party was over and
all the little folk had gone to their homes in the woods, Mrs. Squire
Squirrel tucked Fluffy and Furrykins in her daughter’s little bed,
kissed each of them “goodnight,” heard them say their prayers, and went
quietly to her own room on the opposite side of the big oak tree.




CHAPTER TEN


Fluffy was too tired to dream of the many experiences she had had that
day and went to sleep quickly. Early next morning, as promised, Mrs.
Furrykins saw to it that Fluffy was taken safely home. Her mother was
anxiously waiting for her at the door and each was happy to feel the
other’s arms around her.

Mother Squirrel kissed her little daughter after each adventure was
told to her, and wiping the tears from her eyes when Fluffy had
finished, she said, “After all, Fluffy dear, you see that one can
never lose anything by being kind to others. You are home again safe
and sound and I’m glad you enjoyed the party.”







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SQUIRREL FLUFFYTAIL: A PICTURE STORY-BOOK FOR CHILDREN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.