VOL. XXXII.                                       No. 2.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          FEBRUARY, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                       33
    GIFTS FROM THE FIELD                             34
    AFRICAN EVANGELIZATION                           35
    LIFE OF EDWARD NORRIS KIRK, D.D.                 36
    NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES                           37
    CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE—IS THE NEGRO
      DYING OUT?                                     38
    AFRICAN EMIGRATION                               39
    INDIAN NOTES                                     41
    CHINESE NOTES                                    43

  NEW APPOINTMENTS.
    THE SOUTHERN FIELD                               44
    AMONG THE CHINESE—AMONG THE INDIANS—MENDI
      MISSION, WEST AFRICA                           48

  AFRICA.

    OUR NEW MISSIONARIES                             48
    KAW MENDI, SHERBRO, W. AFRICA. REV. J.
      M. WILLIAMS                                    49

  COMMUNICATIONS.

    POETRY. “Christ in the Person of the Poor.”
      —REPLACING THE BURNED BUILDINGS                50
    CAMPAIGN IN MASSACHUSETTS. DIST. SEC’Y
      POWELL, OF CHICAGO                             51
    AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION. From
      the _Fisk Expositor_                           53

  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                54

  RECEIPTS                                           55

  CONSTITUTION                                       59

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                       60

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              A. Anderson, Printer, 28 Frankfort St.




                _American Missionary Association_,


                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    AUGUSTUS E. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXII.   FEBRUARY, 1878.   No. 2.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


We desire to express our grateful appreciation of the kind
notices with which “THE MISSIONARY” in its new form
has been received, especially by the newspapers edited under
Congregational auspices. Their relations to us have always been of
the pleasantest, and their readiness to do us favors has been a
constant help and encouragement. May their circulation never grow
less!

       *       *       *       *       *

We are daily receiving enclosures of twenty-five cents, as payment
for the MISSIONARY for 1878. We trust that the receipt of the
January number, and the present form of the magazine, will monthly
remind our friends that _a quarter of a dollar only pays for half
a year_. Please send the other quarter, all who have made this
mistake.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Belleville Avenue Congregational Church of Newark, N. J.,
and the Congregational Church at Mount Carmel, Conn., have
already accepted our proposition to send 100 copies of the
MISSIONARY for the year to one address for $30.00. Other
churches and neighborhoods are canvassing for it; who will go and
do likewise? We want readers, and those who pay something for the
magazine will read it. A letter, enclosing his subscription, from
a Presbyterian minister, says that he can secure the information
he desires in regard to the Southern field and work from no other
source.

       *       *       *       *       *

We welcome with special pleasure to our table, the first number
of the _Fisk Expositor_, published at Fisk University, Nashville,
Tenn., from which we give an extract on another page. It is an
additional witness to the devotion and enterprise, with which
our professors and teachers are working in all directions, to
extend their influence for the information and enlightenment
of those among whom they labor. This is another of a group of
such publications, among which are the _Southern Workman_, of
Hampton, the _Southern Sentinel_, of Talladega, and the _Straight
Occasional_, of New Orleans. They are full of information as to the
work of these institutions, and of valuable discussions of topics
of interest and importance to the colored people of the land.

       *       *       *       *       *


SMALL GIFTS.

We cited in the MISSIONARY for January a number of
large gifts from wealthy men and women, to relieve from debt the
Missionary Boards of various churches, as worthy examples to some
of the men of liberal heart and means who are in especial sympathy
with our work for the lowly. We still have hope that such, alone or
in combination, will do great things for us, and make us glad, in
freeing us from accumulated but already diminishing indebtedness.

Meanwhile, to enable us to carry on our constantly increasing work,
it may not be needless to address this word to those who cannot
give large sums from a large store of good, but who, out of their
moderate incomes and limited means, have been in the habit of
sending us smaller amounts.

Dear friends, after all, it is on you that we depend. If you will
look through our list of receipts from month to month, you will
see how large a proportion of it all comes to us in little sums—a
few dollars here and a few dollars there. You must not fail us,
then. We cannot afford to give up the large contributors, perhaps;
still less the small ones. Sometimes, when it has gone abroad that
such an one has given his five, ten or twenty thousand dollars,
the givers of five, ten or twenty dimes are checked for a while in
the flowing of their generosity. Because there was a heavy rain
yesterday, the dews will not form to-night. The suggestion of
plenteous supplies goes abroad because of one large receipt, and
the small sums seem so very small to the givers as they compare
them with the large ones.

But, after all, good friends, a deluge of beneficence only comes
once in a great while. Our bow of promise of unfailing resources
is formed upon the drops of your steady giving. Forty days and
forty nights the Deluge lasted; but, for forty years, each morning,
“when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the
wilderness there lay a small, round thing...on the ground”—it was
the daily bread of Israel. So your gifts—if they be only “small,
round things,” the dimes and quarters, the ancestral dollars—are
the gifts to which we look for the maintenance of the great host
which we are trying to lead from the bondage of ignorance and sin
to the liberty of intelligence and Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been coming into our treasury during the last month a
class of offerings for the debt, which have a peculiar and almost
pathetic significance. They are the gifts from the Southern
field—from the teachers and pupils in our institutions, from the
pastors and people of our poor colored churches; one from a Band of
Hope, one from a Sisters’ Benevolent Association. One Sunday-school
agrees to take a monthly five-cent collection from its 200 members,
and hopes to send $10.00 a month. The Avery Normal Institute at
Charleston. S. C., and the Chattanooga Band of Hope gave each
a holiday entertainment, and sent us, the one $38.60, and the
other $50.00, for the debt, “as tokens of love and respect from a
grateful people.” We believe the original suggestion was made by
Rev. G. S. Pope, of Tougaloo, Mississippi. The amounts have varied
from over one hundred to three dollars, and are accompanied with
hearty expressions of kind and grateful feeling.

A missionary, who has devoted the last ten years to work among the
freedmen, writes: “I think the story of these Christmas gifts from
the South toward the A. M. A. debt, ought to bring ten-fold from
the North. I tell you, boys and girls here have given their five
cents, dimes, quarters and half-dollars, who have hardly decent or
sufficient clothing to wear.”

One old and poor colored member of one of the churches said: “I
will give a dollar for that, if I have to go without meat and bread
for a week.” A teacher writes: “Would that the history could be
written of every dime and ‘nickel’ of this offering, which comes
from old men and women, youths and maidens, and little children in
their rags, to the A. M. A., which God has ordained as a channel of
blessing to the colored race in the South and their fatherland.”
Such gifts are sacred, by the sacrifices of which they are the
fruits, and by the spirit of loving devotion to which they testify.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROVIDENTIAL PREPARATIONS FOR AFRICAN EVANGELIZATION.

It is a significant fact that God moves His providences on parallel
lines. One great event is made to match another. The supply and the
demand spring up together, as the following circumstances, with
many others, illustrate:

In 1855, Mr. Charles Avery gave $100,000 worth of property to this
Association, to constitute a perpetual fund for charitable use,
in sending the Gospel and the blessings of civilization to the
colored people on the continent of Africa. Almost simultaneously,
Burton and Speke made known to the world the fact that the heart
of Africa, instead of being a wild waste, possessed a wonderful
lake system, a most fertile country, and millions upon millions of
vigorous and interesting people.

At a later day, Mr. Stanley visited these lakes, and made an
appeal for missionary effort, which was answered by a response as
liberal as the donation of Mr. Avery; and as a result, the Church
Missionary Society of England is sustaining a mission at Uganda, in
Mtesa’s Kingdom.

When Dr. Livingstone was in the heart of Africa, he wrote: “Come
on, brethren, to the real heathen. You have no idea how brave
you are till you try.” His words were caught up, and the story
of his explorations, devoured with eagerness, resulted in the
establishment of three missions at least, far in the interior. More
than $60,000 was given for the establishment of Livingstonia, on
the Nyassa Lake. A large amount was also given for the University’s
Mission in the same vicinity, and $25,000 by Mr. Arthington,
of Leeds, to the London Missionary Society, for the purpose of
establishing a mission at Ujiji, on the shores of the Tanganyika.

To this latter amount was added a sum sufficient for sending forth
a full corps of missionaries to that locality, and recent reports
warrant the hope that they have already reached their destination.

Perhaps no more striking illustration of the parallelisms we have
suggested has been exhibited, than the one recently brought to our
knowledge by the report of Mr. Stanley’s explorations, and the
doings of the Baptist Missionary Society of London.

Last May, this Society received a letter, stating, “There is a
part of Africa on which I have long had my eye. It is the Congo
country. There is not much knowledge of the Christian religion
in the Congo. Only three or four of its inhabitants can read and
write. The language of the coast is the original African. The old
king has strongly expressed his hopes that some white men would
come to them. It is, therefore, a great satisfaction, and a high
and sacred favor to me, to offer £1,000 if the Baptist Missionary
Society will undertake to teach these interesting people the words
of eternal life. By and by, possibly, we may be able to extend the
mission eastward, and carry the Gospel, as the way may open, as far
as Nyangwe.”

While this letter was being penned, Mr. Stanley was pushing his
way from Nyangwe, through a vast unexplored region, to the mouth
of the Congo, having overcome the obstacles which had baffled
Dr. Livingstone and Commander Cameron, who attempted the same
explorations, from the same point of departure.

It is to be remembered, also, that there have been other forces
affecting Africa, parallel to these gifts, and explorations and
missions. Fervent prayers of faith have been offered for its
redemption, and many things indicate that these are being speedily
answered.

“I go,” said Dr. Livingstone, in his last public utterance, before
leaving England, “to open the door to Central Africa. It is
probable I may die there; but, brethren, I pray you see to it that
the door is never again closed.”

It requires no great reach of faith to apprehend that the time
has fully come when the words of the risen Saviour may become our
assurance respecting tropical Africa—“Behold, I have set before
thee an open door, and no man can shut it.”

       *       *       *       *       *


LIFE OF EDWARD NORRIS KIRK, D. D.

The appearance of this biography renews our remembrance of the
honored man whose life and work is chronicled so well by his former
pupil and friend, Rev. David O. Mears. As the President of the
American Missionary Association for nearly ten years—from 1865
until death sundered the relation—it is fitting that there should
be a notice of this published record of his career in the organ of
the Association.

Dr. Kirk was born in New York City, was graduated from Princeton
College, and pursued legal studies for a year and a half, living a
life which he characterizes as profligate. His conversion, after
a severe struggle, was complete, and the purpose of his life was
utterly changed. He immediately devoted himself to preparation for
the ministry of the gospel.

Handsome, gifted and ardent, he at once took a leading position.
His two pastorates, at Albany and in Boston, were full of
fruitfulness. While yet a pastor, he did the work of an evangelist,
with a power and success which has been seldom paralleled. He was
a direct and pungent preacher, sometimes, as in Albany, stirring
up opposition, and yet wonderfully tender and conciliating in his
manner, and so gaining friends even from those who antagonized him.

He was always a reformer, but a radical only in the best sense.
He spoke manfully of the slave, and of the possibilities of
the African race, in 1820, when only in his eighteenth year, a
student at Princeton. Not until much later was he in sentiment
an Abolitionist. He was never a denunciator. In opposing a false
system, he made all charitable allowance for those involved in it,
and was careful to recognize the fact that there were slaveholders
who became or continued such that they might protect and benefit
the slave. In the summer of 1860 and in the spring of 1861, when
the South was peculiarly sensitive, Dr. Kirk was traveling in
Virginia, North Carolina and beyond, expressing his sentiments
frankly, and yet so courteously and wisely that he was always met
with kindness.

In 1865, when the emancipation of the slaves had opened to the A.
M. A. the work of their instruction and Christianization, Dr. Kirk
was chosen its President, as a man representing its aim and spirit
most fully. His sympathy with its work was deep and earnest, and
continued to the end.

But this was not a specialty. He was equally earnest in the
cause of Foreign Missions, of work among the Roman Catholics, of
Education (as shown by his interest in Amherst College and the
Mount Holyoke Seminary), of Temperance, and of evangelistic work at
home.

So far as the memoir reveals the secret of his power, it seems to
have been a rare combination of fearlessness and tact—the courage
which comes from deep conviction, and the tact which comes from
a loving sympathy with men, and a real sweetness of disposition.
But more than all, it shows him as a man who walked with God in
reverential yet familiar intercourse—who realized that the Lord
Jesus was indeed with him always, and whose prayers were in accord
with the resolution of his early life—“I intend hereafter, in my
prayers, to converse with God, and not make speeches before Him.”

Such lives are powerful in their influence while they are with us,
and profitable in their instruction when we have only the record of
them to read.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES.

SAND MOUNTAIN, ALA.—This church has no pastor. Sunday
services kept up by the reading of sermons; does not sustain a
prayer-meeting or Sunday-school. The church is composed of white
people, all from the North. A day-school, numbering fifteen, is
sustained in connection with the church.

SELMA, ALA.—Rev. Fletcher Clark, pastor, reports the
field as encouraging, with earnest workers in the church. The
meetings are well attended. The church is very strong in favor of
temperance, and against the use of tobacco, as compared with the
other churches in vicinity. Sabbath-school flourishing. An earnest
effort is making in behalf of the young men. A very encouraging
feature of the work here is a Woman’s Prayer-meeting, which meets
once a week.

ATLANTA, FIRST, GA.—Rev. S. S. Ashley, pastor. Several
additions during the year. Large proportion of the church, heads of
families, also in the Sabbath-school, which numbers about 275. The
church has adopted the plan of “Envelope Collections,” and finds it
increases the amount of collections.

BYRON, GA.—This church has been supplied, during the
year, by Bro. H. Watkins. The church holds its own, and still
sustains the mission-school at Powersville.

MACON, GA.—Rev. M. O. Harrington, pastor. This church
has not been in a very good condition for two or three years past;
their church and school building have been burned during the year
past, and consequently they are much broken up. A new building is
nearly completed, and much hope is felt that the church will take
a “new departure” in Christian earnestness and godly living. The
school sustained in connection with the church is in as prosperous
a condition as could be expected under the circumstances.

MARIETTA, GA.—Rev. T. N. Stewart, pastor. This church
was organized February 8, 1877; now numbers 21. The Sabbath-school
averages 20.

CHATTANOOGA, FIRST, TENN.—Rev. T. Cutler, pastor. This
church is in good condition, though the Young People’s Meeting has
been given up. The Band of Hope prosperous; a Mother’s Meeting is
held once a month; Sabbath-school, 175.

NASHVILLE, UNION, TENN.—Rev. H. S. Bennett, pastor, is
connected with Fisk University. The church is composed almost
entirely of students. A hopeful feeling manifest.

GOLDING’S GROVE, GA.—“The condition of the church
spiritually is pretty good. The presence of the good Spirit has
been felt in our midst, and we have gathered some of the fruit.
At our last communion season, which was on the last Sabbath in
November, six joined with us, five by confession of faith. Three
of these five were very old persons; one eighty odd years of age.
The old man’s experience was full of useful lessons, and it seemed
as though we could almost see the long, patient love of God toward
sinners, as he sat and told of a wasted life, and, with tears in
his eyes, sorrowed for his sins. There is much interest in our
midst still.”

SAVANNAH, GA.—“We received six new members into our
church last week, two by letter and four by profession.”

HAMPTON, VA.—“We are still favored with the influences
of God’s Spirit in the conversion of souls. These influences,
with which we were so richly blessed the last school year, did
not end with the year, but in some instances bore fruit unto life
during the long summer vacation, and, since the beginning of the
new school year, have been manifested in turning heavenward the
thoughts and steps of one and another of our pupils. Four united
with the church on the first Communion Sabbath of the year, and at
least as many more are expecting to make a public profession of
their faith in Christ on the coming Sabbath.

“Another item of interest is the increase of the missionary spirit,
and we trust that the reflex influence of the one who has gone as
a missionary to Africa, will be more and more richly blessed to
those still in the school, quickening them to corresponding works
of faith and love. Such certainly should be the result.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE.

At the recent meeting of the Central South Congregational
Conference, the minutes of which have just been laid on our table,
the following resolutions were passed:

On the subject of Education, it was

  _Resolved_, That education is a matter of prime importance, and
  that it is the duty of all our churches to advance the cause by
  contributions, by sending promising young persons to the schools
  within their reach, and in every other way.

  _Resolved_, That the necessity for aid from the North is still
  pressing, and that the American Missionary Association be
  requested and urged to continue its assistance in this direction.

In regard to Church Extension the following resolution was passed,
viz.:

  That the needs of the churches represented in this Conference
  call for the appointment of a man of wisdom and experience to
  be a Missionary Superintendent, whose labors should be first
  directed toward establishing, upon a firm basis, the churches
  already organized; and next toward selecting promising and
  needy fields for planting new churches and directing our young
  ministers in opening such fields.

       *       *       *       *       *


IS THE NEGRO DYING OUT?

—In the lull of political agitation over the colored people, the
question is being discussed as to their continuance. Are they dying
out? What are the ascertained facts?

—A correspondent of the Cincinnati _Gazette_, in Jackson, Miss.,
has taken the pains to collate the deaths of the white and colored
people in the various Southern cities. In Washington, during the
year 1875, 19.22 died out of every thousand whites and 47.60 out
of every thousand blacks. In the succeeding year, the proportion
was 26.53 whites and 49.29 blacks. In Baltimore, the rate for 1875
was 19.80 whites to 34.42 blacks. In Knoxville, during 1876, the
mortality per thousand whites was 18; per thousand blacks 31.2. In
Richmond, for the same year, the rate was 17.36 whites, and 28.13
blacks. In Mobile, during the previous year, the proportion was
12.1 to 23.1. In New Orleans, the rate for the same year was 25.45
whites to 39.69 blacks. In Charleston, during the ten months of
the present year, 17.4 out of every thousand whites have died, and
38.7 out of every thousand blacks. In Memphis in 1876, there were
652 deaths among the white population, and 601 among the negroes:
in other words, considering the proportion of white and colored
inhabitants, the death-rate among the negroes was nearly four times
as great as among the whites.

—It has been suggested that these death-rates may not hold
throughout the country places in the South, and that the cities
whither the freedmen flocked after the close of the war have become
peculiarly fatal to the race. In answer, the Charleston _News
and Courier_ states that the negroes of the rural parts of South
Carolina are dying out even more rapidly than those in Charleston.

—The _Scientific American_ deduces the following results, from the
Surgeon-General’s report, as to comparative health and mortality
in the army. For the year ending June 30, 1877, the army consisted
of 23,284 white men and 2,075 colored men. Total cases of sickness
of all kinds, 40,171; deaths, 260. Among colored troops, total
sicknesses, 4,348; deaths, 32. The colored men’s sicknesses were 20
per cent. more than those of the whites; while in deaths, we find
the proportion reversed, for only 7 per thousand of colored men
died of disease, as against 8 per thousand of white men. In cases
caused by wounds, accidents, or injuries, 8 per thousand negroes
died, against 3 per thousand of white men. It thus appears that
the negroes become diseased more easily than white men, and also
recover more readily; but when actual bodily injury occurs, the
death-rate is more than twice that of white men.

—The United States Census of 1860 showed the increase among the
blacks in ten years to have been 25 per cent.; from 1860 to 1870 a
little over 10 per cent., though these were years of war and want.

—In view of these statements, General Armstrong, of Hampton, Va.,
writes in the _Southern Workman_:

“Many close observers believe that the decrease is general, but
equally good authorities assert the contrary. No conclusion is
satisfactory; but we incline to the belief that the colored race
will at least hold its own, because in the corresponding class
of whites in all cities there is great mortality. It would be
interesting to know the death-rate among the poor whites of
Washington, Richmond and Charleston, whose dying out has never been
hinted at. The negro is prolific. The phenomena of a dying race,
such as one sees among the decaying Polynesian tribes are not seen
among them. Children are abundant and healthy in city and country.
The pickaninnies do not seem destined to die young. They are a
numerous, frisky, healthy class, of unfailing humor and appetite,
as unlike as anything can be the sore-spotted, scarce Hawaiian
child, whose race is doomed.”

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICAN EMIGRATION.

—It appears that the “information from Liberia,” said to have been
received by “the Department of State,” already widely circulated,
was not in any sense an official publication, nor is the name or
standing of the author given.

—Rev. Dr. George W. Samson, for forty years a resident of
Washington, for twelve years President of Columbian College, and
for sixteen years a member of the Executive Committee of the
American Colonization Society, has written a weighty reply to
these statements in the Boston _Traveller_. In it he shows the
economical planting, the rapid progress, the fertility of the soil,
the intelligence and educational facilities of the colony, by the
testimony of U. S. naval officers and other distinguished witnesses.

—Fifty-two colored emigrants sailed for Liberia recently in the
bark Liberia. They were forwarded by the American Colonization
Society. Three clergymen were among the cabin passengers, one of
whom goes to the Boporo Mission in the interior. The majority of
those emigrating are mechanics and farmers. Many of them are
members of Christian churches. They are comfortably quartered
on board, and have more conveniences than is usual on emigrant
vessels. The American Colonization Society has made a contract with
the agents of the vessel, who agree to carry adults for $50 and
children for $25. This amount includes everything required during
the voyage, and the Liberian Government insures their support for
at least six months after their arrival. Each single immigrant
receives ten acres of land, and the head of a family twenty-five
acres. Ex-President Warner, recently elected Vice-President of
the Republic, is the Society’s agent to receive the emigrants,
and under his charge they will be kept until they can support
themselves. The Society has sent many parties before this and
reports the applications as so numerous that space cannot be found
to accommodate them.

—A very different enterprise, apparently, is the Liberia Exodus
Association, which failed to provide the steamship which was to be
ready December 15th. Says Mr. Scarborough, an intelligent colored
man connected with Wilberforce University:

  I regard the Liberia Exodus Association as another Credit
  Mobilier affair on a small scale. We judge of an undertaking by
  the character of the men engaged in it. Now, it does not require
  a profundity of knowledge to tell who and what these men are;
  what has been their past history, what it is now, and what it
  will probably be in the future. All these we can pretty well
  determine. It is stated on good authority that a petition will be
  sent to Congress praying for aid; the exact amount is not stated.
  However, I am confident that I express the feelings of hundreds
  of the better-thinking colored citizens when I say that Congress
  should make no appropriation for any such pell-mell movement. If
  Congress wishes to make an appropriation for the negro, let it
  make it with the restrictions that it shall be used to pay off
  the deficit caused by the sinking of the Freedmen’s Savings Bank,
  or for the purchasing of lands and outfits in the great West,
  that the negro may wend his way thither, build up and utilize the
  hitherto barren country. In South Carolina, it is said, thousands
  are selling or letting their little farms and homes by way of
  preparation for leaving America; men, women and children all
  have the African mania. My advice to these people now is this:
  To pay no attention to these fair promises; if they have sold
  their homes, buy them back if possible; if they have leased their
  farms, rent others till the lease expires and then return to
  their own; or, if this is not desirable, seek homes in the great
  West, in the country that gave us birth, forgetting color, race
  or condition, only to rise above it.

—As bearing on the question of a general or large transportation
of ignorant and untrained men to Liberia, were it possible,
we quote from Prof. Blyden in a late number of the _Methodist
Quarterly Review_. He, in speaking of unskilled labor, says:

  In Liberia, there is no lack of the lower kinds of unskilled
  labor supplied by the numerous aborigines who throng the
  settlements. The immigrant who comes from America is at once
  made a proprietor. He has land given him by law, but having no
  capital to employ labor, he must enter, single-handed, upon the
  work of subduing the forest, and with all the efforts he may put
  forth, it is with the utmost difficulty that he ever rises above
  a hand-to-mouth existence. Hence, very often men owning their
  twenty-five acres of land, pressed by their necessities, prefer
  to leave it a wilderness and go to the arduous and, for new
  comers, perilous labor of shingle and lumber getting, or enter
  the employ of men who may be able to keep them from starving, but
  hardly able to give them a start toward self-support on their own
  lands.

When it is remembered that Prof. Blyden is a citizen of Liberia and
knows whereof he speaks, there will be no reason to doubt the truth
of the above statement.

—One of the workers in the Liberia movement met a wise, old
colored man in Shreveport, La. He was describing the great benefits
the negro would enjoy by emigrating, and told him that there the
negro did not have to work; bread and sugar trees covered the
forests, and bananas, cocoanuts, pine-apples, lemons, and all the
tropical fruits, grew everywhere. “Dat’s ’nough of dat story,” said
the old man; “dat ain’t so, kase if it was, de white man would a
went dar long ago, and the niggers neber would hah known nuffin
’bout it.”

—We notice now, as the most recent movement, that a State
convention of the Mississippi Colonization Society, held a few
weeks since, to consider the project of emigrating from the South,
was attended by some 4,000 persons, including 300 delegates
from other States than Mississippi. The proposition to emigrate
to Africa was not looked upon with favor, but the proposition
to emigrate to Arizona, New Mexico or Texas was approved. The
following resolution was adopted:

  _Resolved_, By the people of color of the State of Mississippi,
  in convention assembled, that we earnestly entreat our countrymen
  throughout the Union to form a national colonization association,
  with branches in every county and State in the Union, for the
  purpose of effecting a peaceable separation of the blacks from
  the whites, and concentrating our numbers as a body in certain
  States or Territories within this Union, as may be hereafter
  agreed upon in national convention assembled.

A national convention is to be held in February next, at Corinth,
Miss., in furtherance of this project.

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIAN NOTES.

—Are the Indians dying out? Major S. N. Clark, of the Bureau of
Education, has compiled these various estimates of their population
as follows:

  1789—Estimate of Secretary of War                       76,000
  1790-91—Estimate of Gilbert Imlay                       60,000
  1820—Report of Morse on Indian Affairs                 471,036
  1825—Report of the Secretary of War                    129,366
  1829—Report of the Secretary of War                    312,930
  1834—Report of the Secretary of War                    312,610
  1836—Report of Superintendent Indian Affairs           253,464
  1837—Report of Superintendent Indian Affairs           302,498
  1850—Report of H. R. Schoolcraft                       388,229
  1853—Report of United States Census of 1850            400,764
  1855—Report of Indian Office                           314,622
  1857—Report of H. R. Schoolcraft                       379,264
  1860—Report of Indian Office                           254,300
  1865—Report of Indian Office                           294,574
  1870—Report of United States Census                    313,712
  1870—Report of Indian Office                           313,371
  1875—Report of Indian Office                           305,068
  1876—Report of Indian Office                           291,882

These figures are, however, in part conjectural, and all based upon
varying data, and limited by varying boundaries. They do not show
any constant movement of increase or decrease.

In regard to particular tribes, the Cherokees, since 1809,
notwithstanding the depressing influences of removal, and loss by
civil war, have increased from 12,395 to 21,072. The Seminoles
have, since 1870, increased from 2,638 to 3,000. The Iroquois, 100
years ago numbering about 11,500, are now 13,668. Within forty
years the Sioux are computed to have increased from 25,000 to
40,000.

A comparison of births and deaths for the last three years has been
made, but it is too incomplete to be the basis of any conclusions.

Major Clark says, in summing up, that several years of study have
convinced him that the usual theory that the Indian population is
destined to decline and finally disappear, as a result of contact
with white civilization, must be greatly modified—probably
abandoned altogether.

—Missionaries Riggs and Williamson substantially agree that (1)
the Indians, in their wild state, increase quite rapidly, unless
disturbed by some violent agent, as war, famine, or pestilence; (2)
the first effect of a change to civilized life is to diminish their
numbers; (3) the final effect, however, is to a recovery and more
rapid growth, even, than in their former state.

—From the best official estimates, there are in the country about
275,000 Indians. Of this number, 56,630, or only about one-fifth,
receive subsistence from the government. Perhaps a majority of
the whole number are self-sustaining. The tribes in the Indian
Territory are said to compare favorably in moral, social and
material condition with many of the white communities in the
neighboring States. Schools, courts, church organizations and local
legislatures are among their cherished institutions.

—The only Congregational Church in Indian Territory was dedicated
Sunday, December 2d. Its site is in the town of Caddo, on the line
of the Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad. Having been begun in
the year 1876, it is known as the “Centennial Church.”

—Official statistics lately published show that, for the past
forty years, the military operations against the Indians by the
United States have cost $12,000,000, on an average, each year.
The wild Apaches, 10,000 in number, cost the government nearly
$2,000,000 annually for the pay of the army that takes care of
them; while the 60,000 Cherokees, who are civilized and quiet, cost
us almost nothing.

—The governor and delegates of the Chickasaw nation, and the
delegates of the Choctaw nation, have united in a memorial to the
Senate, remonstrating against the passage of the bill to enable
Indians to become citizens. They say:

  We have no objection to the measure in so far as it permits
  citizens of our nations to become citizens of the United States,
  if upon such change of citizenship they leave our jurisdiction,
  and surrender all rights growing out of and depending upon the
  tribal relation, retaining, however, all their separate property.
  But this bill expressly provides that, after one of our citizens
  becomes a citizen of the United States, he shall retain all his
  rights and interests in the lands, claims, annuities, funds, and
  other property of our nations or tribes. The result of these
  provisions is that after he ceases to be a citizen of the Choctaw
  or Chickasaw nation, he retains every right which he had while a
  citizen. The proposed statute will violate the treaty, and confer
  on citizens of the United States, who are not citizens of the
  Chickasaw nation, a part of a large fund which the United States
  have covenanted shall be the property of the Chickasaw nation.
  Certainly we could not be expected to consent that a treaty
  stipulation of such great importance to us should be annulled by
  an act of Congress.

—A bill to allow the civilized tribes of the Indian Territory to
elect a delegate to Congress has been introduced in the House,
and referred to the Committee on Indian Affairs. A sub-committee
has been appointed to consider and report upon the bill. Their
report is favorable, and will be made to the committee on the
re-assembling of Congress. It will no doubt be adopted. It provides
that a delegate, who shall be a member of some one of the Cherokee,
Creek, Seminole, Choctaw, or Chickasaw tribes, shall be chosen at
a general election, to be held under the supervision and direction
of the Secretary of the Interior, and shall have all the rights,
privileges and emoluments of a delegate from any of the regularly
organized Territories. The report shows that it costs the natives
upward of $60,000 yearly to send delegates here. Under the present
system each tribe now sends from two to five or six delegates, at
an expense of about six dollars a day each. One delegate for all,
who shall have the privilege of the floor of Congress, would give
the tribes much more influence with the government.

—The new Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Mr. Hayt, took the oath
of office Dec. 18th, and received his commission.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE NOTES.

—No one seems to fear lest the Chinaman will die out. To allay
apprehensions as to their over-swarming, Prof. S. Wells Williams,
LL.D., for forty years an honored resident in the Flowery Kingdom,
says:

  Some fear that this country will be swamped altogether by this
  flood of aliens, but the 125,000 or so of Chinese now in this
  land, with few exceptions, all came from a small portion, two
  prefectures, of Kwangtung province. There is no probability of
  other parts of the empire joining in this emigration, for several
  reasons, one of which is the great differences in their dialects.

—Congressman Shelley, of Alabama, has introduced into the House
a bill providing that, after January, 1879, all Chinamen coming
here (except officially) _from any country_ shall be taxed $250 per
capita, or serve five years in the penitentiary!

—Over 300 Chinese have been received as members of the Protestant
churches of California, and in addition there are 700 Chinamen in
Christian associations for learning Christian doctrine; 750 Chinese
attend the mission schools of San Francisco, and over 1,000 go to
the Sunday-schools.

—Representative Page, in a letter to the President of the United
States, writes:

  I desire still further to state, that in California there is
  no division of opinion as to the evils of Chinese immigration,
  and I, therefore, on behalf of the people of that State, very
  respectfully suggest that you make this matter the subject of a
  special message to Congress when it convenes in January next.

—On the other hand, Mr. D. O. Miles, formerly of the Bank of
California, says:

  There are about 60,000 Chinese in California, and I do not
  know what we could do without them. They are industrious and
  peaceable, generally speaking, and it would be impossible readily
  to supply our manufactories with labor, but for the Chinese.
  Their wages—the wages of the laborers, I mean—average $1 a
  day. In Virginia City white labor costs as much as $2.50 a
  day. We need whatever Chinese labor we have in California. It
  might be well for Congress to check temporarily the flow of
  Chinese immigration by levying a tax upon each immigrant. But
  those who are now on our shores are needed, and they should be
  treated with humanity, and protected from the persecution of the
  rougher element of society. The Chinese, generally speaking, are
  temperate, exceedingly industrious and economical.

—The Attorney-General, by direction of the President, has given
considerable attention to the question of protecting the Chinese in
California. The Attorney-General finds that there is no authority
for the United States to interfere unless the State should ask
for aid, and is of opinion that this matter should be referred to
Congress, and a special message from the President on the subject
has been talked of. The President, and all members of his Cabinet,
are anxious to use every means which they can constitutionally
command to prevent the threatened outbreak. The class of people
engaged in the attempt to create disorder is chiefly confined
to the foreign laboring element, aided by roughs and the lower
classes of San Francisco population. The fact that the Chinese
have completely armed themselves has held the roughs in check; but
matters are believed to be in a much worse condition than has been
reported, and news at any time of horrible scenes in San Francisco
would not create surprise in Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW APPOINTMENTS.

1877-1878.


The following list presents the names and post-office addresses
of those who are under appointment in the Churches, Institutions
and Schools, aided by the American Missionary Association, among
the Freedmen in the South, the Chinese on the Pacific Coast,
the Indians, and the Negroes in Western Africa. The Theological
Department of Howard University is supported jointly by the
Presbytery of Washington and the A. M. A. The Berea College and
Hampton Institute are under the care of their own Boards of
Trustees, but being either founded or fostered in the past by this
Association, and representing the general work in which it is
engaged, their teachers are included in this list.


THE SOUTHERN FIELD.

  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

    HOWARD UNIVERSITY.
      _Theological Department._
        Rev. W. W. Patton, D.D.,             Washington, D. C.
        Rev. Lorenzo Westcott,               Washington, D. C.
        Rev. Alexander Pitzer, D.D.,         Washington, D. C.
        Rev. John G. Butler, D.D.,           Washington, D. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  VIRGINIA.

    HAMPTON.
      _Minister._
      Rev. Richard Tolman,                  Hampton, Va.
      NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Gen. S. C. Armstrong,             Hampton, Va.
          Gen. J. F. B. Marshall,           Hampton, Va.
          Mr. Albert Howe,                  Hampton, Va.
          Mr. M. B. Crowell,                Hampton, Va.
          Mr. J. B. H. Goff,                Hampton, Va.
          Lt. S. R. Jones,                  Hampton, Va.
          Miss Ann M. Hobbs,                Hampton, Va.
          Miss Charlotte L. Mackie,         Newburgh, N. Y.
          Miss Susan B. Harrold,            Franklin, Mass.
          Miss Mary F. Mackie,              Newburgh, N. Y.
          Miss Nathalie Lord,               Portland, Me.
          Miss Isabel B. Eustis,            Springfield, Mass.
          Miss Helen W. Ludlow,             New York City.
          Mrs. Sophia Buck,                 Orange, N. J.
          Miss Eleanor W. Collingwood,      Hampton, Va.
          Miss Eunice C. Dixon,             Hampton, Va.
          Miss Mary A. Coe,                 Boston, Mass.
          Miss Elizabeth P. Hyde,           Brooklyn, N. Y.
          Miss Margaret W. Buck,            Hampton, Va.
          Miss Jeannie I. Hincks,           Hampton, Va
          Miss Carrie Watson,               Hampton, Va
          Miss Emily Kimball,               Hampton, Va
          Mr. Albert H. Tolman,             Hampton, Va
          Mr. Charles G. Buck,              Hampton, Va
          Mr. Thomas T. Brice,              Hampton, Va
          Mr. James C. Robbins,             Hampton, Va
          Mr. Frank D. Banks,               Hampton, Va
          Mr. John E. Fuller,               Hampton, Va

    CARRSVILLE.
      _Teacher._
        Miss M. A. Andrus,                  Riceville, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NORTH CAROLINA.

    WILMINGTON (P. O. Box 207).
      NORMAL SCHOOL.
        _Minister and Superintendent._
          Rev. D. D. Dodge,                 Nashua, N. H.
        _Principal._
          Miss Lucy Goodwin,                Mason, N. H.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Martha Moore,                Holden, Mass.
          Miss E. A. Warner,                Lowell, Mass.
          Mrs. D. D. Dodge,                 Nashua, N. H.

    RALEIGH.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Geo. S. Smith,                 Raleigh, N. C.
      _Teachers._
        Miss E. P. Hayes,                   Limerick, Me.
        Miss Kate Randall,                  Lorain, Ohio.
        Mr. William R. Harris,              Raleigh, N. C.
        Miss Anna M. Day,                   Sheffield, Ohio.
        Miss Ida M. Ransom,                 Raleigh, N. C.
        Miss Eliza Gant,                    Raleigh, N. C.

    DUDLEY.
      _Minister._
        Rev. David Peebles,                 Long Island, Ala.

    McLEANSVILLE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. J. Kedslie,                    Jamaica, W. I.
      _Teacher._
        Miss E. W. Douglass,                Decorah, Iowa.

    WOODBRIDGE.
      _Teacher._
        Miss Carrie E. Waugh,               Scriba, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SOUTH CAROLINA.

    CHARLESTON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. W. G. Marts,                   Delmont, Pa.
      AVERY INSTITUTE.
        _Principal._
          Prof. A. W. Farnham,              N. Hannibal, N. Y.
        _Assistants._
          Mr. C. C. Scott,                  Charleston, S. C.
          Miss Jane S. Hardy,               Shelburne, Mass.
          Miss Julia E. Phelps,             Syracuse, N. Y.
          Miss Eugenie C. Gaillard,         Charleston, S. C.
          Mr. E. A. Lawrence,               Charleston, S. C.
          Mrs. L. J. Brown,                 Charleston, S. C.
          Miss Monimia H. McKinlay,         Charleston, S. C.

    ORANGEBURG.
      _Minister._
        Rev. W. L. Johnson,                 Orangeburg, S. C.
      _Teacher._
        Mrs. W. L. Johnson,                 Orangeburg, S. C.

    GREENWOOD.
      BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.
        Mr. J. D. Backenstose,              Geneva, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GEORGIA.

    ATLANTA.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. C. W. Francis,                 Atlanta, Ga.
        Rev. S. S. Ashley,                  Northboro, Mass.
      ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. A. Ware,                  Atlanta, Ga.
          Rev. C. W. Francis,               Atlanta, Ga.
          Rev. Horace Bumstead,             Atlanta, Ga.
          Prof. J. F. Fuller,               Atlanta, Ga.
          Prof. Frank W. Smith,             Lincoln, Mass.
          Miss Emma C. Ware,                Norfolk, Mass.
          Miss Mary A. Chapin,              Uxbridge, Mass.
          Miss Susie A. Cooley,             Honek, Kansas.
          Miss Mary E. Sands,               Saco, Me.
          Mrs. Lucy E. Case,                Millbury, Mass.
          Miss Carrie H. Loomis,            Hartford, Conn.
          Miss Mary L. Santley,             New London, Ohio.
      _STORRS SCHOOL._ (104 Houston St.)
        _Principal._
          Miss Amy Williams,                Livonia Sta., N. Y.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Emily Robinson,              Lake City, Minn.
          Miss M. E. Stevenson,             Bellefontaine, Ohio.
          Miss Fannie Andrews,              Milltown, Me.
          Miss F. J. Norris,                Atlanta, Ga.
          Miss Julia Turner,                Atlanta, Ga.
      PARISH SCHOOL.
        _Teacher._
          Mr. George Clarke,                Atlanta, Ga.

    MACON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. M. O. Harrington,              Macon, Ga,
      LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.
        _Teachers._
          Mrs. M. O. Harrington,            Macon, Ga.
          Miss Lizzie Abbott,               Andover, Mass.

    BYRON.
      _Minister._
        Rev. L. A. Rutherford,              Macon, Ga.

    AUGUSTA.
      _Teacher._
        Miss S. A. Hosmer,                  Augusta, Ga.

    MARIETTA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. T. N. Stewart,                 Marietta, Ga.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Cosmo P. Jordan,                Atlanta, Ga.

    ALBANY.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Howard Burts,                   Atlanta, Ga.

    ATHENS.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. John McIntosh,                  Atlanta, Ga.

    CUTHBERT.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Richard R. Wright,              Atlanta, Ga.

    DALTON.
      _Teacher._
        Miss Blanche Curtis,                Atlanta, Ga.

    FORSYTH.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. Wm. F. Jackson,                 Atlanta, Ga.

    STONE MOUNTAIN.
      _Teacher._
        Mr. William C. Craig,               Atlanta, Ga.

    SAVANNAH.
      _Minister and Supt. of Missions._
        Rev. R. F. Markham,                 Wheaton, Ill.
      _Teachers._
        Mrs. R. F. Markham,                 Wheaton, Ill.
        Miss Hattie Markham,                Wheaton, Ill.
        Miss E. H. Twichell,                Saratoga, N. Y.

    _MISSION CHURCHES._
      WOODVILLE.
        Rev. J. J. H. Sengstacke,           Savannah, Ga.
      OGEECHEE.
        Rev. John McLean,                   McLeansville, N. C.
      LOUISVILLE AND BELMONT.
        Rev. Wilson Callen,                 Selma, Ala.

    McINTOSH, LIBERTY CO.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Jos. E. Smith,                 Atlanta, Ga.
      _Teachers._
        Mr. Seaborn Snelson,                McIntosh, Ga.
        Mr. Silas Daniels,                  McIntosh, Ga.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ALABAMA.

    TALLADEGA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. D. L. Hickok,                  Kingsville, Ohio.
      TALLADEGA COLLEGE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. P. Lord,                  Olivet, Mich.
          Rev. G. W. Andrews,               Collinsville, Conn.
          Rev. D. L. Hickok,                Kingsville, Ohio.
          Mr. Warren E. Wheeler,            Salem, Wis.
          Miss Annie Sawyer,                Boxford, Mass.
          Miss Emma L. Miller,              Huntsburg, Ohio.
          Miss Mary Kernan,                 Locust Valley, L. I.
          Miss Kate A. Lord,                Olivet, Mich.
          Mrs. G. W. Andrews,               Collinsville, Conn.
          Mrs. D. L. Hickok,                Kingsville, Ohio.
          Mrs. Lucy Alford,                 New York City.
    _MISSION CHURCHES._
      ALABAMA FURNACE, CHILDERSBURG, KYMULGA, THE COVE, ANNISTON.
      _Superintendent._
        Rev. G. W. Andrews,                 Collinsville, Conn.

    MOBILE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Wm. Ash,                       Providence, R. I.
      EMERSON INSTITUTE.
        _Teachers._
          Mr. B. F. Koons,                  Sulphur Springs, O.
          Miss Jennie Stevenson,            Bellefontaine, O.
          Miss Sara J. Irwin,               Galesburg, Ill.

    MONTGOMERY (P. O. Box 62).
      _Minister._
        Rev. Charles Noble,                 Norwich Town, Conn.
      SWAYNE SCHOOL.
        _Principal._
          Miss Martha J. Adams,             Columbus, Wis.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Julia E. Goodenough,         Davison Sta., Mich.
          Miss Annette Lynch,               Ballston, N. Y.
          Miss May Merry,                   Providence R. I.
          Miss Fannie A. Wilson,            Montgomery, Ala.
          Mrs. M. Hardaway Davis,           Montgomery, Ala.

    SELMA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Fletcher Clark,                Albany, N. Y.

    MARION.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Geo. E. Hill,                  Southport, Conn.
      _Missionaries._
        Mrs. Geo. E. Hill,                  Southport, Conn.
        Miss —— Hill,                       Southport, Conn.

    ATHENS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Horace Taylor,                 McMinnville, Tenn.
      TRINITY SCHOOL.
        _Teachers._
          Miss M. F. Wells,                 Ann Arbor, Mich.
          Miss Nettie Underwood,            Burlington, Mich.

    FLORENCE.
      _Minister._
        Mr. L. C. Anderson,                 Nashville, Tenn.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TENNESSEE.

    NASHVILLE.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. Henry S. Bennett,              Nashville, Tenn.
        Rev. Joseph Moore,                  Nashville, Tenn.
      FISK UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. M. Cravath,               Brooklyn, N. Y.
          Rev. A. K. Spence,                Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. H. S. Bennett,               Nashville, Tenn.
          Rev. F. A. Chase,                 Nashville, Tenn.
          Mr. Edw. P. Gilbert,              Nashville, Tenn.
          Mr. John Burrus,                  Nashville, Tenn.
          Mr. W. G. Rappleye,               Mineto, N. Y.
          Miss Helen C. Morgan,             Cleveland, Ohio.
          Miss Anna M. Cahill,              Binghamton, N. Y.
          Miss Henrietta Matson,            N. Bloomfield, Ohio.
          Miss E. M. Barnes,                Bakersfield, Vt.
          Miss Laura S. Carey,              St. Johnsbury, Vt.
          Mrs. J. D. Lee,                   Nashville, Tenn.
          Miss Irene E. Gilbert,            Fredonia, N. Y.
          Miss Sarah M. Wells,              Big Rapids, Mich.
          Mrs. M. M. Cahill,                Binghamton, N. Y.

    MEMPHIS.
      _Minister._
        Rev. W. W. Mallory,                 Memphis, Tenn.
      _Missionary._
        Miss Hattie Milton,                 Romeo, Mich.
      LE MOYNE SCHOOL.
        _Principal._
          Prof. A. J. Steele,               Whitewater, Wis.
        _Assistants._
          Miss Laura A. Parmelee,           Toledo, Ohio.
          Miss Emma Rand,                   Whitewater, Wis.
          Miss Ella Woodward,               Royalton, N. Y.
          Miss S. M. McGill,                Memphis, Tenn.

    CHATTANOOGA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Temple Cutler,                 Athol, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

  KENTUCKY.

    BEREA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. John G. Fee,                   Berea, Ky.
      BEREA COLLEGE.
        _Instructors and Managers._
          Rev. E. H. Fairchild,             Berea, Ky.
          Rev. John G. Fee,                 Berea, Ky.
          Rev. J. A. R. Rogers,             Berea, Ky.
          Prof. L. V. Dodge,                Berea, Ky.
          Rev. Charles G. Fairchild,        Berea, Ky.
          Rev. B. S. Hunting,               Sublette, Ill.
          Miss L. A. Darling,               Akron, Ohio.
          Miss Kate Gilbert,                W. Brookfield, Mass.
          Miss Anna Haylor,                 Oberlin, Ohio.
          Miss Juan Kumler,                 Berea, Ky.
          Miss Etta McClelland,             Berea, Ky.
          Miss Clara A. Saxton,             Oberlin, Ohio.

    CAMP NELSON.
      _Minister._
        ——                                        ——

       *       *       *       *       *

  MISSISSIPPI.

    TOUGALOO.
      _Minister._
        Rev. G. S. Pope,                    Strongsville, Ohio.
      TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.
        _Managers and Instructors._
          Rev. G. S. Pope,                  Strongsville, Ohio.
          Prof. D. I. Miner,                Bavaria, Kansas.
          Miss Kate K. Koons,               Sulphur Springs, O.
          Miss Orra A. Angell,              Greenville, R. I.
          Miss Mary H. Scott,               Auburndale, Mass.
          Miss Dora Ford,                   N. Abington, Mass.
          Mrs. G. S. Pope,                  Strongsville, Ohio.
          Mrs. D. I. Miner,                 Bavaria, Kansas.
          Miss S. L. Emerson,               Hallowell, Me.

    GRENADA.
      _Teachers._
        Miss Anna Harwood,                  Grenada, Miss.
        Miss Carrie Segur,                  Grenada, Miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LOUISIANA.

    NEW ORLEANS.
      _Ministers._
        Rev. W. S. Alexander,               Pomfret, Conn.
        Rev. Isaac Hall,                    New Orleans, La.
        Rev. Henry Ruffin,                  New Orleans, La.
        Rev. N. B. James,                   New Orleans, La.
      STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.
        _Instructors and Managers._
            Rev. W. S. Alexander,           Pomfret, Conn.
            Prof. J. K. Cole,               Lawrence, Mass.
            Prof. J. M. McPherron,          New Orleans, La.
            Miss Mary J. Robinson,          Lake City, Minn.
            Miss H. J. Halleck,             Success, L. I.
            Miss Frances Stevens,           Oswego, N. Y.
            Mrs. C. E. Alexander,           Pomfret, Conn.
            Miss Josephine Pierce,          Tallmadge, Ohio.

    ABBERVILLE.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Charles E. Smith,              New Orleans, La.

    NEW IBERIA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. William Butler,                New Iberia, La.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TEXAS.

    GOLIAD.
      Rev. B. C. Church,                    Goliad, Texas.

    CORPUS CHRISTI.
      _Minister._
        Rev. S. M. Coles,                   New Haven, Conn.

    HELENA.
      _Minister._
        Rev. Mitchell Thompson,             Goliad, Texas.

    AUSTIN.
      _Teacher._
        Mrs. E. M. Garland,                 Austin, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *


  AMONG THE CHINESE.

    _Superintendent._
      Rev. W. C. Pond,                      San Francisco, Cal.
    _Teachers._
      SAN FRANCISCO,                        Mrs. M. T. Hunting.
                                            D. M. Boker.
                                            Mrs. Boker.
                                            Fung Affoo.
                                            I. Hackley.
                                            Lue Lune.
                                            Mrs. C. A. Sheldon.
      OAKLAND,                              Mrs. M. M. Hardy.
                                            Jee Gam.
      PETALUMA,                             Miss Isabella Crapser.
      SACRAMENTO,                           Mrs. S. Denton.
      SAN LEANDRO,                          Rev. T. M. Oviatt.
      SANTA BARBARA,                        Mrs. C. P. Stevenson.
      STOCKTON,                             Mrs. M. C. Brown.

       *       *       *       *       *


  AMONG THE INDIANS.

    _Red Lake Agency, Minnesota._
      Agent,                                R. M. Pratt.
      Teacher,                              Miss M. C. Warren.

    _Lake Superior Agency, Wisconsin._
      Agent,                                Dr. Isaac L. Mahan.
      Teacher,                              ——
      Teacher,                              Robert Pew.

    _Green Bay Agency, Wisconsin._
      Agent,                                Jos. C. Bridgman.
      Farmer and Teacher,                   W. W. Wheeler.
      Matron,                               Mrs. W. W. Wheeler.
      Teacher,                              Miss S. B. Dresser.

    _Ft. Berthold Agency, Dakota Territory._
      Agent,                                E. H. Alden.

    _Sisseton Agency, Dakota Territory._
      Agent,                                E. H. C. Hooper.
      Teachers,                             (Connected with the Mission
                                            of the A. B. C. F. M.)

    _S’Kokomish Agency, Washington Territory._
      Agent,                                Edwin Eells.
      Missionary,                           Rev. Myron Eells.
      Teachers,                             (Supported by Gov’t.)

       *       *       *       *       *


  MENDI MISSION, WEST AFRICA.

    _Missionaries and Assistants._
      Mr. Jas. Kirk.                        Mrs. M. M. Mair.
      Rev. Floyd Snelson.                   Mrs. Floyd Snelson.
      Dr. Benj. James.                      Mrs. Benj. James.
      Mr. A. E. White.                      Mr. Samuel Goodman.
      Mr. Elias Tucker.                     Mrs. During.
      Mr. Buel Tucker.                      Mrs. Thomas.
      Mr. —— Jewett.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.


       *       *       *       *       *


OUR NEW MISSIONARIES.

Arrival at Sherbro—A Hearty Welcome—First Impressions.

Our letters from the newly arrived band of missionaries at the
Mendi Mission have been, of necessity, brief and hurried. We learn
from them that the party arrived at Sierra Leone on the 19th of
November, and landed the next morning.

In a letter dated Nov. 22, from Sierra Leone, Mr. White says:

“We had, as you know, fifty-seven days on our voyage. The sea is
a bad road to ride. All of us were sick some, and Mr. and Mrs.
Snelson, Mrs. James and Mrs. Pardoe’s little boy, we thought would
not be able to make the voyage. The captain is a very fine man,
indeed, and tried to do all for us that was in his power. We are
very thankful to him for the kindness he showed toward us. We are
very well pleased with Africa—that is, so far as we have seen, but
we cannot compare Sherbro with this place, because the people here
are not all native, and those at Sherbro are. The mission has a
house in Sierra Leone, in which we will stay till we go next week,
by steamer, to our station. I want to visit some of the Industrial
Schools here before I leave, so that we can tell how they are
carried on.

“The people here are very kind to us. The place looks like some old
towns in America, which are going to ruin. The houses are all built
in the old style. Some of the people will compare with any of our
people in the States, while others are far behind them—some of
them dress very well, while some only wear a piece of cloth around
their hips. You can tell the natives because all of them bear some
kind of a mark, as all the tribes mark their children while they
are small, to distinguish them from other people.”

From Rev. Mr. Snelson, under dates of Nov. 28 and Dec. 1, we learn
that during the week while they were compelled to wait for the
government steamer, they were the objects of many kind attentions
from the ministers, Governor and leading gentlemen of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kirk met them on their arrival there.

Under the later date, Mr. Snelson writes from Bonthe:

“I am glad to inform you that we have arrived here safely. We left
Freetown Thursday evening, taking deck passage on the governor’s
steamer, as cabin passage cost three times as much, and reached
here yesterday (Nov. 30) afternoon. I found Mrs. Mair here making
ready for us. As the boat returns to-day, I shall not be able to
make any report. I like the place so far very well. The people seem
very anxious to receive us. I have asked Mr. Kirk to come down from
Avery next week, that we may all consult together as to what it is
best to do.”

Mr. Burton (now in this country and retired from missionary labor),
who was for so many years in our service in Africa, writes to us:

“I am very glad to hear of the safe arrival of the missionary
company in Africa. I have been for many years looking forward to
the time when the mission should be carried on by laborers taken
from among the freedmen, and I believe that God will use them to
bless Africa.

“I received a letter from Mr. Gomer (a colored missionary of the
United Brethren) a few days since. He had just returned from a
visit to Avery, and spoke of it as being in a very flourishing
condition. I seem to be there in spirit a great part of the time,
and I do not know as it is strange, for a generation has grown up
under my care, who seem almost to be my children. My prayer is that
these freedmen may be God’s instruments to bring them to Christ.”

       *       *       *       *       *


KAW MENDI, SHERBRO, W. AFRICA.

LETTER FROM REV. J. M. WILLIAMS.

  Mr. Williams is a native of Demerara, South America; was educated
  in the schools of the London Missionary Society, and was formerly
  in the employ of the United Brethren. He has been for some months
  at Kaw Mendi, once a mission station of the Association, and
  writes to assure us that our former labors there have not been
  altogether in vain.
                          KAW MENDI, SMALL BOOM RIVER,
                              SHERBRO, W. A., _7th November, 1877_.

Since I left Shengay, in May, I was directed by the providence
of God, through chiefs Wm. and C. H. Tucker, to this, the first
station of the Association. I opened a school, and commenced
telling of Christ to the adults, in July, to the great joy of all
who remembered the former missionaries who labored here. Chief C.
H. Tucker has hitherto done nobly, in helping me in every way to
prosecute my work. He defrays my traveling expenses, and, when
his duties as a chief permit, he accompanies me, and interprets
for me when I go to preach in the other towns and villages. I
had up to last week twenty scholars, but one was sent home to
be cured of a bad ulcer, and five others because their parents
have not fulfilled their duties as promised—that is, to feed
them while under our care. My plan is, that all who are able, pay
something for the education of their children, or the children
work to support themselves. Chief C. H. Tucker subscribes readily
and largely to the support of the school. He is about erecting a
large mission house, a children’s home for boys and girls, and a
chapel and schoolhouse, all of country materials except the doors,
etc. I fear it will be too much for him, but he does not think
so. He hopes to be able to have all ready at the commencement of
the ensuing year, God willing. Chief Tucker is one of the most
intelligent men about Sherbro, educated by your missionaries,
Brooks and White. There is another, a Mr. King, that is an
excellent interpreter, and is of help to me.

The children are progressing very fast. Though I cannot yet boast
of converts to Christ, yet I am cheered by the fact that here and
elsewhere, among those who have attended the preaching of the
Gospel, many are inquiring after the way of salvation. Last Lord’s
day, an adult attended our Sabbath-school. Our present place of
worship here is too small to seat the congregation who meet to
worship with us. Thus, while we are called to suffer hunger and
other inconveniences often, yet the signs of a successful future
inspire me with hope and confidence, and nerve me to go on.

Let me have your prayers. I shall be glad to communicate as
regularly as I can with you. I regard this as the Association’s
field of labor. As soon as the buildings and chapel are completed,
I hope to be more comfortable, and to be able to work more
efficiently.

I have named this institution, in honor of my ever-to-be-remembered
friend, Lewis Tappan, “Tappan Literary and Industrial School,
Brooklyn, near Kaw Mendi, Small Boom River, Sherbro, W. A.,” to
which place please direct my AMERICAN MISSIONARY paper for
the future, and all communications.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMMUNICATIONS.


       *       *       *       *       *


CHRIST IN THE PERSON OF THE POOR.

MATT. XXV. 40.—“And the King shall answer and say unto
them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto Me.”

_Dedicated to the American Missionary Association._

    O, the hearts, all crushed and bleeding,
    Who can pass them by unheeding?
    Who resist their piteous pleading?
        When mine eyes the King shall see,
        Shall the waiting welcome be,
        “Ye have done it unto Me”?

    Lo, our Lord has condescended
    To uplift the unbefriended,
    And the poor man’s cause defended.
        When mine eyes the King shall see,
        Shall the waiting welcome be,
        “Ye have done it unto Me”?

    Came He to the pure and holy,
    Or to save the sinners solely?
    Lo, He loved the lost and lowly.
        When mine eyes the King shall see
        May the waiting welcome be,
        “Ye have done it unto Me”!

    When the ruined, rescued races,
    Sit with us in heavenly places,
    Christ-like love shall crown the graces.
        Then mine eyes the King shall see,
        And the waiting welcome be,
        “Ye have done it unto Me.”

    JACKSONVILLE, Dec. 26, ’77.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLACING THE BURNED BUILDINGS.

The new building at Macon, Ga., which contains both chapel and
schoolrooms is nearly completed. It is built substantially and
plainly of brick, fully supplies the place of the two buildings
burned, and in cost will come quite within the insurance money
received. It will probably be ready for dedication about the first
of February.

A lot, on which is a building for a teacher’s home, has been
purchased at Mobile, Ala., and the rebuilding of the Emerson
Institute will be begun at once. It will also be of brick,
commodious and convenient in its proportions and arrangement.

At New Orleans we have met with delays from time to time, arising
from the necessity of a change of location, and the customary
vexations of real-estate transfers. We sympathize with the trials
of our Straight University corps of teachers in the disadvantages
under which they are working. We hope soon to have a desirable
lot fully secured, and shall then press the building with all the
speed which is compatible with prudence and safety.

One of the teachers, in a personal letter, writes:

“As far as numbers make a school a success, Straight is a
success. There must be now two hundred pupils, of which there
are ninety-three enrolled in my department, with an average of
eighty-seven.

“When you know the disadvantages under which the pupils labor,
you will wonder, with us, at their constant attendance. More than
half in my room sit in chairs in which their feet cannot touch the
floor; and the other half are seated at old-fashioned wooden desks
that are loose from the floor and often so nicely balanced that one
child leaving his seat will cause the books, &c., of three others
to come to grief. Think of ninety-three huddled together in a room
twenty-five by twenty-five, with the only two windows on one side,
the other three sides being dark, the only passage from this room
to the street being through another, in which recitations are being
heard through the entire day. This, of course, prevents any recess,
so necessary in a primary or intermediate department.

“Quite unexpectedly the severe weather has come upon us, in which,
because of the unsuitable clothing of the children as well as lack
of conveniences for heating the rooms, the children suffer with
the cold. Last Friday the gentlemen teachers kept their winter
overcoats on all day, and shivered at that. With the exception
of severe colds, the teachers are well, and at their posts. The
accession of new pupils each month somewhat retards school work.
What to do with any more in my department is beyond my ability to
answer at present. But if wishes could lay a brick or drive a nail,
the new building would be well toward completion.”

       *       *       *       *       *


CAMPAIGN IN MASSACHUSETTS.

DIST. SEC’Y POWELL, OF CHICAGO.

Thanksgiving week ended, we began our campaign in Massachusetts,
at Sheffield, Monday afternoon, December 3d. Very unfavorable were
the circumstances attending our first meeting. The brutal murder
of an old man and woman on Thanksgiving-Day, had thrown the quiet
town into an unusual state of excitement. Evidence pointed strongly
to a negro as the murderer; and only the determined resistance of
the sheriff at the time of arrest, had saved the town from the
disgraceful presence of Judge Lynch. A murder committed by a white
man would not, I think, have affected unfavorably a meeting in
behalf of home missions; rather, such an event would have given it
special point and interest; but a black man being the criminal,
the result was different. The meeting was small, and yet I should
not be surprised if that meeting at Sheffield should prove to be
the most fruitful in results of any held. That murder ought to
lead the “sober second thought” of the community to a very hearty
endorsement of the American Missionary Association, and I believe
it will.

The uniform heartiness with which the ministers of Connecticut
received us was emulated by our Massachusetts brethren. Wherever we
came, a cordial welcome awaited us, and when we left, an equally
cordial God-speed accompanied us. Our meetings were held almost
entirely in the western part of the State. Hampshire, Hampden and
Berkshire counties were the field, and forty-two different churches
were visited. Just here I might as well make note of the delightful
weather we had all through our Massachusetts campaign—only one
unpleasant evening during the time, and that not sufficiently so
to keep the people at home. Very fortunate we were that evening
in Lee—the well-known go-to-meeting habits of the people gave
us a large audience, compared with some other places visited on
pleasant evenings; and in connection with the weather, how can
I forbear mention of the country—its native beauty, striking
grandeur, and historic interest—who that knows New England can
be ignorant of these? Valleys where poets might go crazy in the
vain attempt to sing their glory, New England’s sturdy sons have
turned into factories of wealth. The Mountains Holyoke, Sugar
Loaf, Tom and Toby, seeming to keep perpetual watch of the busy
life in the valleys below, and then the stories of Indian romance
that, lingering still, encircle some spots with their own weird
interest; the houses of such as Edwards, Field and Bellamy, open up
historic trains of thought which lead to the fountain-head of those
intellectual and moral forces which have made not only Western
Massachusetts, but all New England such an influential power
in the best development of our country. These “sceptred dead,”
from whom not yet has the realm of empire departed! What with
pleasant weather, beautiful scenery, romantic tales and historic
reminiscence, the fatigue of travel and wear of speaking, were
considerably lightened.

In many cases, the afternoon meetings proved, both in point of
numbers and interest, the best. People who leave their homes and
business in the afternoon, riding in some cases four or five miles
to attend a meeting, bring with them an inspiration which a speaker
cannot fail to feel; and after he has gone, his words remain to
be thought over and acted upon. What a difference between an
audience pleased only when the speaker entertains them, and one
that is gathered because of already awakened interest in the cause
of missions! Well, we had both kinds, but our afternoon audiences
were chiefly of the latter. Buckland, Ashfield, Lee, Amherst and
Chicopee, are especially worthy of mention for the large audiences
given us, while, with the exception of two places, which I will
not mention, all the others accorded us a generous hearing, larger
indeed than, under the circumstances, could have been expected.

A little episode occurred during the first week, that broke up our
speaking force for a few days, but added at the same time to the
value of the campaign. The Worcester Central Missionary Society
held its Fifty-Third Annual Meeting, December 6th, in Worcester,
to which meeting Mr. Woodworth and myself repaired, and occupied a
full hour kindly given us, to set forth the claims of the American
Missionary Association; while Mr. Cutler, reinforced by Mr. Pike,
kept on, and filled the appointments in their original order. There
were two things about this Worcester meeting I wish to mention.
_First_, it indicated the growing interest of the churches in the
subject of missions. This Society was organized fifty-two years ago
as auxiliary to the American Board, and, during these intervening
years, has preserved this exclusive relation. This year the Society
voted to change its constitution, in order that hereafter _all_ the
Missionary causes may have recognition in its deliberations and
benefactions. _Secondly_, this meeting indicated that a whole day
can be profitably given by the churches in convention assembled,
to the consideration of missions. From the beginning the power of
the meeting increased, and the evening session, at which there was
a mingling of stirring pleas for the Education Society, the Board
Home Missions, and the Missionary Association, was the crowning
interest of the day.

Brethren, let us move for a “Missionary Day” in our conferences,
and put the Missionary Societies under requisition for the very
best material they can furnish to kindle a fire of missionary
enthusiasm in our churches. The Sabbath following this Worcester
meeting was spent by Mr. Woodworth in Worcester, Mr. Cutler in
Gardner in the morning, and with his former charge in Athol, in
the evening; while I went to Keene, New Hampshire, and spent the
day with my old Seminary class-mate, Rev. Cyrus Richardson. His
sensitive regard for my physical well-being, led him to let me off
with three preaching services, at all of which I had to talk A.
M. A. and all the time. The evening meeting was a crowded union
service, Rev. Mr. Leech coming over with his people in full force,
showing that the churches of Keene have a warm place in their
hearts for missionary work among the despised races in America.

By previous arrangement, we were to again unite our forces at
Buckland, near Sherburne Falls, on Monday afternoon; but

  “The best laid schemes o’ mice and men gang aft agley.”

Mr. Woodworth failed to start, Mr. Cutler missed his train, and I
found myself dumped at a station, marked Buckland in the railway
guide, three miles away from the town, and the only living creature
I discovered, from which to get directions what to do and where to
go, was a poor little cat that came bounding to my side, purring
out as plainly as anything could be said—“I am glad to see you.”
After a brief interchange of the compliments of the season, I
buttoned my overcoat, adjusted my satchel, and started up the
only road it was possible to take, and in the only direction
possible—for the road terminated at a river, on the bank of which
stood the depot. It proved to be the right way. How easy it would
be to get along if the right way was the only way in which we could
go! As I drew near the village, the cheery notes of the church bell
rung out their merry call, while well-filled carriages, whirling
along in the direction of the church, told me that the people were
evidently interested in missions. I was on hand, and in time. A
fine audience had gathered; but my brethren, where were they? Well,
they did not come; that was all I knew, and in their absence I did
the best I could. The gift of continuance was given me in copious
plenteousness, and the time was exhausted before I was. I failed to
notice, however, whether my audience was not also exhausted. The
next day the _disjecta membra_ came together again at Sherburne
Falls, and henceforth to the close kept together.

And now as I review this entire series of meetings, the question
comes—have they been profitable? Others, I presume, will ask
the same question, and therefore I take a brief space to answer
it as I may be able. The object we had in view was, _first_, to
impart information concerning the work of the American Missionary
Association, and to discuss its claims upon the churches, to the
end that the receipts of its treasury might be increased, and
its work correspondingly strengthened; and, _secondly_, that
the distinctive missionary nature of our work might have a more
prominent place in the religious thought of the churches, and
thus become a factor in the development of such Christian life
as has a tender regard for those who are despised and poor and
oppressed. So far, then, as our object is concerned, we must wait
for time to bring an answer, but the meetings themselves developed
certain data out of which we can construct an answer. The data are
these: _First_, while no contributions were asked for or taken
from the congregation, individuals, self-moved, have handed to us
considerable money that otherwise would not have come into our
treasury, while pledges have been made of amounts far more than
sufficient to meet the expense of both campaigns. _Secondly_, I
took occasion to ask nearly all the ministers, and, so far as I
could, the leading men attending the meetings, the question—“In
your judgment has it paid for us three men to come here and hold
this meeting?” And _without exception_ the answer has been,
“_Yes_,” and in the majority of cases the additional remark, “I
wish it were so you could come again.” With this testimony, and
personal knowledge of the general interest of the meetings, I can
only answer the question raised in the affirmative, with the strong
conviction that time will confirm its correctness.

       *       *       *       *       *


[_From the Fisk Expositor._]

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Great honor is due George Peabody, because he donated to the South,
for the purposes of general education, upwards of three millions of
dollars, the interest of which is to be appropriated to the work of
developing the school systems of the various States.

But the American Missionary Association of New York City, the
almoner of funds received from the Congregational churches of the
United States, has already, since the war, disbursed more money in
the South for educational purposes than the entire gift of George
Peabody, and is expending for the prosecution of the same work,
every year, more than twice as much as the interest of the Peabody
Fund.

In this statement no intention exists to depreciate the munificence
of Mr. Peabody’s gift, but to call attention to the fact that
the South owes a debt of gratitude to the American Missionary
Association, which it should not be slow to recognize.

The Association was organized in 1846, for the purpose of “carrying
the Gospel to the poor.” The first school for colored children
was opened at Hampton, Virginia, in 1861. Since that time it has
expended between $3,500,000 and $4,000,000, ninety per cent. of
which has been appropriated to the support of its work in the South.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

AN EXAMPLE FOR THE BOYS.

  The following letter explains itself. A boy who gives to the
  poor the whole proceeds of his farm, and that within a month of
  Christmas, is worthy of special note. We would like to hear from
  more such boys.

I have wanted to do something for the freedmen. I am a little
boy seven years old. Last spring grandpapa gave me a little plot
of ground for my vegetable garden, consisting of corn, pop-corn,
beans, summer squashes, Hubbard squashes, cucumbers, tomatoes,
cabbages, watermelons. I took most of the care of the garden
myself; only when I went on a sail my grandma picked the squashes.
I sold the products of my garden to my grandma, and she paid me in
money, amounting to a _dollar and a half_, with which I cheerfully
send to you for the freedmen.

                                   AMASA DAY CHAFFEE.
MODUS, CONN., _Nov. 29, 1877_.

       *       *       *       *       *

SIX COMPOSITIONS.

  A graduate of Hampton writes to a former teacher enclosing sample
  compositions of his pupils in “The Sunday School.” We copy from
  the _Southern Workman_: as it says; “We do not remember ever
  seeing a richer collection of children’s compositions. The
  teacher has no reason to despair.”

                                                       “VA.

“_Dear Teacher_:—On returning from my school this afternoon, I
thought I would write and let you hear of my sojourning. To-day
is Friday (the last day in school week), and, after a review of
the week’s studies, the children are requested to write short
compositions. I send you six, copied just as they were written:

‘SUNDAY SCHOOL.

‘Sunday school is a good place to go. To keep out of badness. And
learn the words of god good boys and girls goes to sunday school
every sunday when they can. Everybody ought to go to sunday school;
and hear the Bible because it tell them what is right and wrong. M.
F. Hancock.’

‘Sunday school are the place that people ought to go, and learn
to read about god and his diciples, and of him to learn good and
not bad like Biley done to day killed a little sparrow, where will
never do him no harm in the world, and he put the bird to death.
Poor bird. Peter S. Hancock.’

‘Sunday School is a good place that all bad children ought to go
to. And some of the members do not come to the Sunday School. And
this School is a very emportant one. And the people ought make
their children come where gods work are going on. And if they fuse
to come whip them. I do not fuse to come where the Lord work is.
Jerry Chappell.’

‘Sunday School are a place that people ought to go to learn
something about the scripture Sunday School are a very pretty place
to go to learn and to spell and to read People ought to be have
there Selves. Emily Farmer.’

‘Sunday School is a very useful thing; though I don’t go to it but
I hope every body will go if I dont go. Sunday School is a place
where every body ought to go to learn sense, and read the scripture
and hear the word of God. Ellen Coles.’

“These were written by the Fourth Reader class. My school numbers
fifty-one pupils. I have no little task to undergo. Besides
worrying with the children all the week, I have the responsibility
of head Deacon and Clerk of the church. I sometimes despair;
but when I look and see that there is no one in our midst more
competent than I am for either position, I look to the ‘Great I Am’
and do the best I can.

“Ere this, you are somewhat experienced in the movements of our
race. They suit quite well to begin with, but the end, alas! how
different from the beginning! Our people are quick of apprehension,
but do not continue in it.

  “Very respectfully,
      “Your once pupil and scholar,
                                 “H.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR DECEMBER, 1877.


       *       *       *       *       *

  MAINE, $288.54.

    Alfred. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               $23.07
    Augusta. Joel Spalding, to const.
      MRS.HELEN G. ECOB, L. M.                                30.00
    Bangor. Hammond St. Ch.                                   10.00
    Bath. Mrs. J. C.                                           0.25
    Bethel. Francis Barker                                     2.24
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      21.00
    Blanchard. "A Friend"                                      5.00
    Blue Hill. "A Friend"                                      1.00
    Brewer. First Cong. Ch. $12; and Sab. Sch. $4.53          16.53
    Dennysville. Peter E. Vose, box of C. and new
      cloth, _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Fryeburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              8.10
    Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          13.60
    Hampden. Chas. E. Hicks and others                         5.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. Mary Flagg $10; H. K.Baker $2,
      _for printing press Talladega, Ala._
      —— "Friends" $1.25, _for Ogeechee Ch._
      —— "Two Lady Friends" $5 ea.                            23.25
    Norridgewock. Cong. Ch.                                   50.00
    North Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         5.00
    North Vassalborough. Joseph White                         10.00
    Norway. Wm. Frost and Mary K. Frost                        5.25
    Portland. "Two Ladies"                                     4.00
    Topsham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Vassalborough. ——                                          0.25
    Waterford. Cash                                            5.00
    Wells. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. SARAH A. SOUTHWORTH, L. M.                       40.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $755.32.

    Antrim. "Friends," by Imla Wright                         40.00
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.25
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.50
    Brookline. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              7.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.05
    Centre Harbor. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (bal. coll.)             1.00
    Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         55.22
    Concord. North Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N. C._
    Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             42.50
    Exeter. "A Friend"                                        30.00
    Grafton Co. "A Friend" ($30 of which to const.
      MRS. GEO. E COLBURN, L. M.)                            130.00
    Hanover Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        10.00
    Hollis. "Lady Friends," bbl. of C., by Mrs. J.
      C. Burge
    Hopkinton. D. S.                                           0.35
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $117.85; Second
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. $37; J. P. $1; Mrs. C. C.
      W. 25c.                                                156.10
    Milford. Nathan Jewett                                     5.00
    Nashua. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                27.35
    ——. "A Friend," _for the Debt_                           100.00
    Newport. "A Young Lady"                                   10.00
    Stratham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00
    ——. "A Friend"                                           100.00


  VERMONT, $536.98.

    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.65
    Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                                 70.00
    Brookfield. C. E. B.                                       0.25
    Cambridge. Dea. Solomon Montague $10; Mrs.
      Benj. Barrett $2                                        12.00
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $29.61; Rev C. C.
      Torrey $15                                              44.61
    Chester. "X. Y. Z."                                        1.00
    Granby and North Victory. Cong. Ch.                        1.50
    Hardwick. A. M. Amsden and wife                           15.00
    Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $52.73;
      Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.
      $11.—Ladies’ Miss. Soc., B. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N. C._                                      63.73
    Lower Waterford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       27.75
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $22.45; Sab. Sch.
      $1.81                                                   24.26
    North Cambridge. John Kinsley                             10.00
    Peacham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               34.40
    Pittsford. Thos. D. Hall                                   5.00
    Royalton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              27.00
    Shelburn. Mrs. Mattie Duncan, bal. to const.
      MRS. JOSIE. MERILL, L. M.                               10.00
    Stowe. Cong. Ch.                                          44.14
    West Charleston. Rev. W. T. Herrick, _for the
      Debt_                                                   25.25
    Westminster. Cong. Ch.                                     8.50
    West Randolph. M. A. and S. E. Albin                       6.00
    West Rutland. Young Ladies’ Working Band, by H.
      D. Tuttle                                               65.00
    West Townsend. Charitable Soc., by Mrs. R. P.
      W. Baldwin, bbl. of C., val. $42, and $2 _for
      freight_                                                 2.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch. $10.29; Cong. Sab. Sch. $1.65          11.94
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             11.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,447.27.

    Abington. Mrs. Sullivan                                    3.00
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Ch. and Soc.                 5.80
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Andover. South Cong. Ch. $105.—Rev. J.
      H. Laird $10; E. Taylor $6; M. C. Andrews $5;
      Dr. Gilbert $2; H. J. and Mrs. D. G. $1 ea.,
      _for Talladega C._—Individuals, _for Mag._, $1         131.00
    Ashfield. Henry Taylor, $6.—Ladies $1,
      _for freight_                                            7.00
    Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      NOYES B. HERRICK, L. M.                                 43.00
    Athol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                103.21
    Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         41.00
    Ayer. "Friends"                                            3.25
    Bedford. M. E. R.                                          0.50
    Blandford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.35
    Boston. Union Ch. and Soc. $83.92; Mrs E. W. B.
      50c.                                                    84.42
    Bradford. Young Ladies of Bradford
      Academy, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                  10.00
    Buckland. E. S.                                            0.25
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                          47.65
    Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $74.98; "Memorial Offering from Member
      of Central Ch." $50                                    124.98
    Chicopee. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       16.72
    Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        9.63
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         21.33
    Cummington. Mrs. S. R. Wilbur $5; Mr. and Mrs.
      M. Porter $2; Mrs. H. Porter $1.50; Mrs.
      Alivia Wilbur $1.30; others $1.20                       11.00
    Dalton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $19.59; Cong. Sab.
      Sch. $5                                                 24.59
    Danvers. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        100.00
    Dorchester. Miss E. Pierce                                 1.50
    Douglass. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $10; A. M. H. 50c.           10.50
    Dracut Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.75
    East Hampton. Payson Ch. and Soc. $283.95; L.
      D. L. 25c.                                             284.20
    East Weymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         25.15
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                   132.65
    Great Barrington. L. M. Pixley                            10.00
    Greenfield. C. C. Phillips $2.—Woman’s Miss.
      Soc., by Mrs. Newell, bbl. of C., _for
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            2.00
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch., _for Chinese M._              4.53
    Goshen. Mrs. Wm. Tilton                                    2.00
    Groton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          64.27
    Hanover. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        26.50
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              45.75
    Harvard. Mrs. C. S.                                        0.50
    Haverhill. Mary B. Jones $10; W. H. E. 25c.               10.25
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           18.41
    Hinsdale. J. H.                                            1.00
    Hingham. R. J. F.                                          0.25
    Holden. Ladies’ Sewing Circle, B. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N. C._
    Lakeville. Betsey Kinsley                                  2.00
    Lawrence, Lawrence St. Ch. and Soc.                       75.19
    Leicester. Mrs. C. C. Partridge                            5.00
    Lincoln. Miss. S. R.                                       0.25
    Lowell. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $104;
      "A Friend in Eliot Ch." $50. to const.
      DEA. JAMES W. MORSE, L. M.                             154.00
    Lynn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            37.68
    Lynnfield Centre. "A Friend"                               5.00
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                23.45
    Malden. Rev. J. C.                                         0.27
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       61.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                11.69
    Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $129.63; Cash,
      _for postage_, 12c.                                    129.75
    North Abington. Mrs. A. S. Reed, to
      const. MRS. GEO. ADAMS, L. M.                           30.00
    Northampton. W. K. Wright                                 30.00
    North Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    Northborough. "Friends" $7, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._—Mrs. Martha D. Wells $3                     10.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                         84.46
    New Bedford. "A Friend"                                    5.00
    Newton. Elliot Cong. Ch.                                  59.18
    Newton Centre. S. A. E.                                    0.50
    Newton Lower Falls. "Friend"                               7.00
    North Chelmsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      30.25
    Norfolk. Mrs. Wm. Mann, _for Student’s Aid,
      Atlanta, U._                                             2.00
    Plympton. Cong. Ch.                                        3.80
    Randolph. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              86.19
    Rochdale. Mrs. R. W.                                       0.25
    Salem. South Cong. Ch. and Society (Mon. Con.
      Coll.) $8.12; J. P. A. 50c.                              8.62
    Sherborn. Miss M. B.                                       1.00
    South Boston. Miss J. A.                                   1.00
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           30.03
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 15.00
    Springfield. Hope Cong. Ch. $21.08; Olivet Ch.
      and Soc. $1.39; Miss L. B. $1                           23.47
    Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                    38.83
    Sutton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                23.66
    Swampscott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            34.00
    Taunton. E. S. E.                                          0.50
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             33.25
    Topsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             64.10
    Townsend. Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. and friends $25,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._; Friends 90c.             25.90
    Upton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           17.78
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            114.00
    Ware. "A Friend," _for the Debt_                          10.00
    Warren. S. Blair                                           2.00
    Watertown. Mrs. A.                                         0.50
    Whately. L. B. W.                                          2.00
    West Andover. A. L. Goodell                               25.00
    West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   80.00
    West Springfield. Park St. Ch.                            63.00
    Westminster. E. A. Whitney                                 5.00
    Winchendon. "Two Friends"                                 10.00
    Woburn. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            100.00
    Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. $138.83 (of which
      $15 _for Talladega_); Piedmont Ch. and Soc.
      (ad’l) $182. (of which $100 from John B.
      Gough); E. A. Goodnow $10; Mrs. J. 50c.; Mrs.
      H. B. F. 25c.                                          331.58
    Yarmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               5.25


  RHODE ISLAND, $140.25.

    Barrington. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $50; J. I. S.
      25c.                                                    50.25
    Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    90.00


  CONNECTICUT, $3,680.48.

    Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Ashford. Cong. Soc.                                       10.00
    Avon. By A. U. Thompson $130 (of which $100
      from Harry Chidsey, to const. L.
      H. CHIDSEY, MRS. L. H. CHIDSEY and HARRY C.
      HUMPHREY, L. M.’s); M. A. $1                           131.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                   8.47
    Birmingham. Mrs. C. A. B.                                  0.25
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. CHARLES E. REDFIELD, L. M.                       43.58
    Cromwell. Mrs. Stephen Topliff                             3.25
    Durham. Cong. Ch.                                         25.50
    East Woodstock. H. C.                                      0.25
    Enfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            20.00
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      35.29
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               76.90
    Haddam. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch. $207.75; J. E.
      Cushman $160 ($60 of which _for
      the Debt_),—Mrs. Polly Johnson $1.50 _for
      Mendi M._—A. W. 50c.                                   369.75
    Higganum. Cong. Soc.                                       6.00
    Hebron. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Jewett City. Mrs. M. A. Rockwell                          25.00
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.08
    Old Lyme. by M. S. _for Mag._                              0.50
    Marlborough. Miss L. A. Carter $2; Geo. H. Lord
      and Others $8                                           10.00
    Meriden. C. H. Learned                                     5.00
    Middletown. J. G. Baldwin                                 25.00
    Milford. Plymouth Ch. $36.50; First Cong. Ch.
      $29.50                                                  66.00
    Milton. Rev. S. J. M. Merwin                              15.00
    Montville. ——                                              7.00
    Moodus. Amasa Day Chaffee                                  1.50
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.40
    New Haven. Davenport Cong. Ch. $62.75; Third
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. $32.58; R. E. Rice $20;
      Mrs. E. R. Marvin $8.25; "A Friend in Centre
      Ch." $10; Individuals _for Mag._ 50c.                  134.08
    New Hartford, North Cong. Ch., Rev. F. H.
      Adams’ Bible Class $10.26; John Richards’
      Bible Class $10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             20.26
    New Milford. Cong. Ch.                                    95.69
    New London. Miss M. A. R. Rogers                           2.00
    Norwich. Park Cong. Sab. Sch. $50 _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._—"A Friend" $5                          55.00
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.02
    Redding. Cong. Ch.                                         5.90
    Rockville. Rev. G. Pease, Box of C.,
      _for Savannah, Ga._
    Roxbury. Individuals _for Mag._                            0.75
    Saybrook. Second Cong. Ch.                                 6.90
    South Glastonbury. Cong. Ch.                               6.00
    South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                            30.00
    Stratford. Cong. Ch.                                      25.50
    Suffield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        13.85
    Terryville, Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.                         6.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      46.80
    Tolland. "Family Thanksgiving donation by L. J. C."        1.00
    West Avon. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    West Hartford. Miss E. C. H.                               0.62
    West Haven. Mrs. Huldah Coe                                6.50
    West Meriden. E. K. Breckenridge $10; "H. L.
      C." $5                                                  15.00
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   59.40
    Whitneyville. H. H.                                        0.50
    Willimantic. Cong. Ch.                                    54.39
    Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                     11.93
    Winsted. Cong. Ch. $51.13; Mrs. Emily Case $10            61.13
    Winthrop. Miss. C. Rice                                    2.00
    Woodbury. ESTATE of Judah Baldwin $1,689.05;
      ESTATE of Mrs. Eunice Baldwin $278.07,
      by A. W. Mitchell, Ex.                               1,967.12
    Woodbury. A. W. Mitchell and Mrs. J. G. Minor
      $5 ea.                                                  10.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for a
      Theo. Student, Straight U._                             40.42
    —— "A Friend"                                             50.00


  NEW YORK, $2,115.77.

    Adams. Mrs. D. R. S. Colton $2, and box of books           2.00
    Alfred Centre. Mrs. Ida F. Kenyon                          5.00
    Barnes Corners. Mrs. L. R. Greenly                        10.00
    Brentwood. E. F. Richardson                                8.50
    Brooklyn. Clinton Ave. Cong. Ch. (of
      which $1,000 from A. S. Barnes _for the debt_)       1,227.94
    Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch. $51; Ch. of
      the Covenant $5                                         56.00
    Cincinnatus. Thanksgiving Coll. Union
      Service, by Rev. E. Rogers                              10.00
    Durham. Mrs. H. I.                                         1.00
    East Avon. Mrs. F. D.                                      1.00
    Elma. Mrs. E. S. A. Bancroft                               5.00
    Elmira. Miss Clarissa Thurston                             5.00
    Felts Mills. Joel A. Hubbard                              30.00
    Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                    10.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       17.42
    Gainesville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.00
    Gouverneur. Mrs. E. R. B.                                  1.00
    Harford. Robert Purvis                                    30.00
    Harlem. Cong. Ch.                                         10.30
    Harris Hill. Thomas Hutchinson and John Berry              5.00
    Lima. Rev. H. N. P.                                        0.25
    Lisle. Miss A. B.                                          1.00
    Little Valley. Cong. Ch.                                   3.00
    Lockport. H. W. Nichols                                    5.00
    Locust Valley. Mrs. S. Palmer                              5.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Marcellus. First Ch. $20; S. C. Hemenway $5; A.
      Rockwell and others $1; Mrs. L. H. 50c.                 26.50
    Mexico. M. Midlam $3; Individuals, by Dr.
      Smith, $1.75                                             4.75
    Middlesex. Lester Adams and E. J. Adams                   10.00
    Oneonta. Mrs. L. J. S.                                     0.27
    Newark Valley. First Cong. Ch.                            38.09
    New York. E. A. Graves $100; Alex. Ostrander $5          105.00
    Oriskany Falls. Joseph C. Griggs                          25.00
    Palmyra. Pliny T. Sexton, to const.
      MISS MARY SQUIRE, L. M.                                 30.00
    Paris Hill. Cong Ch.                                      27.50
    Perry Centre. "A Friend"                                  10.00
    Penn Yan. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             18.00
    Pierpont. Mr. and Mrs. James Gleason                       5.00
    Rochester. Mrs. J. H.                                      0.25
    Sag Harbor. Chas. N. Brown to const. MISS
      ANNA C. POLLEY, L. M.                                   30.00
    Sing Sing. Mrs. Harriet M. Cole to
      const. REV. DAVID E. JONES, L. M.                       30.00
    Springville. Lawrence Weber                                3.00
    Syracuse. Mrs. S. J. White                                 5.00
    Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan $15; Mrs. Fanny
      D. Duncan $10                                           25.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                 5.00
    Watkins. Mr. G. $1; others $1                              2.00
    Westfield. Mrs. L. S.                                      1.00
    West Mount Vernon. I. Van Santvoord, overcoat,
      package of C. and $2 _for freight_                       2.00
    Williamsburgh. ESTATE of Mary
      Withington, by J. M. Stearns, Ex.                      250.00
    Windham. Rev. O. B. Hitchcock, Set of
      Appleton’s Cyclopedia, val. $80, _for
      Talladega C._
    Windsor. Mrs. Jonah Woodruff $3; Rev. J. S. P.
      $1                                                       4.00


  NEW JERSEY, $12.50.

    Bricksburg. Rev. G. L.                                     1.00
    Camden. J. E. S.                                           0.50
    Newark. David Owen $1, and five Sab.
      Sch, Banners                                             1.00
    Trenton. S. T. Sherman                                    10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $3.50.

    Orwell. Rev. Wm. Macnab                                    2.00
    Providence. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                1.00
    Terrytown. Dr. G. F. H.                                    0.50


  OHIO, $405.21.

    Berea. James S. Smedley                                    5.00
    Bellevue. J. S.                                            0.25
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                         21.48
    Cincinnati. Rev. B. P. Aydelott $10; C.
      B. Ruggles $3; Mrs. Charlotte Ruggles $2                15.00
    Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch $19.70; A. H.
      L. $1                                                   20.70
    Delaware. Froedshindalar Welsh Cong. Ch. ($5 of
      which from Wm. Bevan)                                   10.32
    Garrettsville. Cong. Ch.                                   5.50
    Granville. Mrs. C. G. Olds                                 2.00
    Greenfield. Wm. Smith                                      5.00
    Geneva. Mrs. S. Kingsbury $10; Miss M. M.
      Kingsbury $5; W. C. P. $1; W. M. A. 50c.                16.50
    Georgetown. Joseph W. Hill                                 5.00
    Greenwich. Mrs. Luther Mead                                5.00
    Hampden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
    Huntsburgh. A. E. Millard $10; Mrs. M. E.
      Millard $5                                              15.00
    Hudson. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Paper_                        3.00
    Madison. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $35, _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._; M. B. H. 50c.                35.50
    Marietta. Rev. I. M. P.                                    0.25
    Medina. N. B. Northrop                                    20.00
    Moores Saltworks. Robert George                            2.00
    Oberlin. Mrs. C. C. Wheat to const I. C. V.
      WHEAT, L. M., $30; Rev. J. S. 25c.                      30.25
    North Benton. Mrs. Margret J. Hartzel                      5.00
    North Eaton. Mrs. M. O.                                    0.57
    Prairie Depot. A. B. F.                                    0.25
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    Ruggles. Cong. Ch.                                        23.75
    Saybrook, W. C. Sexton                                     2.00
    Steubenville. Woman’s Missionary Soc. by Miss
      Anne G. Elliott, Treas.                                 10.00
    Sullivan. Mrs. M. McC.                                     1.00
    Tallmadge. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($5, of
      which from Ladies, _for a student, Talladega
      C._)                                                    29.14
    Toledo. Mrs. M. A. Harrington                             10.00
    Wellington. Cong. Ch. to const. REV. J.
      A. DALY, L. M.                                          50.00
    Welshfield. S. P.                                          0.25
    Westerville. G. W. F.                                      0.50
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00


  INDIANA, $5.

    Goshen. A. M. Lee                                          5.00


  ILLINOIS, $3,231.61.

    Albion. Mrs. Martha Skeavington                            5.00
    Aurora. N. L. James                                        5.00
    Avon. F. H. M.                                             0.25
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch. $14.30; Leavitt St.
      Cong. Co. $11.24                                        25.60
    Crystal Lake. ESTATE of Simon S.
      Gates, by William D. Gates, Ex.                      3,000.00
    Evanston. First Cong. Ch.                                 25.25
    Galesburg. Ladies of Cong. Ch. _for Ind. Sch.
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  40.00
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                        29.07
    Knoxville. W. H. Holcomb and others $1.00 ea.              5.00
    Marshall. Mrs. G. E. C.                                    0.50
    Mattoon. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Naperville. Mrs. L. C.                                     1.00
    Port Byron. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                            8.50
    Quincy. Lucius Kingman                                     5.00
    Rosemond. _For Mag._                                       0.25
    Rockford. First Cong. Ch.                                 37.44
    Sterling. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.75
    Sycamore. Rev. A. S.                                       1.00


  MICHIGAN, $318.96.

    Alpena. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch. $25
      _for a student Atlanta U._—Miss J. F. F. 60c.           25.60
    Birmingham. Mrs. A. D. Stickney                            1.25
    Detroit. "A member of First Cong. Ch."                     3.33
    Dexter. Dennis Warner                                     10.00
    Dowagiac. Cong. Ch. $6; Ladies Soc. $3.20 "The
      Widow’s Mite" $1                                        10.20
    Grass Lake. Z. Boynton                                     5.00
    Hillsdale. J. W. Ford                                      2.00
    Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett $1.25; "A Friend"
      75c.                                                     2.00
    Kalamazoo. Webster Johnson $100; Cong. Ch.
      $77.93 ($30 of which to const. CLARENCE L.
      DEAN, L. M.)                                           177.93
    Lodi. Eli Benton                                          30.00
    Milford. E. G.                                             1.00
    Richland. Presb. Ch. Coll. $4.62; S. Mills $5;
      Mrs. S. Boyles $1.50; Mrs. C. T. 25c.                   11.37
    Vermontville. First Cong. Ch.                             34.28
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   5.00


  WISCONSIN, $146.16.

    Appleton. M. C. P.                                         0.50
    Brodhead. Mrs. M. A. C.                                    1.00
    Cooksville. Edward Gilley _for African M._                 5.00
    Madison. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid_                25.00
    Milwaukee. Spring St. Cong. Ch.                           12.35
    Watertown. Good Templars, by T. D. Rauouse,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           27.50
    Whitewater. Cong. Ch.                                     74.81


  IOWA, $231.64.

    Anamosa. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    College Springs. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                  15.00
    Cherokee. First Cong. Ch.                                 10.03
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               26.00
    Des Moines. Plymouth Cong. Ch. $45.81; Rev. M.
      N. Miles, "Family Thanksgiving donation."
      $7.10                                                   52.91
    Fairfax. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch. $7.75; H. A. M. 25c.                8.00
    Gilman. Cong. Ch., M. Coll.                                1.00
    Green Mountain. Cong. Ch.                                 30.00
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $44.20; By Mrs. M.
      B. Day $2.50                                            46.70
    Iowa Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
    Mantor. Cong. Ch.                                          8.00
    New Hampton. Mrs E. F. Powers                              4.00
    Riceville. Mrs. A. B. C.                                   1.00
    Tabor. Friends by Miss Julia E. Williams                   5.00


  MINNESOTA, $92.92.

    Hastings. C. S. Campbell                                   5.00
    Lake City. Cong. Ch.                                      24.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 13.92
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                          1.00
    Northfield. A. N. N. $1; Rev. J. W. S. $1                  2.00
    Plainview. Cong. Ch. $34; Cong. Sab. Sch. $6              40.00
    Sauk Centre. Cong. Ch.                                     7.00


  NEBRASKA, $5.

    Milford. Rev. H. A. French                                 5.00


  DAKOTA, $24.25.

    Yankton. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for a Student_              24.25


  COLORADO, $16.95.

    Denver. Cong. Ch.                                         15.45
    Greeley. "Evans"                                           1.50


  CALIFORNIA, $9.

    Benicia. Mrs. N. P. S.                                     1.00
    Mojave. W. F. Montague                                     8.00


  OREGON, $16.55.

    Forest Grove. Jos. W. Marsh $10; Cong. Ch. $5;
      Mrs. S. H. P. $1                                        16.00
    Forest Grove. S. T. W.                                     0.25
    Portland. W. W.                                            0.30


  WASHINGTON TER., $15.

    Skokomish Agency. Cong. Mission Ch. of Christ             15.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $36.

    Washington. Christmas Gift from the Officers
      and Students of Howard University, _for the
      Debt_                                                   36.00


  VIRGINIA, $5.25.

    Farmville. T. N. W.                                        0.25
    Salem-Fauquier. Catherine V. Mead                          5.00


  TENNESSEE, $326.17.

    Chattanooga. First Cong. Ch. $20.32
      Christmas Gift, _for the Debt_; Chattanooga
      Band of Hope No. 1, $20 _for the Debt_                  40.32
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   132.60
    Memphis. Second Cong. Ch., _for the Debt_                 40.00
    Nashville. Christmas Gift from
      Teachers, Workers and Students of Fisk
      University, _for the Debt_                             113.25


  NORTH CAROLINA, $304.77.

    Raleigh. Public Fund $100; Washington Sch.
      $16.50                                                 116.50
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $178; Cong. Ch. $10.27           188.27


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $218.21.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  211.86
    Charleston. Plymouth Ch., _for the Debt_                   3.35
    Columbia. Prof. F. P. B., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         1.00
    Orangeburgh. Cong. Ch., _for the Debt_                     2.00


  GEORGIA, $539.76.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University                              248.35
    Byron. Cong. Ch.                                           2.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    53.10
    Macon. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for the debt_           12.25
    McIntosh. The Sisters’ Benev. Ass’n of Liberty
      Co., Christmas gift, _for the debt_                     15.60
    Savannah. Rent $150; Beach Inst. $58.46                  208.46


  ALABAMA, $340.50.

    Athens. Cong. Ch., _for the debt_                         15.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  220.80
    Selma. First Cong. Ch. $7.42, and Sab.
      Sch. $12.58; E. C. Silsby $5, _for the debt_            25.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.20
    Talladega. Talladega College                              72.50


  LOUISIANA, $114.50.

    New Orleans. Straight University                         114.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $107.80.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                             77.80
    Tougaloo. Church and School, _for the debt_               30.00


  MISSOURI, $13.60

    Cahoka. Cong. Ch.                                          3.10
    Index. W. B. Wills                                        10.50


  TEXAS, $1.

    Corpus Christi. Rev. S. M. C.                              1.00


  ENGLAND, $10.

    London. Wm. Saunders, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     10.00
                                                          —————————
    Total                                                $17,516.42
    Total from Oct. 1st to Dec. 30th                     $42,305.54

                                            H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                     _Ass’t Treas._

  ENDOWMENT FUND

    Concord, N. H. ESTATE of Irenus
      Hamilton by J. K. and W. C. Hamilton                 1,500.00

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.


       *       *       *       *       *

ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to
conduct Christian missionary and educational operations, and
diffuse a knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other
countries which are destitute of them, or which present open and
urgent fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who
professes faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder,
or in the practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to
the funds, may become a member of the Society; and by the payment
of thirty dollars, a life member; provided, that children and
others who have not professed their faith may be constituted life
members without the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of
the regular officers and members of the Society at the time of
such meeting, and of delegates from churches, local missionary
societies, and other co-operating bodies—each body being entitled
to one representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the
collecting and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling,
sustaining and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons)
missionaries and agents; the selection of missionary fields;
and, in general, the transaction of all such business as usually
appertains to the executive committees of missionary and other
benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical
jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to be subject
always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall, by a
reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference
shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society: to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in
appointing officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting
fields of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals
agreeing to the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint
and sustain missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so
through the agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually
agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made in this Constitution
without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present at a
regular annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; this necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2;
Ga., 11; Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2;
Texas, 4. _Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.
_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn., Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.; 11; _Other
Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS—Among the Freedmen,
209; among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign
lands, 10. Total, 252. STUDENTS—In Theology, 74; Law, 8;
in College Course, 79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404.
Scholars taught by former pupils of our schools, estimated at
100,000. INDIANS under the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with
the growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational
institutions, to accommodate the increasing numbers of students;
MEETING HOUSES, for the new churches we are organizing;
MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here
and missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK    H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON      Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House
  CHICAGO     Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; To Life members; to all clergymen
who take up collection for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year no
less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION in their last Will and Testament, are earnestly
requested to use the following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
“American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be applied
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: USE
    BROOK’S
    PRIZE MEDAL
    SPOOL COTTON]

                           THE BEST FOR

                      HAND and MACHINE WORK.

                    FOR SALE BY ALL RETAILERS.

                           SOLE AGENTS,

                       WM. HENRY SMITH & CO.

          P. O. Box 502. _59 Leonard St., New York City._


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: MARVIN’S
    FIRE & BURGLAR
    SAFES
    COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
    SCALES
    _MARVIN SAFE AND SCALE CO._
    _265 BROADWAY, N.Y._
    _627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Morton’s Gold Pens.

                       ALSO EVERY VARIETY OF

                  _GOLD, SILVER, CELLULOID, PEARL
                       AND IVORY PENCILS AND
                            PEN CASES._

These Goods have stood the test of nearly thirty years and no pains
or expense is spared to maintain their character as the best Goods
in the market.

THE TRADE SUPPLIED AT LOWEST TERMS.

☞Where these Goods are not found on sale, they can be ordered
directly from MORTON by mail.

                     No. 25 Maiden Lane, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           COOPERS’ BEST

                      STATIONARY AND PORTABLE

                           Steam Engines

                        Circular Saw Mills,

                     French Burr Grist Mills,

                          Mill Machinery

                           AND SUPPLIES,

                   Millwrights and Contractors.

                          CIRCULARS FREE.

                         Cooper M’f’g Co.,

            State what is Wanted.      Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      The Congregationalist.

                   A NATIONAL RELIGIOUS JOURNAL.

The CONGREGATIONALIST has never before been increasing in
circulation faster than of late. It keeps abreast of the times and
discusses the vital questions of the day in religious matters, and
especially as they relate to the denomination which it represents.
Its recent circular, with replies from nearly one hundred
ministers, on the question of Everlasting Punishment, and its own
utterances on that subject, have lately brought it more prominently
than ever before the public. It has now secured as an editor in New
York, =Rev. A. H. Clapp, D. D.=, so that, as to its news matter
and its discussions, it is now more than ever truly national,
remembering the interests of all parts of the country. We also
have a regular letter from Washington, and from Chicago, besides
a multitude of correspondents in different sections, who furnish
ministerial and church news—a department which is fuller in the
CONGREGATIONALIST than any other journal. Among our contributors
are Prof. AUSTIN PHELPS, D. D., President S. C. BARTLETT, Dr.
LEONARD BACON, Mrs. J. D. CHAPLIN, Rev. GEO. LEON WALKER, Prof. W.
M. BARBOUR, and a long list which includes many of the best known
writers for the religious press in the country. Our Literary Review
occupies four columns. We give weekly the best portion of JOSEPH
COOK’S Tremont Temple Lecture, and we aim always to furnish such
a variety that all members of the family shall find something for
their own especial interest.

                       Webster’s Dictionary.

Hundreds are now availing themselves of our offer to furnish this
great work as a premium for four new subscribers. Its retail price
is $12.00, yet we offer it as a gift to any one who sends us four
new names, with the money, for one year. $12.00 in all. Thus it
will be seen that these four subscriptions and the Dictionary can
all be secured simply for the regular price of the dictionary. Such
an opportunity has never been presented before, and it cannot be
expected again in a life-time.

The CONGREGATIONALIST is its own best advertisement. Send
for a specimen number. Price $3.00 a year.

          W. L. GREENE & CO., No. 1 Somerset St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.

                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish


Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary:

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Acts, $1.75: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._”


                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    The World’s Model Magazine.

A combination of the entertaining, the useful and the beautiful,
with fine art engravings and oil paintings in each number, worth
more than its cost.

                    Demorest’s Monthly for 1878

Will surpass all former issues in brilliancy, variety and artistic
excellence.

The highest appreciation and a magnanimous tribute to American
journalism, by the representative European Journal. See what the
great Thunderer says of DEMOREST’S MAGAZINE:—

_“Got up in America, where it has enormous sales, the
most remarkable work of the class that has ever been
published, and combines the attractions of several English
Magazines.”_—LONDON TIMES, Oct. 7—followed by an extended
description of its various departments.

You cannot afford to do without this world’s acknowledged Model
Magazine. The largest in form, the largest in circulation, and the
best in everything that makes a magazine desirable.

                    EXTRAORDINARY ANNOUNCEMENT!

Our Splendid Double Premium for 1878—the beautiful and
highly-prized Oil Pictures—“ROCK OF AGES,” “OLD OAKEN BUCKET,”
“AFTER THE STORM,” or “CAPTIVE CHILD.”

The great public who know how to appreciate the highest art, will
be delighted and surprised to learn that _two_ of these splendid
Oil Pictures, in all their original beauty and excellence, mounted
on canvas and stretchers, ready for framing, are offered as a
premium to each $3 yearly subscriber. Transportation, 50 cents
extra.

The size of these pictures (15×21 inches) is just about the
proportion to make them suitable for some choice place in the
parlor. They are so full of sentiment, yet so purely artistic, as
to always command the approbation of every man or woman of taste
or feeling. Suitable and elegant frames of French walnut and gold,
with engraved corners, will be furnished for $1.50 each, making
the whole cost (including subscription to the Magazine) $6.00, but
richly worth five times that amount. Address

            W. JENNINGS DEMOREST, 17 E. 14th St. N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  MASON & HAMLIN CABINET ORGANS,

Winners of Highest Honors at all World’s Exhibitions for Ten Years.
  PARIS, 1867; VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO, 1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876.


“_I believe that every member of the Jury heartily concurred in
assigning to those of your make, and_ =yours only=, the =first rank
in all important qualities= of such instruments,”—GEO. F. BRISTOW,
_of N. Y._ (_Examining Juror at U. S. Centennial._)

“_Musicians generally regard them as_ =unequaled=.”—THEODORE
THOMAS, _of_ THOMAS’ ORCHESTRA, _and_ NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC SOCIETY.

“=Superb Instruments=,” “=unrivaled=.”—FRANZ LISZT.

“_Their fine quality of tone is_ =in contrast= _with that of other
reed Organs_.”—OLE BULL

[Illustration]

=SUPERB NEW STYLES ARE NOW READY, SURPASSING previous productions
in musical capacity and elegance of cases=. One of these (Style
245) is in a new style of case, of Solid Black Walnut, having
panels, raised surfaces, and some other parts finished in
HIGHLY POLISHED JET, upon which are borders and graceful
designs in GOLD BRONZE. It is also studded with jet and
gold bronze beads and ornaments. With _nine stops_ it is sold for
Cash for $135. Other very beautiful new styles at corresponding
rates.

_=PRICES REDUCED=_.—In accordance with decreased cost of
manufacture, we _HAVE REDUCED CATALOGUE PRICES_ =$10= to =$50=
_EACH_ on almost all styles. FIVE-OCTAVE, DOUBLE-REED ORGANS, $99
and upwards; with _nine stops_, $108 and upwards. Sold also for
installments, or rented until rent pays for the Organ. _Dealers
often recommend and urge the sale of inferior organs, because they
get larger discounts or commissions for selling them._

NEW ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUES and REDUCED PRICE LISTS (_November,
1877_) sent free. Any one sending for these is requested to give us,
also, names of any other parties who might like catalogues. Address
MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 250 Wabash Avenue, CHICAGO; 25 Union
Square, NEW YORK; or 154 Tremont Street, BOSTON.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                “_The Leading American Newspaper._”

                  The New York Tribune for 1878.

THE TRIBUNE has long enjoyed the distinction of the
largest circulation among the best people. During the year 1878
it will spend more labor and money than ever before to deserve
that pre-eminence—which it secured, and means to retain, by
becoming the medium of the best thought, and the voice of the best
conscience of the time; by keeping abreast of the highest progress,
favoring the freest discussion, hearing all sides, appealing always
to the best intelligence and the purest morality, and refusing to
cater to the tastes of the vile or the prejudices of the ignorant.
The continued popular approval, and the constantly widening
political influence it enjoys, are the best proofs that it is still
faithful to these early secrets of its strength.

THE TRIBUNE earnestly strove for the election of President Hayes,
and it gives its heartiest support to the high purposes of his
Administration. Doubting the wisdom of methods sometimes taken
by his subordinates, and criticising with entire freedom his
occasional mistakes, it still thinks it the duty of the hour to
hold together and strengthen the party that elected and alone
sustains him. It believes the day of danger to the negro has
passed, and that of danger to the Tax-Payer has come. The Solid
South (at last in full control of every Rebel and Border State)
sees its chance to get at the National Treasury, and get back
what it lost by the war. Only 47 Northern votes are needed. If
Tammany Hall could furnish New York, then Indiana, or Connecticut
and New Jersey, would suffice. The danger is upon us, and against
it the old party of Freedom—still the party of the Churches
and the School-houses—is the only bulwark. It alone can keep
the Solid South from grasping the National Government in 1880.
It alone can save us, even now, from the threatened Democratic
abandonment of Resumption and renewed debasement of the currency
which would needlessly and most wickedly check the revival of
business, and treble the country’s burdens. In behalf of the old
party, therefore, THE TRIBUNE renews the old appeal to the National
conscience, the National honor, and the enlightened self-interest
of the Tax Payers.

THE TRIBUNE has always been a favorite with the religious
community. Its moral tone is pure. It is largely read by ministers,
and its columns almost furnish a liberal education of themselves.
It prints a complete collection of religious news, prepared for it
by the Rev. Dr. GEORGE R. CROOKS, late editor of _The Methodist_.
The Rev. Dr. JOHN HALL, the famous Pastor of the Fifth Avenue
Presbyterian Church, contributes to it, as current topics on which
he wishes to address the public arise. The Rev. Dr. HOWARD CROSBY,
the Rt. Rev. BISHOP H. B. WHIPPLE, the Rev. Dr. LEONARD BACON, and
great numbers of other clergymen, are also frequent contributors.

THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE has been for a third of a century the favorite
paper for our substantial country population. It has recently been
enlarged and greatly improved by a change of form. Each issue
consists of sixteen pages, of the form and general appearance of
_Harper’s Weekly_, but with pages considerably larger, and with
unusually large and clear type. It preserves all the old and
standard features, including a singularly varied and excellent
Agricultural Department, while it offers, among other novel and
special attractions, a graphic series of articles on _Domestic Life
and Habits Abroad_, by BAYARD TAYLOR; a few papers on _Current
Topics from the Christian Minister’s Point of View_, by the Rev.
JOHN HALL, D. D.; occasional contributions on _Political Problems
and Promises_, by GAIL HAMILTON; _A Northern Farmer on Southern
Agriculture_, by SOLON ROBINSON, and _Life and Sights in New York_,
by Veterans of the City Staff.

THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE combines many of the merits of both the
other issues, and is in some respects the best as well as the
cheapest paper issued from THE TRIBUNE office. It has also been
enlarged and changed to the new 16-page form.

                       TERMS OF THE TRIBUNE

                Postage Free in the United States.

    _Daily Tribune_:
      One year                   $10.00

    _Semi-Weekly Tribune_:
      One year                     3.00
      Five Copies, one year       14.00
      Eleven Copies, one year     28.00

    _Weekly Tribune_:
      One Copy, one year           2.00
      Five Copies, one year        8.25
      Ten Copies, one year        14.00
      Twenty Copies, one year     25.00

_Any number of copies above 20 at the same rate. Additions to Clubs
may be made at any time. Remit by P. O. Order or in Registered
Letter._

                       UNEXAMPLED PREMIUM!

             Webster’s $12 Unabridged Dictionary Free.

THE TRIBUNE makes an extraordinary offer. It will give THE WEEKLY
for five years, post paid, and a copy of the great standard
Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary (latest and best edition), in
leather binding, 1,840 quarto pages, with 3,000 engravings, _both_
for $10—being two dollars less than the cost of the Dictionary
alone at any book-store! Thus any subscriber, renewing at the
regular rate for five years, gets his favorite paper for the five
years for nothing and the great Dictionary for $2 less than its
regular price; or he gets his paper at the regular price, and the
great Dictionary for nothing—whichever way he pleases to count it.
Any old subscriber to THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE can avail himself of
the same offer by sending the regular price of that issue for five
years’ subscriptions—$15—in the same way. The papers are sent in
all cases free of postage; the Dictionary, being too heavy to go
in the mails, is forwarded at once in whatever way the subscriber
asks, at his expense. For further information and specimen copies,
address simply       _THE TRIBUNE, New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          STOVES, RANGES,

                 Furnaces, Fire-Place Heaters, &c.

         THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT AND VARIETY IN THE MARKET.

                        EXCLUSIVE MAKERS OF

                 _P. P. Stewart’s Famous Stoves_.

We continue to make a discount of twenty-five per cent. from our
prices on these well-known Cooking and Parlor Stoves, to Clergymen
and College Professors. Orders and letters in response to this
notice, addressed to our New York house, will receive prompt
attention. ☞ Special terms to =_Clergymen_= on all our Goods.☜

Send for Catalogues and Circulars to

                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.
                                       236 Water St., New York.
  TROY.                     CHICAGO.                  CLEVELAND.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                         Centennial Medals

                        TWO AWARDS IN 1876,

[Illustration]

                               FOR

                              MARKS’

                              PATENT

                  First Premium Artificial Limbs.


[Illustration]


The official report of judges and award by the United States
Centennial Commission of the International Exhibition,
Philadelphia, and also by the American Institute for 1876 and
1877, and for many previous years; all of which, together with
full description of the Limbs, recommendatory letters from eminent
surgeons and patrons, illustrations of important cases pertaining
to the superior merits of these historical, simple, substantial
and always reliable substitutes for lost Limbs, will be found in
my 112-page Pamphlet, of SPECIAL INTEREST TO DISABLED SOLDIERS AND
SEAMEN OF ALL RANKS.

[Illustration]


COPIES SENT FREE.


[Illustration]

                              ADDRESS

                           A. A. MARKS,

                      575 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

[Illustration]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS,

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

              C. Y. WEMPLE,
                    _Vice-President_.

              J. L. HALSEY,
                    _Secretary_.

              S. N. STEBBINS,
                    _Actuary_.

              H. Y. WEMPLE,
              H. B. STOKES,
                    _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.


_Besides giving news from the Institutions and Churches aided by
the Association among the Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes,
the Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western
Africa, it will be the vehicle of important views on all matters
affecting the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly
summary of current events relating to their welfare and progress._

_We publish =25,000= copies per month, and shall be glad to
increase the number indefinitely, knowing from experience that to
be informed of our work is to sympathize with, and desire to aid
it._

_The Subscription Price will be, as formerly, =Fifty Cents a
Year=_, IN ADVANCE. _We also offer to send =One Hundred
copies to one address=, for distribution in Churches or to clubs
of subscribers, for $30, with the added privilege of a Life
Membership to such person as shall be designated. The Magazine
will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons indicated
on the sixtieth page. Remittances should be sent to_ H. W.
HUBBARD, _Assist-Treas., 56 Reade Street, N. Y._


                      Advertising Department.

_A limited space in our Magazine will henceforth be devoted to
the interests of Advertisers, to whom our low rates and large
circulation give its pages special value. Our readers are of the
best and most enterprising in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitute them valued
customers in all departments of business._

_To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed to
the_ “RULES” _of the best Newspapers, requiring_ “DOUBLE RATES”
_for these_ “LUXURIES,” _our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements._

_We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise._

_Advertisements must be received by the_ TENTH _of the month,
in order to secure insertion in the following number. All
communications in relation to advertising should be addressed to_

                        _J. H. DENISON, 56 Reade Street, New York._


                 *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber’s Notes:


Spelling and punctuation were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. The punctuation changes are too numerous
to list; the others are as follows:

Ditto marks in tables were replaced by the text they represent.

“last” changed to “Last” on page 54. (Last spring)

“accomodate” changed to “accommodate” on page 60. (accommodate the
increasing numbers of students)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 02, FEBRUARY, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.