VOL. XXXII.                                             No. 4.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                           APRIL, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    THE WARDS OF THE ALMIGHTY                                  97
    DOUGLASS AND HAYES AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY                    98
    CHURCH WORK IN THE SOUTH                                   99
    FOUR NEW MISSIONARIES FOR AFRICA                          100
    THE TWO INDIAN POLICIES                                   102
    NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES—ITEMS FROM THE SCHOOLS             103
    LIGHTS AND SHADOWS                                        104
    INDIAN NOTES                                              105
    CHINESE NOTES                                             106
    OBITUARIES                                                107

  THE FREEDMEN.

    TALLADEGA COLLEGE                                         108
    NORTH CAROLINA: “A mighty still religion.”
      “Good Christians is Peaceable.”                         111
    ALABAMA: Debt-raising in a Colored Church                 112
    LOUISIANA: Revival News                                   113
    TENNESSEE: Le Moyne Normal School—A Woman’s
      Work Among Women                                        114
    KENTUCKY: Berea College                                   115
    HYMN                                                      117

  THE INDIANS.

    WASHINGTON TERRITORY: Three Indian Boys and
      Their Letters. Rev. Myron Eells, S’kokomish             118
    INDIAN WELCOME TO AN AGENT. Dr. I. L. Mahan,
      Red Cliff, Wis.                                         118

  THE CHINESE.

    THE CHINESE NEW YEAR—MOB DENUNCIATIONS—THE GREAT
      COMMISSION LESSENED—CONVERSIONS. Rev. W. C.
      Pond, San Fransisco                                     119
    LETTER FROM AH JAM                                        120

  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                         121

  RECEIPTS                                                    122

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                                126

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              A. Anderson, Printer, 28 Frankfort St.





                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    AUGUSTUS E. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXII.      APRIL, 1878.        No. 4.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


THE WARDS OF THE ALMIGHTY.

The notable event connected with the formal presentation of Mr.
Carpenter’s picture “Signing the Emancipation Proclamation,” to the
United States, was the speech of the Hon. Alexander H. Stephens. It
was a graceful and significant act, when the former Vice-President
of the Southern Confederacy spoke such words of hearty good-will
at the reception of this commemoration of its death-blow. Mr.
Stephens claims for the South a share of the honor of emancipating
the slaves, since “the freedom of that race was never finally
consummated, and could not be, until the Southern States sanctioned
the Thirteenth Amendment. They accepted the proposition for
emancipation by a voluntary uncontrolled” adoption of it.

Of the institution of slavery, as previously existing, he said:

  “If it were not the best relation for the happiness and
  welfare of both races—morally, physically, intellectually and
  politically—it was wrong and ought to have been abolished. This
  I said of it years before secession, and I repeat it still. But,
  as I have said, this is no time now to discuss those questions.

  “I have seen something of the world, and traveled somewhat, and I
  have never yet found on earth a paradise. The Southern States are
  no exception. Wherever I have been, I have been ready to exclaim
  with Burns:

      “‘But, oh! what crowds in every land
    Are wretched and forlorn!

           *       *       *       *       *

    Man’s inhumanity to man
    Makes countless thousands mourn.’

  “It was so at the South. It was so at the North. It is so yet. It
  is so in every part of the world that I have seen.”

In regard to the future relation of the races in this land, Mr.
Stephens speaks cautiously, and not unwisely. With many of the best
men of the South, he sees here a problem not easily to be solved,
and an outcome not lightly to be prophesied. He denies that any
Southern men desire a change back to the old relation of master and
slave. We quote again:

  “The question of the proper relation of the races is one of the
  most difficult problems which statesmen or philanthropists,
  legislators or jurists, ever had to solve. The former polity
  of the Southern States upon this subject is ended, and I do
  not think it inappropriate on this occasion to indulge in some
  remarks with regard to the future. Since the emancipation,
  since the former ruling race have been relieved of their direct
  heavy responsibility for the protection and welfare of their
  dependents, it has been common to speak of the colored race as
  ‘the wards of the nation.’

   “May I not say with appropriateness, in this connection, and
  due reverence, in the language of Georgia’s greatest intellect
  (Toombs), ‘They are rather the wards of the Almighty,’ committed
  now, under a new state of things, to the rulers, the law-makers,
  the law-expounders and the law-executors throughout this broad
  land, within their respective constitutional spheres, to
  take care of, and provide for, in that complicated system of
  government under which we live? I am inclined, sir, so to regard
  them, and so to speak of them—not in exceptional cases, but
  as a mass. In the providence of God, why their ancestors were
  permitted to be brought over here, it is not for us to say; but
  they have a location and habitation here, especially in the
  South, and since the changed condition of their status, though
  it was the leading cause of the late terrible conflict of arms
  between the States, yet I think I may venture to affirm there is
  not one within the circle of my acquaintance, or in the whole
  Southern country, who would now wish to see the old relation
  restored.”

Recognizing a national responsibility for the welfare and
protection of these freedmen, he closes with this ringing
exhortation:

  “This changed status creates new duties. The wardship has changed
  hands. _Men of the North and of the South, of the East and of
  the West—I care not of what party—I would to-day, on this
  commemorative occasion, urge upon every one within the sphere of
  duty and humanity, whether in public or private life, to see to
  it that there be no violation of the Divine trust._”

To which the _Independent_ gives its enthusiastic assent as follows:

  “Amen and Amen! Statesmen, patriots, Christians, listen to the
  words of the Vice-President of the Confederate Government! They
  speak the deepest feelings of the best men who fought against
  the Union. There remains now for us the greater task of making
  the freedmen worthy to enjoy and fit to adorn that freedom whose
  proclamation was signed September 22d, 1862.”

       *       *       *       *       *


DOUGLASS AND HAYES AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Surely, the colored people of the South are receiving plain talk
and good advice on all sides. Perhaps no one speaks more plainly
and penetratingly, and perhaps no one has a better right or ability
to do it, than the Hon. Frederick Douglass. At the reception of
an engraving of Mr. Carpenter’s picture, from the artist, by the
Howard University, he uttered honest words, and true. Speaking of
Mr. Stephens’ speech, in which he said it was yet to be proven
if emancipation was a blessing, Mr. Douglass replied that this
question was to be answered in the future, and meant that his race
was still on trial—on trial to see if they would be better masters
to themselves than their masters were to them—if they would rise
as early and work as late.

In regard to his own people, he said:

  “Among the faults of my people are self-indulgence, love of
  ease, and improvidence. They must learn to spend their earnings
  judiciously. _If one can’t get up, he will be helped down._ They
  have a fair chance to get up. They are on the way to Congress,
  and if the negro can stand Congress, Congress ought to stand
  the negro. The colored men have been forced up by abnormal
  conditions, but they are now coming up gradually by their own
  exertions.”

This is the soundest kind of sense. Emancipation only struck the
shackles from the slave; it had no power to lift him up. Federal
force could hold him up by the arms, but he is still as limp as
ever, for all that; his ankle bones could not immediately receive
strength from it. “They have a fair chance to get up”; but that
does not get them up of itself. The stairways of education are
laid from the first story—yes, from the sub-cellar up through the
basement, flight after flight, to the top floor. But stairways do
not turn, end for end, to tumble people up. The paths of honest
industry and thrift are open; but they are all up-hill, and never
slide their travelers down into competence and respectability.
There is a chance to get up, but the freedman must do his own
climbing, after all. If there are some to dissuade him, by assuring
him that for him these ascents lead up to nothing worth the effort,
there are others to cheer him on, and to rejoice with him in each
new advance. But even such will be compelled to admit the justice
of the saying, “If one can’t get up, he will be helped down”; he
must not obstruct the way. He ought, however, to be encouraged,
by seeing such men as Douglass up so near the top. And those who
cannot encourage him by example, because they were born on higher
levels, surely may sympathize with him, in the remembrance of
their own toil, as they ascended on the same scale, though higher.
Let there not fail him, while he fails not to strive, cheers from
above, cheers from below, cheers from all around him, and a hand,
too, now and then, for him to grasp and get a friendly pull. The
stair builders must be in the way to help a little, just when heart
and strength are failing.

President Hayes spoke, too, on the same occasion, and in much the
same line. Read this President’s Message:

  “The wisdom, the righteousness, and the grandeur of Abraham
  Lincoln’s act of emancipation, no man will deny. That it has
  conferred infinite blessings on our country, on both races, and
  on the world, very few will question. This estimate of the act,
  and of its results, will not be changed by the good conduct or
  the bad conduct of either race. But it is said that the question
  of the blessing conferred on the colored race depends on their
  conduct. What they most need is, what Burns calls ‘the glorious
  privilege of being independent.’ What this requires is, the
  willingness to labor, and the prudence and self-denial to save
  the fruits of labor. My young colored friends, let this, then, be
  among your good resolutions: I will work, and I will save, to the
  end that I may become independent.”

That is good advice for any poor man, black or white. This picture
of the signing of the Emancipation Act can commemorate all of which
it is capable, only if the privilege of freedom be embraced as the
opportunity of manly toil, and the occasion of all patient effort
to become the equal of other men, not in external advantages and
rights half so much as in capacity and character.

This is what we are working for among our colored brethren, and
especially among the youth, and with a measure of success which
makes us full of hope for their future and ours. We must be patient
to hold out the chances, and keep open the opportunities, as well
as they to toil and strive to use them. Most of all do we feel that
when we have succeeded in leading them to an intelligent Christian
experience, we have awakened in them the highest motive of which
the human mind is capable, and brought them under the most powerful
stimulus to the worthiest of all ambitions—to fit themselves, not
for high stations, but for useful work.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHURCH WORK IN THE SOUTH.

Is the A. M. A. devoting a proper share of its work to the
extension of Congregational Churches in the South? The question is
a fair one, and deserves a frank answer. But the answer, to be just
to all interests concerned, must take a broad view of the whole
subject. The paramount duty of the nation, and especially of the
churches, to the emancipated slaves, is to fit them for their new
position as citizens, and their true destiny as men and Christians
in America, and as missionaries to Africa. Anything short of
this is less than our whole duty. The blacks are all religious
in their way, and nearly all are connected with churches. In the
matter of outward profession and inward emotion, the _quantity_
is all that could be asked. It is in the _quality_ alone that a
change is needed. No Christian Church can discharge its duty to
them by merely denominationalizing them into its ranks, leaving
the essentials of character and Christian manhood unchanged. The
Congregational Churches of this country certainly will not be
satisfied with this low aim.

But these Congregational Churches are, by the nature of the
case, compelled to work in methods differing from those of
other denominations. Methodists, Baptists, and, to some
extent, Presbyterians and Episcopalians, pre-occupy the ground.
Congregationalists were almost unknown among the blacks before
the war, and their efforts must naturally meet with sectarian
prejudice, somewhat in proportion to the ignorance of the people.
But, nevertheless, Congregationalism has a great responsibility
in regard to this people, in laying foundations on which to build
the essentials of character in civil and Christian life. It is
with this aim that the Association has, from the beginning, sought
to do its work—moving, with the progress of the colored people,
from the common-school to the more effective normal, collegiate
and theological teaching. The wisdom of its efforts is attested by
the commendations of those, both in the South and North, who are
most competent to judge, and also by the more convincing fact, that
it can point to 100,000 scholars in schools taught by its former
pupils, to the education it has given to many colored ministers,
and to the missionaries, born in slavery, trained in its schools,
and now sent to Africa.

The church work must for a time, at least, grow out of, and keep
pace with, this Christian teaching, which prepares the people
to appreciate, and the minister to preach, a pure Gospel and a
practical morality. It were easy to scatter the seeds in a thin
and shallow soil, and gather a harvest that would wither while
it was gathering. A writer in one of the religious papers, who
censures the Association, makes this great boast, followed by a
frank confession: “With half of three millions of dollars I can
Congregationalize every negro in the South; _but, of course, the
work would not be permanent_.” The italics in this quotation are
ours, for we wish to call attention to the acknowledgment, and to
say that this transient work is precisely what the Association does
not attempt. It will not take the money of its patrons to start
ephemeral growths. It prefers, and we are sure its intelligent
friends will prefer, that it should plow deep, harrow thoroughly,
and sow “wholly a right seed,” that the gatherings may be an
hundred fold for the garner of the Master.

An effort is made to stir up Congregationalists to plant _white_
churches in the South. The project is not new, but its results
thus far have not been encouraging. Soon after the war, the Home
Missionary Society and the Congregational Union invested large
moneys in establishing such churches there, and we suppose that
their experience will lead them to ask for very clear evidence of
more favorable auspices before they will wish to renew the attempt.
But if it were renewed, it would only be an exaggeration of the
difficulties at the West, where feeble rival churches, in poor and
small communities, struggle against inevitable death. For, in the
South, we should have two feeble Congregational churches, the one
white and the other black, in still poorer and smaller places. And
more than all that, the A. M. A. has started its church work on the
only true Gospel basis, founding churches without distinction of
color. Its churches are not black by its ordination, and are only
made nearly so by the caste prejudice of the whites. It ought to
be understood that the progress of any people in civilization and
Christianity is a growth, taking form and bearing fruit according
to soil and climate, and that it cannot be produced to order, or at
the behest of mere theorists.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOUR NEW MISSIONARIES FOR AFRICA.

Many an experiment has failed because entered upon half-heartedly,
and tried on too small a scale to succeed. The height of wisdom
is to find the true line on which caution and courage meet. It
has been the purpose of the Association to do its part in the
evangelization of Africa, by missionaries of African descent, and
to begin in that effort so soon as our schools should begin to
furnish those qualified for such important work.

Last fall, when, after the return of Mr. Billheimer and the death
of Barnabas Root, the Mendi Mission needed rëinforcement, the new
policy was begun by sending Messrs. Snelson, James and White to
the field. They arrived in due time, and entered at once heartily
upon their work. They have had some slight illnesses—almost, if
not quite all of them having suffered somewhat in the process of
acclimation—but at last accounts all were well again. If we are
fully informed, they have endured less inconvenience from this
cause than we anticipated.

But the mission was still weak—Bro. Snelson the only minister. Two
of the white missionary helpers, who had been in the field before,
soon withdrew in impaired health. It was deemed wise, and, indeed,
indispensable, for the successful prosecution of the work, that the
ranks should be at once filled. It was decided to send three single
men, or better, if possible, two married men with their wives. A
letter was written to Fisk University, stating the need, which was
read without comment, at prayers, Feb. 8th.

God’s Spirit took the message to the heart of Andrew E. Jackson,
and sent it by him to Albert Miller, and through them to Ella M.
Hildridge and Ada J. Roberts (also students at Fisk), to whom they
were respectively engaged, and three days later the four offered
themselves willingly for this far-off field. The faculty recognized
at once their fitness for the work; they were among the best and
brightest and most advanced of the students in their respective
departments. The four met daily for prayer together, and their
convictions and purposes were daily strengthened. The Executive
Committee accepted them promptly, and felt it necessary to press
their speedy departure, that they might reach the west coast of
Africa before the wet season should set in, when the conditions for
their acclimature would be less favorable than earlier.

On Saturday of that week a council was convened, which, on the
following day, Sunday, Feb. 17th, ordained the two young men to
the Gospel ministry, they having each had considerable experience
in preaching. A farewell meeting of the students was also held on
the same day, full of heartiness and fervor, at which the following
resolution was unanimously adopted:

  “In consideration of the call of God to our brethren, to labor in
  Africa, and in consideration of the many hours spent together in
  Christian communion,

  “_Resolved_, That we devote a portion of each Sabbath morning
  to prayer especially for them in their labors on the African
  shores, that they may be abundantly blessed, both spiritually and
  physically, and enabled to do good work for the Master.”

We have no fear of a lack of missionary zeal henceforth in Fisk
University. But the manifestation of interest in this event was not
confined within its walls. All Nashville seemed aglow with friendly
enthusiasm. Dr. Rand, of the First Cumberland Presbyterian Church,
invited Miller into his pulpit, at the close of the Sunday morning
service, to address the congregation, which took up a liberal
collection for the outfit of the young missionaries. Their ages
range from twenty-one to twenty-seven. The Theological students
of Vanderbilt University invited them to an interview on Sunday
afternoon, at which they were most kindly received; and after
prayers together, and conversation, were the recipients of presents
of books and money.

The next day, the double marriage was solemnized by Professors
Bennett and Spence, and later, a general farewell meeting was held
in St. John’s Chapel. The large building was crowded, and many went
away unable to find entrance. Prominent ministers from the city
and vicinity, representing the leading denominations of Christian
churches, were present. The tone of the meeting was congratulatory
and hopeful, as befitted the sending forth of these soldiers of the
Cross.

At their leaving Nashville by the evening train, an immense crowd
gathered in and about the depot to see them off. A day or two only
was spent in New York, to make necessary purchases, and receive
instructions from the Secretary. On Thursday afternoon, a few
members of the Executive Committee, and representatives of the
religious press, held an informal interview with them. They each
told the story of their lives, of their struggles to acquire an
education, and of their religious experiences. All were deeply
impressed with the sincerity of their devotion, and with their
modesty and good sense as well.

On Saturday, the 23d of February, they sailed for England, where
they arrived March 3d. By the 20th they were expected to reach
Freetown, and a few days later, their new home.

We have thus fairly launched on the new experiment of African
evangelization by men and women of African descent, who have come
through American slavery to freedom. The nine adults together in
the field are enough to support each other’s courage and hold up
each other’s hands. But the field is far away; the perils of it are
peculiar; the path is a new one to these young men and women. We
trust in them with great confidence. But in the complications and
unforeseen emergencies which always may arise in a foreign field,
we feel that they need, more than most missionaries even, the
constant remembrances, in prayer, of the thousands of the friends
of Africa in our land and in Great Britain. We repeat most urgently
their parting request—“Brethren, pray for us.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TWO INDIAN POLICIES.

Two radically different views have prevailed in this country from
the outset in regard to the treatment of the Indians—the one
represented by the word civilization, and the other by the word
extermination. The first of these was entertained by the Pilgrim
Fathers, and by the founder of Pennsylvania, and was carried out
apostolically by John Eliot, David Brainard, and others, as well
as by successful Indian missions of later date. But the effort
has been constantly obstructed by the hostilities between the
Indians and the white men, rendering the latter indisposed to
send the Gospel, and the former to receive it. The only decided
and comprehensive effort by the general Government, for the
civilization of the Indians, is the peace policy inaugurated by
General Grant, the results of which, in spite of all obstacles and
opposition, have been unmistakably and increasingly advantageous.
(1) As a class, the agents selected by the religious societies have
been far more trustworthy and efficient than their predecessors,
being themselves honest in their dealings with the Indian, and
defending them from the frauds of ring speculators, and the
temptations of the liquor dealers. (2) The progress of the Indians
in their industrial, educational and moral advancement has been
very marked, as is shown by a tabulated and comparative statement
of facts, prepared by the Board of Indian Commissioners, and
recently published. (3) The agents—representing all denominations,
and, therefore, not committing the government to sectarianism—have
most directly and heartily co-operated with the religious efforts
of the different churches for the evangelization of the Indians.
As the only possibility of civilizing the Indians lies in their
Christian enlightenment, the work of the religious societies, under
the fostering care of the government, gives the highest promise of
success.

On the other hand, the policy of extermination has been tried from
the beginning. In the earlier days the struggle resembled the
border wars between England and Scotland, being mere temporary
raids, carried on with little expense. But modern warfare puts
another aspect on this contest with the Indians, making it vastly
more costly in men and money. It is believed that not a single
Indian has been killed by our army, at less than an average expense
of a million of dollars, and of the lives of one or more white men.
The War Department and the army are the natural representatives of
this policy, and if the Indians are transferred to their care, the
peace policy will be overthrown, and we fear that of extermination
substituted in its place. This apprehension involves no reflection
on the humanity of the officers and soldiers of the army, but the
inference is justified by the history of the past, and by the
fact that the business of an army is to destroy, and not to give
instruction.

Much significancy is added to this question by the recent tables of
Major Clark, showing that the Indians are not decreasing in number.
They are here, and mean to stay. We cannot exterminate them, and
we ought, as a Christian people, to face manfully the other and
grander alternative of making them good citizens and sharers in the
blessings of the Gospel.

One other thing should not be forgotten. This nation long oppressed
the black man, and the dread penalty came at length, whose
mementoes are in a million of soldiers’ graves, in broken homes and
hearts, North and South, and in the disturbance of all commercial
and industrial interests, under which the whole land still
trembles. If we persevere in our wrongs and neglects of the red
man, have we any hope that we shall escape similar retributions?
God still reigns!

       *       *       *       *       *


NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES.

HAMPTON, VA.—“Five students united with the church by profession,
the first Sabbath in March. Others were advised to wait until they
had opportunity to prove themselves Christians by their Christian
works. There seems to be a continual work of grace extending
noiselessly and unobtrusively from heart to heart, and adding one
after another to the trophies of its victorious power.”

MCLEANSVILLE, N. C.—Miss Douglass writes: “My Bible-class still
continues large. My room is crowded every Sabbath. After the class
was dismissed last night one young man, who wishes to fit himself
for a missionary, said, ‘I have taken a new resolution to be more
devoted than ever.’ He must soon leave school to earn more money. I
wish he could go on now.”

SAVANNAH, GA.—Mr. Markham writes: “Our congregation is increasing
every week. God is with us. This is as clear as a sunbeam. I feel
His special aid. Two united with our church yesterday (March 3).
I am to go to Ogeechee next Sabbath. Nine will unite there. The
Sabbath-school at East Savannah is increasing. More than 100 are
now on the list.”

MACON, GA.—“Yesterday (Feb. 10,) was a happy day to the Macon
church. Four children baptized, and five adults received into
membership. Of these, four are new converts—others will come
forward next month. Our daily prayer-meetings are continued. The
church is aroused to more activity, and we look for yet better
things.”

WOODVILLE, GA.—“Six united with the church March 2d. Sunday-school
numbers nearly 100. Prayer-meetings are being held every evening.
The day-school has 92 scholars enrolled.”

NEW ORLEANS, LA.—“The very interesting religious work still
continues. As many as fifty have been converted. Some of the very
hopeful cases are, or have been, nominal Catholics: others of the
same class are interested.”

BEREA, KY.—“An interesting revival in progress—some twenty
conversions.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE SCHOOLS.

SAVANNAH, GA.—The Beach Institute in this city was destroyed by
fire on the morning of Feb. 20th. The fire began in a barn on the
premises in some mysterious way, and was speedily communicated to
the Institute building. The Teachers’ Home adjoining was saved,
the wall toward it standing. Part of the school furniture was also
saved. The building had, for a few years past, been rented to the
city school-board for a colored school. Notice had been given them
that the Association would require the building for its own use
next fall. The insurance money will replace the building, and a
school under the Association’s care will be opened as previously
planned.

MARIETTA, GA.—“Our school opened for the first time Oct. 15th,
1877. The local prejudice was so great that only four scholars
attended. A change in the feeling has taken place, and the school
has, up to this time, enrolled 88 pupils. The colored people are
becoming eager to embrace their privileges. The children are
improving in knowledge and in care for themselves. The prospect is
full of encouragement.”

FORSYTH, GA.—On February 1st, the school building of the colored
people of Forsyth was dedicated and set apart for the work
for which it was intended. For months these people have been
struggling to raise money to build the house. They had, as a
fund to start with, about two hundred dollars, which the colored
Baptist Church had collected. Subscription lists were opened and
the colored people and their white friends contributed as they
could. Contrary to the expectation of many, their success was
such that the building was framed and rapidly pushed forward. It
is not yet complete, lacking plastering, but is quite comfortable
nevertheless. The teacher, W. F. Jackson, a graduate of the Atlanta
University, has been indefatigable and untiring in his efforts to
press this enterprise to completion. Rev. E. A. Ware, President of
the Atlanta University, made the dedicatory address.

       *       *       *       *       *


LIGHTS AND SHADOWS.

—A Southern man, a member of the Presbyterian Church, and a book
agent for many years, reports that in the last two years he has
taken 280 orders from the colored people of Charleston for valuable
books, in many cases trusting them when cash payments could not be
made, and has not lost fifteen dollars.

—A gentleman in Augusta, Ga., tells us he has sold over two
hundred house lots to colored people, who have paid for them in
small instalments, since the war.

—The African Methodists have been holding an educational
convention in Georgia, Bishop Campbell presiding. From the
statements made by the Bishop and by Presiding Elder Brown, we
learn that wonderful progress in education has been made during the
last ten years. Ten years ago, in the Atlantic District, there was
but one man capable of keeping a minute of the transactions, “and
then it had to be read while it was hot, for if it ever cooled down
it could never be read again.” Now there is scarcely a preacher
who, besides reading and writing, has not pursued to some extent
the course of studies prescribed to candidates for the ministry.

—It is pleasant to note how the freedmen are rising to the dignity
of self-support in their religious, as well as their material
interests. A missionary of the American Sunday-school Union, in
North Carolina, having recently organized three new Sunday-schools
among freedmen, writes, that at the close of one of his meetings
“an aged negro, of nearly seventy years, came forward with his
pennies to buy a primer for his grandson. His example was followed
until about two hundred pennies were piled upon the desk—the first
contribution of these poor but willing self-helpers.”

—In seven years the students of Talladega College alone have
organized Sunday-schools in which have been taught over 20,000
scholars.

—Dr. Sears, agent of the Peabody Fund, says that in all the States
where there has been a re-action against education, it has been
followed by a return to better measures than ever. Thus, through
local actions and re-actions, the general forward movement is
assured.

—One morning, in our school in Augusta, on calling for the First
Commandment with Promise, a little girl, hardly six years old,
said: “Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in
the land of liberty.” That wasn’t very bad.

—A colored Tennesseean says: “When I want to hear preaching, I go
to the Congregational Church; when I want to have a good time I go
to these other places.”

—One of our faithful ministers in Georgia grieves over a recent
restoration to his pulpit of a neighboring colored pastor. He
says the white people wanted it, because (1) the man’s politics
suit them, (2) he is ignorant, and (3) he gets drunk. The colored
members of his church know nothing of Bible religion, and are like
their priest. On a recent Communion Sunday seven of them were seen
returning to their homes drunk—three just able to stagger on, and
four “being hauled out in a cart, not able to sit up.” The writer
says such churches cannot save these people, and mere secular
instruction will not cure such evils. The Christian school is the
only hope.

—In another case, in the same State, a minister, going into a
church shortly after the close of a communion service, found the
deacons and a few of the members “eating and drinking and carrying
on as if they were in a bar-room.” Being expostulated with, they
said they did not feel at liberty to throw any of the bread and
wine away. It was evidently, however, a renewal of the old excesses
for which Paul so sharply rebuked the Church at Corinth.

—A woman in one of the old-style churches, not far from one of
our best schools, “came through with religion” one night, and in
telling her wonderful “experience,” said she went to heaven, and
from there she saw this whole school “marching down to hell with
their Bibles in their hands.”

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIAN NOTES.

—The House Committee on Indian Affairs has reported in favor
of the transfer of the Indian Bureau from the Interior to the
War Department. Its grounds are (1) the failure of the attempts
to civilize; (2) the divided responsibility between Secretary
and Commissioner—between civil and military officers; (3) the
corruption of the present Indian service; (4) the economy of the
change, which will furnish employment for retired and idle army
officers who receive pay.

—Precisely what civilizing agencies would be brought to bear upon
these people under the War Department is not stated in the report.
Whether the school and the church would be allowed, or only the
stockade and the garrison; whether bullets should take the place of
books, and guns of Gospel. This does not follow of necessity, only
from the despairing tone in regard to the attempts to civilize.

—We beg our readers to notice carefully what class of men, as a
whole, sustain and desire the change to the War Department, and
what sort of men oppose it. There is great significance in such
discriminations.

—The recent Sioux war cost $2,313,531 in money, and 283 men
killed, among whom was the gallant Custer and his staff, and 125
wounded.

—_Sunday Afternoon_ says: “It costs the United States about $1,700
a year to support a soldier fighting the Indians. It costs the
American Board about half as much to support a missionary preaching
to them. Would it not be cheaper to send more missionaries and
fewer soldiers?”

—Hon. A. C. Barstow, one of the Indian Commissioners, and a man
thoroughly conversant with the whole subject of Indian affairs,
gives the following opinion regarding this important branch of our
Civil Service and the men who control it. He says:

  “The present Commissioner of Indian Affairs is an able man, of
  large business experience, and, moreover, (as chairman of the
  Purchasing Committee of the Board of Indian Commissioners for
  two or three years, and up to within a few months of entering
  this office), of large experience in Indian affairs. There is no
  man in the country whom corrupt contractors have more learned to
  fear and to hate; and, in my opinion, they are the men who are
  fanning this flame of excitement, and who are exerting all their
  influence to turn the administration of Indian affairs over to
  the War Department. They are pinched by the present policy, and
  desire change. They cannot suffer by this or any change, and may
  be benefited—hence, their noisy zeal. I am sorry that any good
  man has for a moment been led to believe that the Secretary of
  the Interior is open to the influence of this class of men. I
  think the public may safely quiet their fears upon this point.
  Whatever else may be said of him, he is not a ‘bird of that
  feather.’ From what I have seen, I think the public may look for
  an administration of his department not only honest but able, and
  may also be assured that the policy of President Hayes toward the
  Indians will be eminently humane and Christian.”

—The educational work among the Indians may be summed up from
the Commissioner’s report for 1877, as follows: There are 251,000
Indians, and 28,000 half-breeds, exclusive of Alaska. Among them
are 330 schools, of which 60 are boarding-schools, with 437
teachers; and 11,515 pupils have attended at least one mouth.
Largest monthly average, 4,774; average for the year, 3,598;
expense to the government, $255,379; to Tribal funds, $81,989; to
the religious societies, $33,950; in all, $371,318; 40,397, of whom
23,196 are adults, can read; 1,206 learned to read last year.

—The religious items, drawn from the same source, show 207 church
buildings on the reservations; 126 missionaries, not included
among teachers; expended by religious societies, $36,164; 27,215
are members of the mission churches of all denominations. We
question whether the $36,000 reported as expended by the religious
societies, represents, even approximately, the full amount given
from this source, since the A. B. C. F. M. and the Presbyterian
Board, together, expend annually nearly this amount. We claim that,
considering all the disadvantages of his condition, and the fewness
of the laborers, the results are gratifying and hopeful.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE NOTES.

—The House Committee on Education and Labor made a report,
February 25th, on the Chinese question, of which we give the
following abstract: Since the first treaty with China, in July,
1844, the migration has been on the steady increase for the last
twenty years—from 1855 to 1859, it was 4,530; 1860 to 1864, it
was 6,600; from 1865 to 1870, it was 9,311; from 1871 to 1874, it
was 13,000. —— The lowest estimate of Chinamen in California is
150,000. From the density of population in China, and the lowness
of wages, from their migratory disposition, and the attractions
of our congenial climate, high wages and liberal government, and
the cheapness and safety of the voyage hither, an increasing
rate of immigration is prophesied. —— While the Chinaman is
desirable merely as a laborer, he has neither home, self-respect,
nor underclothes, and lives on rice, tea and dried fish. He has
low ideas of religion, labor, women and virtue. —— He does not
assimilate with the American people, and is unchanged by contact.
He does not mean to stay, and will not even contribute his dead
body to our national welfare. He cannot be made into a soldier, or
even a juryman. —— He is proud of Confucius, and vainly boasts of
China as the central nation of the world. He is, and will remain,
distinct “in color, size, features, dress, language, customs,
habits and social peculiarities.”

The joint resolution relative to Chinese immigration is as follows:

“_Whereas_, It appears that the great majority of Chinese
immigrants are unwilling to conform to our institutions, to become
permanent residents of our country, and accept rights and assume
responsibilities of citizenship; and,

”_Whereas_, They have indicated no capacity to assimilate with our
people; therefore,

“_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested
to open correspondence immediately with the Governments of China
and Great Britain, with the view of securing a change or abrogation
of all stipulations in existing treaties which permit unlimited
immigration of Chinese to the United States.”

—Cheap labor, whether by machine or by man-power, has always been
resisted by those whom it has displaced. But it always pushes
the more intelligent laborers up and not down. It has been so in
California. Men are now foremen who were only fruit-pickers, and
engineers who were only miners before Chinese labor came in.

—Race unions, to keep prices of labor up, and to put competition
down, are no better than other unions for these purposes. All such
combinations are both short-sighted and selfish.

—In the San Francisco _Bulletin_, we find the following
schedule of labor rates in that city: Carpenters, from $3 to
$3.50 a day; bricklayers, $4 to $5; painters, $3; plasterers,
$3.50; hod-carriers,$3; stone-cutters, $4; machinists, $3 to $4;
brass-founders, $4.50; common laborers, $2; woolen mills, $2.50 to
$3.50; domestics, $25 to $30 a month—not more than two children
allowed in an employer’s family at that. It can be seen at a glance
that these wages are twice those paid in the Eastern States for
corresponding work. Does Chinese competition keep these prices up,
or does California need less homeopathic doses of “China” to bring
her prices somewhere near the level of her sister States?

—By the statistics of the arrivals and departures for 1877, it
appears that 9,906 passengers arrived from China and Japan, and
7,852 returned, showing an excess of 2,054 arrivals, not all of
whom, indeed, were Mongolians; while the deaths of Chinese exceeded
2,054. It would seem that our Christian statesmen of San Francisco
might repress their morbid solicitude, in view of these encouraging
facts.

       *       *       *       *       *

We trust our readers will notice carefully the accounts of our
various educational institutions as they appear in order from
month to month. These articles are intended to give a view of
the peculiar work, and appliances for work, of these schools and
colleges. Next month, we expect to publish an article on Tougaloo
University, Mississippi; and, in June, one on Straight University,
Louisiana. Others will follow in such order as their special
circumstances may determine.

       *       *       *       *       *

We find that we are at liberty to say to our readers, that the
touching little poem entitled “Christ in the Person of the Poor,”
which appeared in our February MISSIONARY, was from the pen of the
Rev. ELI CORWIN, D. D., of Jacksonville, Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *


OBITUARIES.

The heroes of the anti-slavery struggle are passing away. The
Tappans, Joshua Leavitt and others finished their course in the
last few years, and now we record the death of two others of their
compeers.

REV. WM. GOODELL was born in Chenango County, N. Y., Oct. 25th,
1792. In his earlier years he acquired a practical knowledge of
business affairs, but it was as a thinker, writer and reformer
that he has made his mark in the world. He will be remembered
as an editor and author, devoted earnestly and successfully to
promoting reform in many directions, but especially in relation to
intemperance and slavery. Mr. Goodell was present at the Convention
in Albany, N. Y., at which this Association was formed, and took
a prominent and effective part in its proceedings, preparing and
reporting the elaborate address to the Christian public, which
was adopted and sent forth as embodying the views on which the
Convention based the new organization. From that time to the close
of his life, his sympathy for our work was constant and earnest.

REV. J. S. GREEN died at his home in Makawao, Sandwich Islands,
Jan. 5th, 1878, in the 82d year of his age. Mr. Green went out
as a missionary to the Sandwich Islands in 1828, in company
with Andrews, Gulick and others, and shared in effecting the
wonderful transformation in those Islands. In 1842 Mr. Green
resigned his connection with the American Board, and from that
time until his death was a pastor, depending for his support upon
his own labor and the contributions of his people. His strong
anti-slavery sympathies led him to seek a connection, yet without
salary, with the Union Missionary Society and subsequently with
this Association, when that Society was merged into it. His name
appeared for years in our list of foreign missionaries, and his
reports were full and interesting. His ready pen, not satisfied
with mere reports, was prolific in contributions on missionary
subjects, and earnest in its denunciations of the evils of slavery
in his native land. He was a man of deep and earnest piety, and his
memory will be cherished in the warm regard of those who knew his
worth and his useful career.

DEATH OF TEACHERS.

The painful intelligence has reached us of the death, on February
17th, of typhoid fever, after a four weeks’ illness, of Mr.
MARMADUKE C. KIMBER, of Germantown, Pa., aged nearly twenty-four
years. The son of one of the valued friends and trustees of Hampton
Institute, Mr. Kimber, when just out of college in 1872, gave his
services to the school for two years as a volunteer teacher. Since
then he has been professor in a Western college, and after a year
of travel in Europe, he took charge of the Friends’ Academy in
Germantown, which position he held at the time of his death. He is
remembered with sincerest esteem by the officers of the school and
teachers who were associated with him at Hampton, and the students
who were under his instruction.—_Southern Workman._

MRS. ALICIA S. (BLOOD) BROWN died at Leavenworth, Kansas, on the
26th of February. Mrs. Brown was for some years a teacher under
this Association at Monticello, Florida, and her many friends there
will remember the faithful instruction she gave and the kindnesses
she bestowed. Her illness was long and severe, but when she did
_not_ look for the Messenger, he came and took her away. In the
midst of her sufferings, she could cheerfully say, that she wanted
to “bear and suffer all His will.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.


       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

REV. E. P. LORD, PRESIDENT.

Almost in the very centre of Alabama, the great Allegheny range
makes a last and only partially successful effort at rearing
mountains, before losing itself in the low, flat _black belt_. Thus
the pure and exhilarating atmosphere of more Northern latitudes
is brought to the very border of the almost tropical country that
belts the Gulf. Overlooking the rich, populous, and somewhat
unwholesome low-lands, breathing the pure mountain air, is situated
Talladega, seeming to have been Providentially placed as a city
of refuge for the colored people of Alabama. The beauty of the
surrounding landscape is a perpetual inspiration to teachers and
students. The location of the college, in a quiet country village
of two thousand inhabitants, invites the young people from the
cities, and less favored localities, to an atmosphere as pure and
healthful morally as it is physically.

But one other Southern State, if any, has so large a colored
population as Alabama. A half million are now in the State, and the
number is continually increasing. Of these, three-fifths cannot
read. There are about two hundred thousand children of school age,
and only one in ten of these was in school last year. Eighty-three
cents only was expended upon the education of each of those who did
attend. One would hardly judge that this could afford a _liberal_
education.

In a State needing moral and educational efforts so greatly, the
A. M. A. has opened schools and organized churches in Mobile,
Montgomery, Selma, Marion, Athens, and a few other places. In 1870
the Association established Talladega College, as the key-stone of
the arch, or the centre of its system of educational and religious
work in Alabama. The college is closely connected with the other
points of the Association’s work in this State by means of the
intimate social relations between the faculty of the college and
the workers in those places.

The various departments designated by the name _Talladega College_,
are so closely interwoven that any distinct mention of the workings
of one must contain facts closely related to the others. For
convenience I will speak of (1) the Literary Department; (2) the
Industrial Department; (3) the Theological Department; (4) the
Church Work.

The Literary Department.

This includes the various grades, from the elementary to the
higher Normal course, the latter requiring three years for its
completion. The studies pursued include in mathematics, University
Algebra and Geometry; in science, Physical Geography, Physiology,
Natural Philosophy and Astronomy, English Literature, Mental and
Moral Philosophy, etc., with the theory and practice of teaching.
Its students have accomplished much in teaching throughout the
State. In seven years, according to their reports to the principal,
these students have taught about five hundred day-schools, with
fifteen thousand scholars. At the same time they have organized
Sabbath-schools, and taught in them over twenty thousand scholars.
These numbers fairly represent the power these young people have
exerted for the moral and intellectual elevation of their people in
this and other States. There are in the department seventy pupils.
Next year a large number will be admitted from the intermediate
grade, which now numbers one hundred, though, in our present
poverty, it has had but one teacher the greater part of the year.

There are in attendance this year two hundred and fifty students, a
much larger number than ever before, and there is every indication
of an increase the coming year. During the last vacation the
principal and the music teacher, with a company of students,
visited many of the larger places of the State, lecturing, giving
concerts, and stirring up the people generally on the subject of
education. The Christian zeal and deportment of the students, and
the information diffused, awakened a desire for education, and a
public sentiment in favor of Talladega College never before known.
The last commencement exhibited and also increased the new love
and enthusiasm for the college. They gathered from the country for
twenty miles around, on foot, on mules, in ox-carts and wagons.
All the examinations were largely attended; many who could not
read taking the liveliest interest in “two unknown quantities,”
and experiments in philosophy. An instructive address by Rev. Dr.
Brown, of Newark, N. J., the prize declamations and essays by
fourteen of the Normal students, the graduating exercises of three
young men from the Theological Department, the concert by the
Musical Union, and other interesting exercises, furnished the only
means for comprehending a liberal education, which hundreds of the
great crowds in attendance had ever enjoyed.

The students, also, are taking a personal pride in bringing back
the best scholars from their summer schools. One young man, having
failed to collect any funds from his summer school in Georgia,
started with his most advanced pupil on foot, their satchels upon
their backs. Walking, riding in chance carts, and helped on by
railroad conductors, who were evidently influenced to surprising
kindness by the spirit of the Master, they reached this place.
Incited by the enthusiasm of this young man, three more have
followed him from his distant field of labor. From Mississippi,
another young man brought back two. They walked about one hundred
miles, and are now paying their way in school by labor on the
college farm.

Both have begun earnest Christian lives, and are soon to unite with
the church.

All the young men of the college are organized into a battalion of
cadets for physical culture. Their government is conducted by means
of this organization, its officers being held responsible for the
conduct of the members, and being expected to set an example of
manliness and courteous deportment. We find this to be one of the
most potent factors of their moral as well as physical development.

Industrial Department.

At the close of the last school year, the Industrial Department
was decided upon. One of the professors, with the approval of
the Association, immediately proceeded to lay the matter before
friends in the North; and the teachers gathered from all sources
whatever they could secure, with which to begin the work. About
three thousand dollars have already been received, and work in the
following branches begun:

A printing press was secured, with which to bring our wants before
the people of the North, and our influence to bear upon the
intelligent colored people. Six students have learned a useful
trade, and by its means are paying their way in school. In August
they began the publication of the _Southern Sentinel_, a small
eight-page paper, of which five hundred copies are issued monthly.
Should any one doubt its usefulness, a year’s subscription (one
dollar) would be an excellent test. Six hundred copies of the
Sabbath-school Lesson papers, prepared with reference to the
peculiar needs of our Sabbath-schools, are also printed, together
with a large quantity of other matter.

Work upon the farm was begun in September. In October one hundred
and sixty acres were bought, in addition to the thirty acres
already owned by the college. The citizens of the place, both white
and colored, have become deeply interested in the success of the
enterprise. Gifts of all kinds, from a little girl’s pet chicken,
to a fine eighteen dollar plow from a merchant of the town, and
from an old auntie’s half-peck of potatoes to a fine cow and calf
from one of the deacons of the college church, and varying in
amounts from five cents to fifty dollars, have been given. Our most
intelligent citizens say that no other enterprise for the benefit
of the colored people has ever aroused so much interest among them
as the Agricultural Department.

In the Girls’ Industrial School, sixteen young women are earning,
wholly or in part, their board and tuition; while, at the same
time, learning ways and methods which will make hundreds of homes
brighter and happier.

In mechanical work, five hundred dollars’ worth of building and
repairing has been done, under the direction of an excellent
carpenter.

In these different departments of labor, the students have already
received about fifteen hundred dollars as wages, in board and
tuition.

Theological Department.

If the colored people are to be elevated, in no class is education
more necessary than in the ministry. One of the leading Baptist
ministers in the State, being asked how many of the young ministers
educated in their schools were now in the ministry in this State,
replied “One, and we expect soon another.” Yet this church includes
by far the largest number of the colored people. To meet this
great want, a Theological Department was organized in connection
with the college in 1872. Four young men constituted the first
class, three of whom are now in the ministry. The number of pupils
last year was twenty-seven; at present it is nineteen. The decrease
is owing to the requirement of a higher standard in literary
training. The colored people are naturally theologians and Bible
students. Three distinct lines of study are pursued, all of which
have special reference to practical, Christian work. (1) To make
the pupils familiar with the facts of the Bible. (2) To establish
them in a system of Christian theology. (3) To acquaint them with
the best methods of Christian work. Twenty-five Sabbath-schools are
carried on by the students. Six of these have grown into churches,
the young men acting as their pastors. Sabbath-school Conventions,
and various other kinds of Christian work, are conducted by the
students, often assisted by teachers from the college. This
department has a library of over eight hundred volumes.

Church Work.

We doubt if anywhere else in the South the Church and School are
both so strong and so closely united as here. The Congregational
Church of Talladega was organized in 1868. There are at present
one hundred and forty-nine members, with a Sabbath-school of three
hundred. Of course the larger part are students, but a goodly
number are citizens, heads of families, having good homes, and
being comparatively prosperous. Not only the members of this
church, but of the other churches in the village, are thoroughly
interested in whatever affects the college. In all the church
services citizens and students mingle, with always a sprinkling
of members from other churches. In the social gatherings of the
students, the members of the church are always welcomed, and
enter heartily into their pleasures. Thus the college is anchored
by means of the church in the hearts of the people themselves.
Many colleges are held in their present location by the force of
gravity, or by the adhesive force of brick and mortar alone; but
Talladega College, were her buildings burned to the ground, or
blown aloft into the air, would remain firmly fixed in the hearts
and affections of the people.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

“A mighty still religion.” “Good Christians is Peaceable.”

MISS MARTHA MOORE, WILMINGTON.

With a larger working force this year, we are able to do more
outside work, and we find in our visits among the people plenty
of poverty, misery and sin. We almost wonder if _any power_ is
sufficient to raise them from their degradation. Yet, the many
noble exceptions bring to view the _possibilities_ of the race, and
encourage us to labor on.

To show how the old heathenish idea of religion seems to those who
have received more light, I will copy a letter from one who, only a
year ago, was led to embrace the truth and to join our church. She
writes from her old home in the country, where she is spending the
winter with her father. She has, as you will see, a very limited
education. She writes:

  “DEAR FRIENDS: I arrieved home safe found All injoying helth I
  went with Brother to the Sunday School But Could not Injoy it;
  Some had their spelling Books And Some their testaments and
  speled And read the lessons over and out to play. then the Church
  gather in to Class and in a half hour every bodys mouth was open
  and their was nothing to be heard But I have been redeemb. I
  stod aside and look at them till at last one of them Caime to
  me saying sister what are you doing havent you got the Spirit
  on yet? why, your religeon dead why what sort of Still thing is
  this. ha you must be up And a doing let the world no that you
  got the spirit on Show your light and let them see. Well I says
  I think that a very poor way to show the Christian light. O well
  if you say this a poor way you got no religeon honey; what Church
  you belong to. I tole them, why I never heard of that before
  well if they are like you I don’t no how it is but its mighty
  still religeon well I says Im Sorry that you all think that
  unless you Make a loud noise the world wont see your Light. I
  believe in showing the light in our walk And Conversation home
  and abroad not wait to go To the Church; But they say you must
  get the Spirit on, so you see its imposible for me to injoy their
  worship. I hope you will all pray for my deliverence for I do not
  think the lord intend to keep Me in this purgatory.

                                         “Yours,      L. S.”

We have in our night-school some who are making great efforts to
improve in knowledge. It requires no little resolution, after
working hard all day, to walk a mile or two and study two or three
hours. A stranger came a few weeks ago, wishing, as he said, “to
cultivate his brain.” There was evidently need of it, and we were
glad to learn that his recent conversion had awakened him to the
importance of knowing how to read for himself. He also expressed a
wish to come here to church, as he had become acquainted with one
of our members, who, as he said, “seemed to be a good, civil sort
of Christian,” and he thought he would come and see what kind of
meetings produced that effect. He had attended another church, but
said he “didn’t like there, for they had some crossness, and good
Christians is peaceable; they can’t help being peaceable”;—a good
lesson for all who bear the Christian name.

Our Sunday-school averages about 130, and the truth seems to be
gaining a firmer hold in the minds of some of the older pupils. The
day-school is prospering. One of the little ones of the primary
department, a bright little fellow, was yesterday laid in his grave.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Debt-Raising in a Colored Church.

REV. CHARLES NOBLE, MONTGOMERY

At the annual meeting of the church, in December, it was found that
of the $100 pledged to the pastor’s salary, only $25 had been paid;
and that an old debt for sexton’s services remained, amounting to
$34. In the extra effort made to pay for the painting and repair
of the church, and other expenses in spring and summer, these
things had been neglected. It was a surprise, and, of course, a
disagreeable one to many of the church; but there was a decided
feeling that the amount ought to be raised at once, and not left
to be a burden on the church any longer. A debt of $109 is as much
to this people as some of the $50,000 debts, which Mr. Kimball has
been helping churches North to clear away, are to them. Therefore,
it seemed to me that the matter was one to be carefully and
prayerfully managed. I appointed a meeting for the consideration
of the matter, and opened it by reading Chaps, viii. and ix. of 2d
Cor., and briefly explaining their teachings. Then we spent half an
hour in prayer, the brethren bringing the burden right to the Lord
in the simplest and most touching language, expressing their sorrow
and self-reproach at having failed to make good their promises, and
asking forgiveness and help. Then they talked the matter over, and
decided to raise the amount at once by subscription. A fair was
suggested, but the decision was against it, on the ground that it
wasn’t quite honorable to call in outside help to make good their
own delinquency; and, moreover, that a fair involved a great deal
of unprofitable labor and excitement, and was a fruitful mother
of dissensions. These points they made themselves, and in view of
them they decided to raise the amount by voluntary offerings. The
subscription began at once, and the matter being presented to the
church for two successive Sundays, the whole amount was raised by
voluntary pledges. I am certain that the brethren who so cheerfully
and promptly pledged, and paid, $7.50 and $6 and $5, gave as
abundantly, in proportion to their means, as those who pledged
$5,000 and $2,000 at Providence. The spirit in which it was done
was the most beautiful part of it. It was more than willingly done.
The gifts were brought forward thankfully, joyously, and I never
saw happier people in my life than those who joined in thanksgiving
to God, when the whole amount was raised. We observed the week of
prayer, with meetings every evening, and there was real evidence
of the presence of the Spirit. One who has long been in the dark
was brought out into the light; and it seemed to us that we must go
forward. We had meetings for two weeks with good attendance, and
very tender feeling. Quite a number of people rose for prayers, and
we hope that four at least have found the Saviour. The church has
certainly been quickened and strengthened very much.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Revival News—“Pray for My Child!”—Older Converts—Romanists
Reached.

MRS. T. N. CHASE, NEW ORLEANS.

You will rejoice to hear of the good work in the Central
Congregational Church of New Orleans. The interest has been
sufficient to bring an unusual number every night for four weeks to
our prayer-meeting. One evening, after the pastor had taken nearly
the usual time, he called for brief testimony from Christians.
Fifty-three responded in the limited half hour.

The fruit to be gathered in was from among the older students of
the school, who were not already professing Christians. This was
what would be expected by those who know their faithful, Christian
teachers. All teachers know the thrilling interest that clusters
around the conversion of young persons under their tuition. So, as
I have heard our teachers talk of this scholarly young man, and
that promising young woman, coming over to the Lord’s side, I knew
very well what a burden of prayer and effort was lifted from their
hearts and hands.

The third week of our meetings a younger class seemed interested.
One evening a widow begged us to pray for her daughter, in tones
that would have melted a heart of stone. As she passed out of the
door, at the close of the meeting, I overheard her saying to one
and another, “Pray for my child! pray for my child!” An earnest
mother, I thought; who can doubt the reality of her religion? On my
way home I learned that her husband had been a devoted member of
our church, and a wealthy, intelligent, respected colored citizen.
I am happy to find such men are not rare in New Orleans. The next
evening the mother, with the same pleading earnestness, begged us
to pray for her child. Since her husband’s death her property had
gone, other dear ones had passed on, and it seemed as though she
could not be denied the conversion of her child. The grandmother
was present, too, and gave us a soul-stirring testimony of her long
pilgrimage. When those who wished our prayers were requested to
come forward, several responded. All were strangers to me; but when
a certain little girl went forward just behind the others, a tide
of emotion almost overcame me. She was as much a stranger to me
as the others, and I, for a moment, wondered at my tears. Then it
flashed upon me that she must be the widow’s child, and my emotion
was caused by the flood of sympathy that was involuntarily surging
from heart to heart for that praying mother. On inquiry, I found
I was not mistaken. You can imagine, better than I can describe,
the scene, when mother and grandmother gathered about the child,
pleading with her to yield to Jesus, as we all knelt to commend the
lost lambs to a loving Shepherd.

Now, the older people are being reached. Friday evening a man came
in late to escort his wife home. Saturday he came early, and at
the very first opportunity was on his feet, saying, “For forty
years I hadn’t thought I had a soul till I came in here last night.
Help me to find Jesus.” He went forward, fell upon his knees, and
was so penitent it did not seem strange that that very night the
publican’s God sent him “to his house justified.” As he met our
pastor the next morning at church, he exclaimed, “Mr. Alexander,
you convinced me, but Jesus saved me.” It would do a stoic good to
look upon his beaming face and see what grace has done for that man.

It seems to me that the most interesting feature of the A. M.
A. work in New Orleans is its leavening influence upon Roman
Catholicism. I was talking, after service one evening, with a
beautiful girl who had been forward for prayers, and whose face
wore a genuine look of deep contrition. On asking her if she
attended church here regularly, she replied, “No; I go to the
Catholic Church.” Another girl was sitting beside a member of our
family one evening, when a boy behind whispered to her, “Don’t you
ask for prayers! if you do, I’ll tell the priest!” I hear that a
large number in the school are professed Catholics, but are allowed
to attend on account of the superior instruction.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Le Moyne Normal School.

                          MEMPHIS, TENN., _Feb. 16th, 1878_.

The Le Moyne teachers, last year, organized among themselves
a reading circle for their own pleasure and improvement. Each
Thursday evening was devoted to the study of an author. After
a while, other friends were invited to join them for a single
reading. The custom was continued after the long vacation, and
became a part of the family life.

So much interest was manifested among the occasional guests, that
some of them proposed that the circle be enlarged to include all
the colored teachers of the city. The proposal was favorably
received, and the new literary society has superseded the original.
The character of exercises has been changed to meet the demands of
this wider and different element. The programme this week was as
follows:

_Historical_: “Benjamin Franklin—his public life; his private
life.” _Poetical_: “Longfellow—sketch of his life; selections
from his writings.” _Debate_: “Resolved, that the Crusades were
a benefit to the world.” “Humorous Reading.” _Scientific_: “Cell
Life.” “Budget.”

Music is interspersed, and discussions upon different topics are
presented. Ten minutes is the utmost time allowed each participant.
The only drawback is the lack of books of reference. Our small
library furnishes some assistance, and the additions made to it
from time to time help us in our preparations for the literary
society.

Friday evenings are devoted to an equally interesting and
well-attended gathering of a more devotional character. The
Sabbath-school teachers, who use the International Lessons, meet in
one of the school-rooms for studying the next Sabbath’s lesson. It
is one of the most enjoyable hours of the week.

The first suggestion of united study came from the superintendent
of the leading Methodist Sabbath-school. Others at once acceded
to the proposal, and heartily join in the exercises. Topics are
assigned to members of various schools, so that special preparation
is previously made, and very little time is wasted during the
meeting.

Methodist, Baptist and Congregational superintendents succeed one
another in leading the meetings. Denominational lines are forgotten
in seeking to learn the truths of the Bible, and in considering
the best methods of presenting those truths to classes. The ten
minutes of devotion, at the beginning of each meeting, include the
discussion of a practical subject. “How to secure the influence of
the Holy Spirit in the hearts of our scholars,” “Best methods of
conducting Infant Classes,” “Opening and closing exercises of the
school,” are a few of the topics considered.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Woman’s Work among Women.

MISS HATTIE MILTON, MEMPHIS.

My mission, thus far, has been mostly to the lowly. The first
step was to become acquainted with the people and secure their
confidence, which had to be accomplished in various ways; sometimes
by taking a great interest in the children, lending them books,
giving them pictures, candy, toys, etc., or by giving the mother
a little assistance or advice about her work. Sickness affords a
good opportunity. I visited one family where the mother had been
helpless for some time from a beating given her by her husband.
I dressed her wounds, made clothing for her infant, washed and
dressed it, set the neighbors to work, and thus secured the
confidence of the whole neighborhood; now I am welcomed into homes
where before I was treated with coldness and suspicion. I reach a
great many through my sick ones.

Some little Sabbath-school girls in Crete, Ill., sent us a box
of bedding and clothing, which has been a great help in my work;
also, my friends at Romeo, Mich., sent a box of clothing, toys,
books, and material for my sewing-school, all of which has been a
God-send to me, as I find some very destitute families. The city
does nothing for the poor colored people, so my opportunity is all
the greater for doing good.

I find many who cannot read and who are very glad to hear the Bible
read. Some have even offered to pay me for reading to them, at the
same time saying, “You must need it, you dear child, if you have
left your friends and home to come and work for the poor colored
people.”

It is astonishing how little these people know about the Bible,
although they have attended church for years. Those who cannot
read find it so hard to understand the preaching, and those who
could read a little to them ‘could not give the understanding,’ as
they say. When I had finished my Bible reading with one family,
they said: “Please, ma’am, come every Sabbath, we get so much more
satisfaction from hearing you read than we do anywhere else.” I
endeavor to visit them at such hours as not to interfere with
their work, and often read and explain the Bible to a woman while
she proceeds with her sewing or ironing; however, some insist on
laying aside work, saying, “We must give our whole attention to the
word of God when we do have a chance to hear it”; and it is quite
affecting to have them thank the kind heavenly Father for sending
some one to teach them ways they knew not of, and pray to become
better women for having received the instruction.

The missionary and those who send her do not lack for prayers from
the colored people. I have a Mothers’ Meeting once a week, where I
endeavor to teach them from the Bible their duties as mothers and
wives; also a sewing-school, where we teach the girls how to cut
and make garments, which they buy, when finished, at a low price.
I have had so much to do in this part of the work, that one of the
teachers has kindly assisted me.

I have over fifty families on my visiting list, and have called on
several others and am received cordially by nearly all. I am well
pleased with the work, and ought never to cease being thankful for
the good and wonderful way in which the Lord has opened this field
of labor for me.

Not long since, one of the girls from the senior class came and
told me she would like to become a missionary sometime, and asked
me to tell her what she could do now, as she wishes to begin to
work for Jesus while she is young. She asked me to take her with
me on some of my visits among the people, which I shall be glad to
do. I think one of the good results of this work is that it tends
to set the colored people to work for themselves, as they are glad
to do, but did not know how to go to work; they need instruction in
this as in everything else.

       *       *       *       *       *


KENTUCKY.

Berea College.

While the echoes of Merry Christmas are ringing in our ears, and
good dinners and joyous family greetings are still bright spots in
our memories, it may be interesting to hear of a Gospel Feast in
Berea, Ky. Our good steward, of the Boarding Hall, conceived the
plan of going out into our highways and hedges and inviting those
most destitute to dine with him. Over the hills and the valleys
went the joyful tidings into many a log-hut—“Mr. H. done ’vite us
to a big dinner at de Hall.”

Aside from teachers and their wives, no white folks were admitted
within those doors as guests. At an early hour, the large parlor
began to fill. To those of us who were late, it required no little
moral courage to enter a room so well filled, and go through the
ordeal of hand-shaking. The walls were lined with people, and
from their sober, dignified looks, one could easily imagine it a
funeral occasion. They seemed conscious of the dignity of the hour,
and were prepared to maintain it at any cost. Men sat modestly
far away from the women. The costumes would have driven “Worth”
distracted. Surely, never could he have devised so many ways of
“doing up” the female form. Bits of ribbon, faded and old, stray
pieces of lace pinned here and there in charming abundance, and
with a lofty indifference to such minor matters as harmony or
usefulness. One large figured gown of prominent yellow shades, made
conspicuous the form of an old woman, who seemed, like her gown,
to have awakened out of a Rip Van Winkle sleep, or been unearthed
from some old ruin. It reminded us of the days of Dolly Varden, and
was not very unlike the Chinese and Japanese cloths which to-day
we try to think pretty. But it would be impossible to attempt a
description of the toilettes. Necessity made a virtue of all sorts
of combinations; and if they were not beautiful, they seemed to
give the wearers the feeling of being dressed—a feeling not always
accomplished under happier circumstances.

As we went from one to another, it certainly relieved the monotony
to hear them say, “Ki, yi! dars Miss Lizzie,” “How d’ye, honey,”
and so on. From the men came the stiffest bows and politest concern
for our health. Knowing but few in the party, we hastily found a
seat, where we could talk to one about gardens. To another, the
never-failing question of babies proved interesting; and thinking
of the little black ones, I thought in God’s sight they might be
as fair as my own. It took so long for one old dame to tell of
her “rheumatiz” and general “misery,” that our sympathy, which
was real, almost cooled before the lengthy recital was ended.
During all that long hour not a loud laugh was heard from those
laughter-loving people.

At length, to the relief of us all, the great doors opened, and the
eager old children could contain themselves no longer, and almost
broke ranks and ran; husbands and wives apart, evidently fearing,
as they hurried to their seats, there would not be room for all.
Not till the guests were seated did the teachers scatter here and
there, glad for _once_ at least to yield the first seat.

What a meal was provided! Of all good things that could be brought
from farm or store, there was no lack. The blessing asked, eagerly
they began to enjoy what was to them the principal event of the
day. Glancing about us, we saw our steward (a man of deeds rather
than of words), upon whom all the expense of this feast came,
looking around, with beaming eye, over the great company whose
hearts he had made glad. We thought of the wife who had stood by
his side so many years, helping in every good work, and who would
have been there if God had not called her higher. The flushed face
of our good housekeeper, who is never too weary or too busy to do
a little more, if she can make hearts happy thereby, shone upon
us, and we knew her hands had been full for many days. Though her
feet were tired, they obeyed the loving heart, and she flew among
us like a spirit, watching on all sides that no one should fail to
enjoy the dinner.

Looking up the table, our hearts ached, as one face after another
brought up the old slave days. Some there were who had risen above
every discouragement, and in the face of poverty, low wages and
many another hindrance, had proved themselves men, gladly denying
themselves the comforts of life, that their children’s days might
be brighter than their own. We saw there old men, grown grey in
their “massa’s” service, turned out without a dollar, to pinch the
rest of their lives to keep from suffering. Women, married in the
Lord and in the honesty of their own hearts, considered only as so
much property, to be abused or neglected as their masters chose.
Beauty was a fearful gift to the race, and many of our colored
women do not lack the gift.

One woman we must speak of, who, having neither riches nor
sweetness of temper, made it all good in the wealth of names, which
can only be equalled in the royal family. I give a few: “Carrie
Lee, Bessie Fee, who but she—Bernaugh.” “Isabel, rise and tell,
the glories of Immanuel—Bernaugh.” “Raphael Rogers, Alfred Hart,
’Postle Paul, Caleb after all—Bernaugh.” How she abbreviated these
names I know not.

The dinner over, the music room quickly filled. Some of our
pianists gave sweet music, but so far above a part of the assembly
that I’ve no doubt they longed for their “fiddles and banjoes.” By
request, they struck up a wailing sound, which rose and fell, with
words somewhat after this style:

    “The ark’s a movin’, movin’, movin’,
    The ark’s a movin’, move right along.”

This was so sad, that something joyful was called for, and again
the strain rung out; old men and women moving their bodies to
keep their own time, which each one seemed to do regardless of
his neighbor, closing up each line, and almost each word, with
such hemi-demi-semi-quavers as would have puzzled some of our best
singers. Poor things! the elements of joy had not entered into
their religious life. The minor strain swept over all their heart
experiences, and in spite of the words of their hymns, their music
gave us the echo of their days of bondage, and helped us to thank
God that a brighter life had been ours. To them seemed to come no
middle ground between the “double-shuffle” and the saddest songs
for Christ.

After many a hand-shake and parting blessing to us all, the people
wended their way back to their homes, some to their rude cabins,
saying to one another, “Dis de best day of my life,” “Tank de Lord
for dis good day.”

To our steward we gave the conventional good-bye, but in our hearts
we knew that there was one blessed passage of Scripture applicable
to him, and we doubt not he will hear it some day: “Inasmuch as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto Me.”

This is one picture. I shall be glad soon to show the other side,
and give the contrast between some of those who were gathered at
this feast, and their children, who have enjoyed the privileges of
the school at Berea. L. R.

       *       *       *       *       *


HYMN.

MRS. E. SPENCE.[A]

  Sung at the farewell meeting on the departure of Rev. Mr. and
  Mrs. A. P. Miller, and Rev. Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Jackson, as
  missionaries to Africa, Nashville, Feb. 18, 1878.

    God bless, with special favor,
      This consecrated band!
    Their trust will never waver,
      Led by Thy loving hand!
    As to thy call they listen,
      Each answers, “Here am I,”
    And yet a tear may glisten
      Unbidden in the eye!

    Thou know’st what ties are breaking
      That twine around the heart!
    The yearning, and the aching,
      When friends and kindred part!
    Oh! let them feel Thy presence
      Continuously so near,
    To compensate the absence
      Of all they hold most dear!

    As, over land and ocean
      They still pursue their way,
    The spirit of devotion
      Replenish day by day.
    When over smooth seas gliding
      With hearts attuned to sing,
    Or tossed by tempest, hiding
      Beneath thy shelt’ring wing!

    And when their destination
      Is safely reached at last,
    Where every mission station
      Has boundaries so vast—
    Strengthen the willing spirit
      For service, till they see
    The land which they inherit,
      Redeemed and ruled by Thee!

    Lord Jesus, lead victorious
      The sacramental host,
    Until thy kingdom, glorious,
      Extend from coast to coast;
    The powers of hell be driven
      From every conquered zone,
    And, even as in heaven,
      Thy will on earth be done!

FOOTNOTE:

[A] Mrs. Spence was born in Scotland, in the year that Cary, the
first missionary from England, went out upon his pioneer and
untrodden way eighty years ago. Her heart has been overflowing with
gladness during these days of preparation.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

Three Christian Boys and their Letters.

REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH

Our hearts were gladdened, last Sabbath, by receiving into our
Church three of the Indian school-boys, each of them supposed to
be about thirteen years of age. We had kept them on a virtual
probation for nearly a year, until I began to feel that to do so
any longer would be an injury both to themselves and to others.
Their conduct, especially towards their school-teacher, although
not perfect, has been so uniformly Christian that those who were
best acquainted with them felt the best satisfied in regard to
their change of heart. Said a member of our Church of about fifty
years’ Christian experience—who was not here much during the
summer, and hence knew comparatively little about them—after
hearing a full statement, “I wish that some of the white children
whom we have received into the Church had given one half as good
evidence of being Christians as these boys give.” And yet the
Church was satisfied in regard to them. On religious subjects, they
have been most free in communicating both to their teacher and
myself by letter. I have thought that you might be interested in
extracts from some of them, and hence send the following:

  “I am going to write to you this day, please help me to get my
  father to become a Christian,” (his father is an Indian doctor)
  “and I think I will get Andrew and Henry” (the other Christian
  boys) “to say a word for my father. I want you to read it to my
  father.”

He wrote to his father the following, which I read to him:

                                                 “AUG. 3D, 1877.

  “MY DEAR-BELOVED FATHER: Your son is a Christian. I am going off
  to another road. I am going in a road where it leadeth to heaven,
  and you are going to a big road where it leadeth to hell. But now
  please return back from hell, I was long time thinking what shall
  I do, then my father would be saved from hell. I prayed to God. I
  asked God to help my father to become a Christian.”

The letter of another, to his Indian friends:

  “You have not read the Bible, for you cannot read, but you have
  heard the minister read it to you. You seem not to pay good
  attention, but you know how Jesus was crucified, how he was put
  on the Cross, how he was mocked and whipped, and they put a crown
  of thorns, and he was put to death.”

The letter of the other to me:

  “O, how I love all the Indians. I wish they should all become
  Christians. If you please, tell them about Jesus coming. It makes
  me feel bad because the Indians are not ready.”

To his Indian friends:

  “The first time I became a Christian, I found it a very hard
  thing to do, but I kept asking Jesus to help me, and so He did,
  for I grew stronger and stronger. So, my Friends, if you will
  just accept Jesus as your King, He will help you to the end of
  your journey. You must trust wholly in Jesus’ strength, and
  yield your will, your time, your talents, your reputation, your
  strength, your property, your all, to be henceforth and forever
  subject to His divine control; your hearts to love Him, your
  tongues to speak for Him, your hands and feet to work for Him,
  and your lives to serve Him, when and where and as His Spirit may
  direct. Don’t be proud, but be very good Christians; be brave and
  do what is right.

                                             “YOUR YOUNG FRIEND.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Indian Welcome to an Agent.

DR. I. L. MAHAN, RED CLIFF, WIS.

The payment recently made to the Bois Forte Indians was one of the
most pleasant and agreeable I have ever made. The Indians received
me with a salute (of blank cartridges) fired from their guns. On
each side of the team, as I passed through their camp, the Indian
men, women and children were in line on each side of the road for
a quarter of a mile, and such hurrahs and rejoicings I have seldom
witnessed.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *

“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L
Stone, D. D., Thomas O. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pound. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese New Year—Mob Denunciations—The Great Commission
Lessened—Conversions.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

The Chinese New Year festival began Feb. 1st. It was observed for
five days, the first three being “the great days of the feast.”
As the Chinese excuse themselves from manual labor during those
days, worship and business, and sociality absorb the time. At
this festival, accounts must be squared, or, at any rate, brought
to some settlement. Votive offerings, with the smoke of incense,
abound in the temples—_bribes_ with which good luck is purchased
from their gods. The city authorities had forbidden the use of
fire-crackers, greatly to the chagrin of the Joss-worshippers, but
the din of the gongs was such that even an idol, it would seem,
might almost be made to hear. For our Christian Chinese it was,
first of all, a week of prayer. Not to be out-done even by their
own former-selves, they began their meetings at eleven o’clock on
the last night of the old year, and welcomed the new one in its
first hours, with worship to Jesus, their new friend and Saviour.
They say that it would be a shame, if they were not willing to give
hours to Him, which, but for Him, they would still have been giving
to senseless blocks of wood, or to pictures hung upon the wall.
Each day there was more or less of time devoted to social worship,
and the rest to friendly calls among the brethren of different
missions, and the reception of calls from American friends, or else
to the transaction of the annual business of their Association. The
carefulness with which they attend to this business, might well be
emulated by many a strong church. The amounts involved are small,
of course, while the talk might seem superabundant to taciturn
people like us; but the exactitude in accounts, the watchfulness
against debts, the punctuality in their mutual settlements, if
grafted into the working of many a church that I have known, would
greatly help its peace and growth, and even its good name.

The “era of good feeling” towards the Chinese, is, doubtless,
nearer now than it was eight months ago. I affirm this _by faith_,
and not because I can see, as yet, even the first streaks of
its dawning. It seems as though the out-cries, “Down with the
Chinese!” “The Chinamen must go, peaceably if they will, forcibly
if they must,” would have become, by this time, monotonous and
wearisome, but every Monday’s morning paper reports a gathering
of from 3,000 to 6,000 people standing on a sand-lot near our new
City Hall, in the midst often of wind and rain, and listening for
an hour or two, while Kearney and Willock repeat their barbarous
refrain. We cannot prevent a depressing effect of this upon our
work. Christians get afraid of it. One of our pastors, entering
upon temporary service with an inland church, wrote me as follows
a few days since: “On my first Sabbath here, a poor Chinaman came
to church to hear me. The next day I found him out, and he is a
Christian. He is hungering and thirsting for the word of life, and
I thought—what a splendid nucleus that would be for a class. I
sought the officers of the church for their consent and approval
to such an organization. Then came swiftly the ominous shake of
the head, which I now so well know, and I was told that ‘public
sentiment would not bear it.’ My heart aches for them, and I pray
fervently to know my duty.” I am utterly at a loss to know how
such church officers read the Great Commission. I understand what
the _plain English_ of it is: I think I could study it out in the
Greek. Does anybody know of any rendering of it, according to which
the Chinese are left out? It not, how is it that we have so many of
these head-shaking Christians all over California?

Furthermore, prejudice breeds prejudice, and the heathen Chinese
are beginning even to hate the language thus abused to curse and
slander them. They have no longer any appetite for the bait with
which we have been fishing for their souls. But if our schools are
thus unavoidably less attractive to them, and some of the seats
get empty, we try to do the better work with such as remain. And
the gracious Spirit adds His blessing still. Five were received to
the First Congregational Church in Oakland at its last communion.
This week two from the Barnes school have been reported to me
as persuaded to be Christians, and desirous of joining the
Association. What I have several times before said is still true,
I think—that no month passes in which I do not hear from some one
or more of our schools, of souls coming out of darkness into light.
The consequence is that hearty Christians once fairly engaged in
this work become enthusiastic in it. One teacher writes: “To try
to prepare the way for the enlightenment of these darkened minds
has been the highest privilege of my life. I do not forget the
blessedness of leading my own children and other young people to
Jesus, but in the offices of mother and teacher, this work has come
to me as a matter of course, while the other is the realization
of one of my earliest and most fondly cherished desires. I have
found it pleasant, even when I could get no word or sign that the
faintest shadow of my meaning was comprehended, for I felt that I
might be starting thought and opening the way for truth to come in
by and by; but when, in some instances, there has been a sudden
interest manifested, and such half-incredulous, half-delighted
responses come as ‘What! Jesus died for me?’ ‘What! Jesus Christ my
best friend!’ ‘Yes, I will love Him!’ I have felt one such moment a
complete compensation for a whole lifetime of sorrow and toil.”

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM AH JAM.

                                   SANTA BARBARA, _January 12th_.

MR. POND:

_Dear Sir_—How is your health? I should be glad to have you to
write me another report about you school. If you find any interest
chapter I shall enjoy it if you will let me know. I cannot explain
it which is the best of all [i.e. cannot tell which chapters are
the best]. It seems to me very hard to understood the Bible. I wish
I had more leisure for my study, or to follow you while I shall
learn a great deal. I was very much troubled when I stayed on board
ship; she had four Chinese besides me. There was nobody instructed
in anything like the gospel. They thought it was dreadful to
believe in Christ. It makes them swear, grumble, and smoke opium.
They are walking in the way of destruction. I felt very sorry for
them. I told them several times what we ought to do in this world
while we live. They said they would never be afraid when they die
where the soul would go. I presume they will do all things as they
please. I left my place, and came on shore two weeks since. But I
cannot find any situation yet, because it is very dull. Perhaps I
will go to the city next year, and then I shall see you again. We
do remember you when we pray; we would like you pray for us, too,
if you please. Your sincerely,

                                        AH JAM, AND THE OTHERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

A SICK BOY’S LETTER TO HIS TEACHER.

I thank you for the beautiful papers that you sent me. I read a
piece in one they call “Glad Tidings.” It was about the dissipated
father and the dying child. He was a bad man, and used bad
_languish_, and cause his whole family to be miserable; and his
little son would go to him and crawl up on his knee and tell him
about the good God, and the tears would gush from his eye. The
little boy said to his father: “Father, you are crying; what is
the matter?” “I am afraid, my son, I am going to lose you—you are
going to die.” “Well, father, I know I am going to die, but I am
not afraid to die, for I will go to Jesus.”

I read that piece, and my little heart did feel so warm. I am
trying to be a good boy, and pray to God that I may be a good boy.
I am trying to be a better boy every day.

                           From your dear scholar,

                                                       M.T.

  MONTGOMERY, ALA.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIVE IN GOD’S SUNSHINE.

“Well, Aunt Polly, here you are again on the doorsteps. It seems to
me you almost live on them.”

Old Polly raised her faded eyes to the face of her friend, and,
laughing, said:

“Yes, dear, dat’s jus’ so! Jim says ‘We mought build a house all
doo’ steps and nothin’ else, fo’ granny, ’cause she lives dar an’
nowhar else.’”

“I suppose you like to see the people, and to hear the children
prattle as they go by to school,” said the lady.

“Well, yes, I likes to see folks, ’cause my Fader up dar made ’em
all; but it’s most fo’ de sunshine dat I stays out here. O, God’s
sunshine’s a powerful blessin’, dear. When I’s cold I comes out and
sits in it, and I grows warm; when I’s hungry, and Jim’s wife’s got
nothin’ to eat, I comes out here and ’pears like I’d had my dinner;
when I’s in pain, and ’scruciated all over wid de rheumatiz, I
comes out into the sunshine, and de pain skulks off; when Jim don’t
be good and ’pears like he was goin’ to ’struction, and my heart
is bustin’ like, I comes out and sits in God’s sunshine, and peace
comes through His beam into my soul; when old Death comes an’
star’s in my face, and say, ‘I comin’ arter ye soon, to take ye
into de dark grave,’ den I comes out into God’s sunshine, and dares
him to frighten my soul! Says I to him, ‘Ye hasn’t power in ye to
throw one shadow on to my pillow; for my blessed Jesus, de Sun of
Righteousness, He been down dar before me, and He left it full,
heaped up and runnin’ over wid God’s sunshine. I shall rest sweet
in dat warm place, for de eternal sunshine dat shall magnify and
glorify all as loves de shinin’ Jesus.”

“Auntie,” said her friend, who always felt that she could sit at
the feet of this humble saint and learn of Jesus, “that is very
lovely. But there come days when there is no sunshine—when the
clouds gather, and the rains fall, and the snows come, and the
winds blow. What do you do then?”

“O la, honey, by de time de storms come, I’ve got my soul so full
ob sunshine dat it lasts a heap o’ time. Dem times Jim scolds,
and his poor wife’s ’scouraged, and de child’n are cross, and
de stove smokes and de kittle won’t bile; but I never knows it.
God’s sunshine is in my soul, and I tries to spread it round, and
sometimes Jim’s wife feels it, and she says—oh, she’s a good
daughter-in-law—‘Long’s I keeps close to granny, ’pears like my
heart’s held up.’

“Well, well, dear, you can teach me somethin’, and ye can fetch
me nice things to make mo’ sunshine; but I can teach you what ye
never thought on—dat God’s sunshine’s ’nough for rich and poor,
and dem dat thank Him for it, and sit in it, or work in it, and
let it into dar heart, will soon go whar it’s all sunshine. Try
to make folks live in God’s sunshine, and get it into dar hearts,
honey.”—_Intelligencer._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR FEBRUARY, 1878.


  MAINE, $491.13.

    Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Augusta. So. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           31.50
    Bethel. A few Ladies of First Cong. Ch.                   11.00
    Blanchard. Daniel Blanchard                                5.00
    Dennysville. Mrs. Samuel Eastman                           5.00
    Gilead. Rev. H. R.                                         0.50
    Holden. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Orland. Mrs. Buck and daughter                            30.00
    Portland. State St. Cong. Ch. $302.13; Second
      Cong. Ch. and Soc $40; Seamen’s Bethel
      Church $15; Mrs. David Patten $5.                      362.13
    Salem. A. P.                                               0.50
    Searsport. J. Y. B.                                        1.00
    Weld. D. D. Tappan                                         2.00
    Wells. First Cong. Ch. ($30 of which from Mrs.
      B. A. Maxwell to const. MRS. W. S. KIMBALL,
      L. M.)                                                  36.00
    Winthrop. Mrs. E. S. B.                                    0.50


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $367.34.

    Bedford. Presb. Ch. $12.50; Mrs. S. S. F. $1,
      _for Wilmington, N. C._                                 13.50
    Dover. M. E. L.                                            0.50
    Francestown. Mrs. R. R. F. $1; W. B. 50c.                  1.50
    Franconia. Mrs. Geo. A. Beckwith                           2.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             3.84
    Hanover. Prof. T. W. D. W.                                 0.50
    Hillsborough. Mrs. D. T. W. and others                     1.51
    Hillsboro Centre. John Adams                              10.00
    Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Wilmington,
      N. C._                                                  13.18
    Keene. “A Friend”                                        128.12
    Lisbon. Mrs. A. P.                                         1.00
    Londonderry. C. S. P.                                      1.00
    Lyme. T. L. Gilbert                                        2.00
    Manchester. First Ch.                                     85.44
    Mason. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $2 and bbl of C.,
      _for Wilmington, N. C._                                  2.00
    Merrimac. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              23.30
    Nashua. “A Friend”                                        20.00
    New Boston. “Willing Workers,” _for
      Wilmington, N. C._                                      12.00
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $8.50; Cong.
      Ch. Mon. Coll. $4.45; Levitt Lincoln $10; “A
      Friend” $1.50; W. W. J. $1; Mrs. S. T. 50c.;
      “A Friend” $6; Subscribers _for Mag._ $2.50             34.45
    Pittsfield. John L. Thorndike                             10.00
    Troy. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                            1.50
    Windham, C. Packard, pkg of C.


  VERMONT, $1,434.42.

    Barre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 15.00
    Brookfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     18.12
    Burlington. ESTATE of Mrs. R. S. Nichols, by
      B. S. Nichols, Ex., _for Fisk U._                      100.00
    Chester Depot. J. L. Fisher                               15.00
    Dummerston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             9.00
    East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         26.00
    Essex. Mrs. Dr. L. C. B.                                   1.00
    Morrisville. Dea. C. F.                                    0.50
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               53.09
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                               10.06
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            22.45
    North Thetford. Mrs. E. G. Baxter                          3.00
    Randolph. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.00
    St. Albans. First. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     52.81
    St. Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch. $392.59, and
      Sab. Sch. 65.40; W. W. T. $1                           458.99
    Salisbury. J. F.                                           1.00
    Townshend. Mrs. Mary B. Burnap $10; Mrs. S. R.
      50c.                                                    10.50
    Waterford. Cong. Sab. Sch. $4; S. E. Potter $3.            7.00
    West Fairlee. Mrs. C. M. H.                                0.50
    Westminster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for
      Talladega C._, and to const. PORTER F. PAGE,
      L. M.                                                   90.70
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.75
    West Randolph. Betsey Nichols $2; Mrs. S. A.
      W. $1.                                                   3.00
    Williston. ESTATE of Dea. Ezbon Sanford, by
      Geo. Lawton, Ex.                                       500.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.95


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,363.53.

    Andover. Rev. Joseph Emerson                              50.00
    Ashby. Rev. G. S. S.                                       0.50
    Barre. Evan Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. MRS. J.
      F. BROOKS, L. M.                                        30.00
    Bedford. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      WALLACE G. WEBBER, L. M.                                30.00
    Boston. Cash $10; G. E. S. Kinney $1.50                   11.50
    Boston Highlands. Miss. E. Davis                          25.00
    Brimfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $15; S. H. 51c.            15.51
    Boxford. Individuals, by M. L. Sawyer                      2.50
    Brocton. Bbl. of C.
    Cambridge. Mrs. J. H. Stone                                2.00
    Cambridgeport. Geo. F. Kendall                            10.00
    Charlestown. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
      HENRY L. KENDALL, L. M.                                 50.00
    Chelsea. Ladies of First Ch. 2 bbls. of
      Clothing and roll of Carpeting, _for Marion,
      Ala._
    Centreville. Marv A. Crosby                                8.00
    Clinton. First Evan. Ch. and Soc.                         34.24
    Conway. C. Batchelder                                      2.50
    Cotuit. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.05
    Dedham. Rev. C. M. Southgate, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  2.00
    Dudley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    East Braintree. Miss R. A. Faxon, _for
      purchase of books_                                       7.00
    East Hampton. ESTATE of Samuel Williston, by
      E. H. Sawyer, Ex.                                    1,200.00
    East Medway. Circle of Industry, 2 bbl’s of C.
      Val. $27.
    Foxborough. C. N. M.                                       0.10
    Granville. C. H.                                           0.25
    Greenfield. Ladies’ Miss. Society, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                18.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.07
    Groton. “Mother and Daughter”                             20.00
    Hadley. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                             13.00
    Hanover. C. C.                                             1.00
    Harvard. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Harwichport. Capt. Leonard Robbins                        10.00
    Haverhill. C. E. C. and B. F. E.                           1.00
    Holden. Mrs. L. B. B.                                      0.50
    Hubbardston. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                           22.00
    Jamaica Plain, Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    Lawrence. Central Cong. Ch. to const MISS
      JOSEPHINE CUMMINGS, L. M.                               60.00
    Leicester. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $3, and bbl. of
      C., _for Wilmington, N. C._                              3.00
    Lynn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.10
    Medford. Dea. Galen James                                300.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         57.71
    Millbury. Tyler Waters. $5; H. G. $1                       6.00
    Natick. “Thank Offering” to const. MRS. MARY
      S. WIGHT, L. M.                                         30.00
    Newton Centre. “Friends,” by Mrs. Furber, $50,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._,—J. W. 50c.               50.50
    Northampton. “A Friend”                                  240.00
    North Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    North Brookfield. First Ch. and Soc.                      50.00
    North Somerville. W. H. A.                                 0.50
    Oakham. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. MRS.
      LAURA E. MORTON and MISS LOUISA A. AYRES, L.
      M.’s.                                                   70.35
    Palmer. Box of C.
    Peabody. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         77.00
    Peru. G. W.                                                1.00
    Plymouth. Mrs. C. H. P.                                    0.50
    Reading. Mrs. B. P. W.                                     0.50
    Rockland. ——.                                             25.00
    Sherborn. Pilgrim Sab. Sch.                               15.00
    Southbridge. “A Friend”                                    1.00
    Southborough. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                          22.66
    South Deerfield. Mrs. M. C. Tilton                         2.00
    South Hadley. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                       30.00
    South Wilbraham. W. V. S.                                  1.00
    Springfield. Class in Hope Ch. Sab. Sch., by
      Mrs. Homer Merriam $3; Mrs. A. C. Hunt
      $1.10; Mrs. R. K. $1                                     5.10
    Sunderland. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               33.17
    Taunton. W. H.                                             1.00
    Tewksbury. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Hampton, Va._            30.00
    Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 15.00
    Upton. Mrs. M. P. J., Miss M. E. C. and Mrs.
      M. F. C. $1 ea.                                          3.00
    Waverly. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Wellesley. L. B. H. and C. E. S.                           1.00
    Westborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          167.70
    West Brookfield. A. S. F.                                  0.50
    Westford. Rev. E. H.                                       1.00
    West Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           22.50
    West Springfield. H. A. Southworth                        50.00
    Williamsburgh. H. H. T. and Mrs. M. E. G. $1;
      J. L. $1                                                 2.00
    Williamstown. C. F.                                        0.50
    Wilmington. J. Skelton                                    10.00
    Winchendon. Mrs. E. B.                                     0.50
    Woburn. Mrs. G. A. B.                                      0.25
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch. and Soc. $82.50;
      Union Ch. $70; Old South Cong. Ch.
      $48.47.—Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $5., by Mrs. C.
      A. Lincoln, _for Ind. Sch., for Talladega
      C._—A. E. W. 80c.                                      206.77


  RHODE ISLAND, $131.

    Pawtucket. Cong. Ch. and Soc $115 (of which
      $25 from “A Friend”); J. G. 50c.                       115.50
    Providence. Geo. W. Davison $15; Miss McB. 50c.           15.50


  CONNECTICUT, $1,411.45.

    Birmingham. Ella S. Smith                                 10.00
    Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                               65.82
    Canaan. “A mite for the Freedmen”                          2.00
    Cheshire. Rev. J. H. I.                                    0.50
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch.                                      10.25
    Collinsville. Everest Fund $200, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._; Cong. Sab. Sch. $46,
      _for Ag. Dept., Talladega C._—Cong. Ch.
      $26.82.—M. A. Warren $12, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._—“A Friend” $2; J. H. B. $1                 287.82
    Darien. “A Friend”                                         0.61
    Derby. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              9.00
    Durham Centre. A. P. C. and J. E.                          1.00
    East Hartford. “A. W”.                                    10.00
    Ellington. Sarah K. Gilbert                                5.00
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             43.95
    Greenwich. “A”                                            20.00
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        22.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                     1.00
    Jericho. Wm. Osgood                                        3.00
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. REV.
      GEORGE N. KELLOGG, L. M.                                34.75
    Lebanon. Betsey Metcalf                                    2.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch. $34.30; A. C. B.
      25c.                                                    34.55
    Kensington. Mrs. M. Hotchkiss                              2.00
    Killingworth. Mrs. A. V. E.                                0.51
    Mansfield Centre. Cong. Ch.                               10.10
    Meriden. Miss L. P.                                        1.00
    Millbrook. Mrs. E. M.                                      1.00
    New Haven. Ralph Tyler $10; “A Friend” $3; “A
      Lady” $2; College St. Ch., S. W. Barnum, 4
      copies “Romanism as it is,” Val. $14                    15.00
    New London. Second Cong. Ch.                              15.00
    New Milford. Mrs. F. G. B 50c.; Mrs. M. A.
      Stone 2 bbls. of C.                                      0.50
    Norfolk. Mrs. M. A. C.                                     1.00
    North Cornwall. “A Friend”                                 7.00
    North Guilford. Mrs. E. F. Dudley, $5; “A
      Friend” $5                                              10.00
    North Stamford. Cong. Ch.                                  9.27
    Norwich. Park Cong. Soc. $414.88 (of which $30
      from Mrs. Chas. Lee to const. FRANK JOHNSON,
      L.M., $30 from Miss S. M. Lee to const.
      MAJ. B. P. LEARNED, L.M.)—Second Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch. $75, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._           489.88
    Orange. Cong. Sab. Sch. $30; Rev. E. E. Rogers
      $10, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                      40.00
    Oxford. Rev. F. R. Wait, Box of S. S. Books.
    Somers. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $17.75; C. B. P.
      50c.                                                    18.25
    Simsbury. Cong. Soc.                                      46.12
    Suffield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      63.30
    Unionville. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                 10.98
    Wapping. Little Miss Ada Hart, _for Ag. Dept.,
      Talladega C._                                            0.10
    Watertown. Miss. A. W.                                     1.00
    Wellington. Mrs. J. H.                                     1.00
    West Chester. Cong. Ch. $8.20 and Sab. Sch.
      $17.44                                                  25.64
    West Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.55
    Wethersfield. H. Savage                                    2.00
    Winsted. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $20, _for Ag.
      Dept., Talladega C._—Elias E. Gilman
      $10.—Ladies, by Mrs. Dea. Hinsdale, bbl. of
      C., _for Talladega C._                                  30.00
    Yalesville. “B.”                                          10.00
    ——. “A Friend”                                            10.00


  NEW YORK, $542.78.

    Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch. $10; Mrs. H.
      Dickinson $5                                            15.00
    Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     70.00
    Canastota. E. B. Northrup                                  5.00
    Cheateaugay. Joseph Shaw                                  10.00
    Clarkson. Oliver Babcock                                  20.00
    Coeymans. Wm. B. H.                                        0.50
    Coxsackie. Mrs. E. F. Spoor and Miss A. G.
      Fairchild $5 ea.                                        10.00
    Danby. Cong. Ch.                                          21.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          22.26
    Ellington. Mrs. Eliza Rice                                10.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Ch.                                 32.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch., _for Montgomery, Ala._               15.00
    Fredonia. Hon. John Chandler                              10.00
    Gouverneur. Mrs. H. D. S.                                  1.00
    Keeseville. Dea. Marcus Barnes, deceased, by
      G. W. Dodds                                              5.00
    Lima. Mrs. G. Sprague, _for a Student_                     5.00
    Lisbon. First Cong. Ch.                                   13.00
    Little Genesee. Rev. T. B. Brown                           5.00
    Little Valley. H. S. Huntley                               2.00
    Little York. J. Pratt                                      5.00
    Moravia. By S. M. Cady                                     1.50
    Morrisania. First Cong. Ch., 2 pkg’s of Bibles.
    New York. Mrs. Hannah Ireland, $100.—Mr. and
      Mrs. Wm E. Dodge, $100, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._—Mrs. Charlotte Tappan Lewis,
      $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._—H. W. H. $1;
      Mrs. M. H. B. 50c.; Stephen T. Gordon, 556
      copies School Song Books                               206.50
    Oneonta. L. J. S.                                          0.25
    Pitcher. Miss N. W.                                        0.50
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Rushford. W. W.                                            0.50
    Saratoga Springs. Mrs. A. M. Wheeler                       2.00
    Three Mile Bay. Mrs. S. U.                                 1.00
    Verona. Cong. Ch., to const.  SAMUEL G.
      BREWSTER, L. M.                                         39.27
    Vernon Centre. M. Judson                                   3.00
    Walton. R. A. R.                                           0.50
    Watkins. S. G. and Mrs. E. S. M.                           1.00
    West Chazy. Daniel Bassett and wife                        5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $133.29.

    Belleville. J. B.                                          0.50
    Boonton. Mrs. N. T. J.                                     1.00
    Chester. J. H. Crane                                      20.00
    Colt’s Neck. Reformed Ch.                                  5.00
    Englewood. Rev. G. B. Cheever, D. D.                       6.79
    Morristown. Mrs. R. R. Graves                            100.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $33.

    Allentown. C. M.                                           0.50
    Canton. H. Sheldon                                         5.00
    Coudersport. John S. Mann                                  5.00
    Easton. Clarissa Silliman                                  5.00
    Jamestown. Mrs. J. C. B.                                   1.00
    Mahoningtown. W. W.                                        0.50
    Minersville. First Cong. Ch. (Welsh)                      10.00
    Providence. E. Weston                                      6.00


  OHIO, $349.82.

    Burton. Cong Soc. $32.35; Mrs. H. H. F. 50c               32.85
    Chardon. Mrs. D. A. S. G                                   1.00
    Cincinnati. Rent $92.12, _for the poor in New
      Orleans_.—Osman Sellew $10, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U_                                           102.12
    Claridon. Cong. Ch.                                       60.50
    Cleveland. Franklin Ave. Cong. Ch. $5.50; Rev.
      H. Trautman $5; J. B., 50c                              11.00
    Columbus. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    Conneaut. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.00
    Cuyahoga Falls. Individuals, by R. G. Thomas               5.50
    Fostoria. C. M.                                            0.50
    Gratis. S. H.                                              0.50
    Greensburgh. H. B. H.                                      1.00
    Hudson. Miss Laura Rogers $2.50; H. T. and A.
      D. C. $1                                                 3.50
    Kent. A. C.                                                1.00
    Madison. W. H. S.                                          1.00
    Metamora. M. S.                                            1.00
    Middlefield. Mrs. L. S. Buel                               5.00
    Norwalk. T. L.                                             1.00
    Oberlin. Mrs. Jane C. Miller $30, _for Ag.
      Dept., Talladega C._—Second Cong. Ch.
      $13.84; Harris Lewis $3; Mrs. C. C. W. 51c              47.35
    Painesville. Elwin Little, $15; C. R. Stone.
      $5; Rev. S. W. P. $1                                    21.00
    Sandusky. Individuals, by Rev. J. Strong                   5.00
    Sharonville. J. H.                                         1.00
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer $3; Mrs. M. S.
      and Miss M. M. $1 ea.                                    5.00
    Strongsville. Elijah Lyman                                10.00
    Wellington. “Two Friends”                                  5.00


  ILLINOIS, $195.10.

    Belvidere. Elizabeth Smith                                 2.00
    Canton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Chicago. W. B. J.                                          0.50
    Dallas City. Mrs. S. Miller                                1.25
    Evanston. “A little Child”                                 1.00
    Equality. S. E. C.                                         0.50
    Galesburg. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Galesburg. ESTATE of W. C. Willard, by Prof.
      T. R. Willard                                            4.00
    Geneseo. Chas. Perry                                      25.00
    Hutson. C. V. N.                                           1.00
    Jacksonville. REV. ELI CORWIN $30, to const.
      himself L. M.; T. W. Melendy, H. L. Melendy
      and M. C. Melendy $30, to const. DAVID COLE,
      L. M.—Cong. Ch, $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     65.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. A. Aldrich, _for Lewis
      High Sch., Macon, Ga._                                   5.00
    Oak Park. O. P.                                            0.50
    Payson. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             11.00
    Peoria. Plymouth Mission Sab. Sch. $20;
      “Friends” 6.60, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              26.60
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               10.00
    Seward. Rev. E. F. W.                                      0.50
    Toulon. H. R.                                              0.25
    Wethersfield. Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Kellogg                   5.00
    Willmette. Mrs. A. T. S. and Rev. E. P. W.                 1.00


  MICHIGAN, $396.14.

    Adrian. A. G. W.                                           0.50
    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                45.96
    Blissfield. W. C.                                          0.50
    Church’s Corners. J. F. Douglass                           5.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. $50, _for a
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._—Fort St. Presb.
      Ch. $50; Peter Gray $5, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                               105.00
    Grand Rapids. “Friends” $45, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._—E. M. Ball $20                                 65.00
    Greenville. Mrs. Dr. Ellsworth, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            5.00
    Kalamazoo. “Helping Hand” Plymouth Ch. $27;
      Ladies’ Home Miss. Soc. $5; Rev. H. N. B.
      $1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                          33.00
    Litchfield. Woman’s Miss. Soc. $10.59; The
      Shining Light Sab. Sch. Class $3.41                     14.00
    Lowell. Mrs. E. A. Yerkes, _for Fisk U._                  10.00
    Mattawan. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    Muskegon. Cong. Ch.                                       22.00
    Pontiac. Mrs. Mills Gelston, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 5.00
    Romeo. Mrs. S. L. Andrews and Mrs. A. B.
      Maynard $10 ea.; Miss T. S. $5, _for a
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._; Box of C., val.
      $40, by Mrs. M. W. Fairfield                            25.00
    Sparta. Mr. Martindale, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                      2.00
    Sparta Centre. Rev. E. W. N. and C. I. M.                  1.00
    Union City. First Cong. Sab. Sch., to const.
      REV. H. H. VAN AUKEN, L. M.                             34.00
    Victor. H. P.                                              1.00
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   5.00
    Whitehall. Cong. Ch. $10.18.—Individuals, by
      B. Hammond, $2                                          12.18
    Ypsilanti. Dr. W. H. H.                                    1.00


  WISCONSIN, $205.55.

    Beloit. Mrs. D. Clary                                     10.00
    Fort Atkinson. Jared Lamphear                             10.00
    Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
    Keshena. W. W. W.                                          0.50
    La Crosse. Mrs. E. V. W.                                   1.00
    Liberty. Cong. Ch.                                         4.52
    Menasha. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                  1.00
    Milwaukee. Spring St. Cong. Ch.                           25.00
    Racine. First Presb. Ch. $55, _Ind. Dept.,
      Talladega C._—Mrs. D. D. N. $1                          56.00
    Ripon. C. F. H.                                            0.50
    Salem. Cong. Ch. ($45 of which from W. Munson)            58.38
    Sheboygan. A. D. and D. B.                                 1.00
    Shopiere. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Watertown. Mrs. H. W. Bingham                              5.00
    West Rosendale. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                13.25
    Wilmot. Cong. Ch.                                          1.60


  IOWA, $318.07.

    Bellevue. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  2.35
    Birmingham. E. S. Livingston                               5.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. $53.46; Mission Sab. Sch.
      $5; Individuals, _for Mag._ $1.50                       59.96
    Cromwell. Mrs. M. E. B.                                    1.00
    Eldora. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss. Soc. $25.—Mrs.
      Merritt $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                  30.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. S. N. M.                                     0.75
    Grinnell. Ladies of Cong. Ch. $50; Mrs. A. E.
      Crosby $10, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._—Prof. B. $1                                         61.00
    Humboldt. L. K. Lorbeer $5; Mrs. C. W. $1                  6.00
    Inland. D. M.                                              0.50
    Leon. Miss. J. K., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                      1.00
    Lyons. “Little Workers” $35, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._—First Cong. Ch. $22.52                         57.52
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Straight
      University_                                             18.49
    Muscatine. Rev. Dr. Robbins, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 2.00
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                  6.00
    Oskaloosa. Mrs. Asa Turner, _for Tougaloo U._             10.00
    Riceville. Cong. Ch. $27.95; Cong. Sab. Sch.
      $7.50                                                   35.45
    Seneca. Rev. O. Littlefield                                6.00
    Wentworth. Cong. Ch.                                       2.55
    Wilton. Woman’s Miss. Soc. $6.50; Rev. E. P.
      S. 50c                                                   7.00


  MINNESOTA, $156.91.

    County Line. Cong. Ch.                                     3.18
    Marshall. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
    McPherson. Cong. Ch.                                       8.03
    Minneapolis. Rev. E. M. Williams $51.16; First
      Cong. Sab. Sch. $23.84, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._—Plymouth Ch. $19.12                            94.12
    Northfield. First Cong. Ch. ($5 of which _for
      Fort Berthold_, D. T.).                                 24.45
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           14.64
    St. Paul. Rev. T. S. W. $1 R. H. 50c                       1.50
    Sterling. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00


  KANSAS, $5.

    Diamond Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00


  NEBRASKA, $10.25.

    Beaver Crossing. Mrs. E. Taylor                            1.25
    Nebraska City. Individuals, by Miss Lucy N.
      Bowen                                                    4.00
    York. Benjamin Bissell                                     5.00


  DAKOTA, $0.50.

    Yankton. Mrs. T. N. B.                                     0.50


  COLORADO, $0.50.

    Canon City. D. L.                                          0.50


  CALIFORNIA, $2.

    Rohnerville. Mrs. Mary A. Brown                            2.00


  OREGON, $22.50.

    The Dalles. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                               2.50
    Portland. Capt. Benj. F. Smith                            20.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $13.55.

    White River. Rev. S. Greene                                3.55
    S’kokomish. Rev. Cushing Eells                            10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $0.50.

    Washington. A. J. H.                                       0.50


  KENTUCKY, $0.51.

    Frankfort. Miss M. A.                                      0.51


  VIRGINIA, $28.46.

    Hampton. Bethesda Ch.                                     28.46


  TENNESSEE, $359.05.

    Chattanooga. Cong. Ch.                                    13.50
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   106.65
    Murfreesborough. Mrs. E. S. Grant, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    5.00
    Nashville. Fisk University                               233.90


  NORTH CAROLINA, $226.96.

    Raleigh. Pub. Fund. $100; Washington Sch.
      $14.60                                                 114.60
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $106.75; Cong. Ch.
      $4.61; P. J. I. and T. H. $1                           112.36


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $222.75.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  222.75


  GEORGIA, $537.50.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University                              162.00
    Macon. Lewis High School                                  74.75
    Savannah. Pub. Fund                                      300.00
    Woodville. J. H. H. S., _for Mendi, Indian and
      Chinese M._                                              0.75


  ALABAMA, $762.05.

    Athens. Trinity Sch. $32; Trinity Miss. Soc.
      $16.60; Miss M. F. Wells $15                            63.60
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                     88.95
    Montgomery. Pub. Fund                                    444.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Talladega. Talladega C.                                  160.50


  LOUISIANA, $185.

    New Iberia. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Mendi M._            2.00
    New Orleans. Straight University                           1.83


  MISSISSIPPI, $158.25.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University $151.90; Miss
      Orra Angell $6.35                                      158.25


  MISSOURI, $6.

    Kidder. S. C. Coult                                        5.00
    Laclede. Rev. E. D. C.                                     0.50
    St. Louis. C. M. J.                                        0.50


  TEXAS, $1.70.

    Marshall. L. H. S.                                         0.50
    Schulenburg. Rev. A. J. T.                                 0.20
    Whitmans. W. B. and E. A.                                  1.00


  ——, $10.

    ——. J. Estey & Co., by G. P. Guilford, Gen’l
      Agt., one organ, val. $225, _for Atlanta U._
    ——. Miss Lizzie Riley’s Class, in Perkins’
      Inst. for the Blind, _for Ind. Sch.,
      Talladega C._                                            8.00
    ——. Small sums, _for Postage_                              2.00

  ——

    Received at Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.,
      _for Student Aid_, from March 2d to Dec.
      31st, 1877, $1,467.28.
    ILLINOIS. _Aurora_: Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch.
      $50; Sab. Sch. Second Cong. Ch. $50;
      _Boltwood_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $7.50;
      _Chicago_: Mrs. Mary E. Blatchford $25; Miss
      Harriet Farrand $3; _Elgin_: Sab. Sch. Cong.
      Ch. $25; _Evanston_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.
      $50; J. M. Williams $25; John Williams $25;
      _Galesburg_: Sab. Sch. Ch. of Christ $50;
      _Galva_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. %50; _Genesco_:
      B. M. Huntington $25; M. B. Huntington $25;
      _La Salle_: Mrs. Tomlins $5; —— Lathrop
      $5; _Malden_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $16.25;
      _Marseilles_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $10;
      _Moline_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $75; _Oak
      Park_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $49.85; _Ottawa_:
      Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. $50; _Peoria_: Chas.
      Fisher $28; _Princeton_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.
      $19; _Streator_: Mrs. Ralph Plumb $30;
      _Toulon_: “Friends” $7                                 705.60
    MICHIGAN. _Ada_: Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $13;
      _Allegan_: Mrs. Elizabeth Booth $50;
      _Alpena_: Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. $39.47;
      _Covert_: Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $10; _Detroit_:
      Sab. Sch. Fort St. Presb. Ch. $30.75;
      _Galesburg:_ Rev. L. M. Hunt $20; Sab. Sch.
      of Cong. Ch. $17.50; _Greenville_: Sab. Sch.
      of Cong. Ch. $50; _Kalamazoo_: Sab. Sch.
      First Cong. Ch. $30; Sab. Sch. Plymouth
      Cong. Ch. $15; _Lowell_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.
      $5; _Olivet:_ Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $10;
      _Plainwell_: Sab. Sch. Presb. Ch. $7;
      _Portland_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $6.40;
      Ladies’ Miss. Soc. and Sab. Sch. 21.60                 325.72
    IOWA. _Burlington_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $50;
      _Clinton_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $25;
      _Davenport_: Sab. Sch. Edwards’ Cong. Ch.
      $50; _Denmark_: Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $28;
      _Dubuque_: Cong. Ch. $20; _Genesco:_ Sab.
      Sch. Cong. Ch. $25; O. Lyons, Mrs. Dr.
      Blanding $5; _Manchester_: Sab. Sch. Cong.
      Ch. $20.85; _Maquoketa_: Ladies’ Miss. Soc.
      $20; _Marshalltown_: J. W. Windsor $32.80;
      _Muscatine_: Cong. Sab. Sch. $50; _Osage_:
      Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. $19.56. _Oskaloosa_:
      Cong. Sab. Sch. $50                                    396.21
    WISCONSIN.—_Beloit_: Sab. Sch. of Second
      Cong. Ch.                                                3.00
    MINNESOTA.—_Minneapolis_: Rev. Edwin S.
      Williams $11.75; _Winona_: Sab. Sch. of
      First Cong. Ch. $25                                     36.75


  CANADA, $13.10.

    Caledonia. A. C. Buck                                      5.00
    Montreal. Rev. Henry Wilkes and I. C. Barton
      $4.05 ea.                                                8.10


  ENGLAND, $6.31.

    London. Mrs. Mary E. Mahan                                 6.31


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $500.

    Hawaii. “A Friend”                                       500.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $14,069.25
        Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 28th                 $71,433.70

                                           H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                   _Ass’t Treas._

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Newbury, Vt. P. W. Ladd                                    5.00
    Bristol, R. I. Mrs. Maria DeW. Rogers and Miss
      Charlotte De Wolf $250 ea.                             500.00
    Hartford, Conn. Roland Mather                          1,000.00
    New Haven, Conn. F. C. Sherman                            50.00
    Putnam, Conn. Mrs. Adaline S. Fitts                       17.50
    Florence, Mass. A. L. Williston                        1,000.00
    Cheateaugay, N. Y. Joseph Shaw                            10.00
    New York, N. Y. Stephen T. Gordon                        100.00
    Austingburgh, Ohio. L. B. Austin                         100.00
    Canfield, Ohio. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        17.00
    Streator, Ill. Samuel Plumb                              300.00
    Oakland, Cal. S. Richards                                100.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,199.50
    Previously acknowledged Jan. receipts                  3,716.33
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             $6,915.83


  FOR TILLOTSON C. AND N. INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Fitchburg, Mass. David Boutelle                          200.00
    Previously acknowledged Jan. receipts                    222.00
                                                            ———————
        Total                                               $422.00

       *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 11;
Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 4.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.
_Chartered:_ Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn., Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools:_ at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selina, Ala; Memphis, Tenn.; 11; _Other
Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS—Among the Freedmen, 209;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign lands, 10.
Total, 252. STUDENTS—In Theology, 74; Law, 8; in College Course,
79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404. Scholars taught by
former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under
the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accomodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; To Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested, to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
“American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be applied
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

  59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                            66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment.

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.


They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                  $7,400,000               DEATH
                                          CLAIMS,

                             HAS PAID

                   $4,900,000 Return Premiums to
                          Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000             OVER
                                      LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

                  _It gives the Best Insurance on
                    the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

                     C. Y. WEMPLE,
                           _Vice-President_.


                     J. L. HALSEY,
                           _Secretary_.

                     S. N. STEBBINS,
                           _Actuary_.

                     H. Y. WEMPLE,
                     H. B. STOKES,
                           _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.

                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish

                   Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and
Style; Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of
Public Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $3.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Acts, $1.75: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.”—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._

                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           GET THE BEST.

[Illustration:

                   Webster’s            Illustrated
                   Unabridged           Edition
                   Dictionary             3000
                                        Engravings
]

                       Webster’s Unabridged.

                3000 Engravings; 1840 Pages Quarto.

      10,000 _Words and Meanings not in other Dictionaries_.

                    FOUR PAGES COLORED PLATES.
                    A WHOLE LIBRARY IN ITSELF.
                     INVALUABLE IN ANY FAMILY
                        AND IN ANY SCHOOL.

Contains =ONE FIFTH= more matter than any other, the smaller type
giving much more on a page.

Contains =3000= Illustrations, nearly three times as many as any
other Dictionary.

[☞ =LOOK AT= the three pictures of a SHIP on page 1751,—these
alone illustrate the meaning of more than =100= words and terms far
better than they can be defined in words.]

More than =30,000= copies have been placed in the public schools of
the United States.

Recommended by =32= State Superintendents of Schools, and more than
=50= College Presidents.

Embodies about =100= _years_ of literary labor and is several years
later than any other large Dictionary.

The sale of Webster’s Dictionaries is =20= times as great as the
sale of any other series of Dictionaries.

        Published by =G. & C. MERRIAM=, Springfield, Mass.

                               ALSO

             Webster’s National Pictorial Dictionary,

               _1040 Pages, Octavo. 600 Engravings_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE SINGER

                         LEADS THE WORLD!

[Illustration: =Works of the Singer Manufacturing Co., Elizabeth,
N. J.=]

Notwithstanding the great depression of business, THE SINGER
MANUFACTURING COMPANY made and sold

  282,812 Machines in 1877—BEING 20,496 =MORE= THAN IN ANY
                                           PREVIOUS YEAR.

        _PRICES REDUCED_ =$30= _ON EACH STYLE OF MACHINE._
                        _Send for Circular_.

☞ The public are warned against a counterfeit machine, made
after an _old abandoned model_ of our Machine. To get a genuine
“SINGER SEWING MACHINE,” buy only of our authorized Agents, and see
that each Machine has our Trade-Mark stamped on the arm.

THE SINGER M’F’G CO., Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         E. D. Bassford’s

                   (COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK.)

                 Net Illustrated Priced Catalogue

Is a book of fifty closely printed pages, quoting, with the size,
capacity and style, the prices of about =SIX THOUSAND= items of
House-furnishing Hardware, China, Glass, Silver Ware, Cutlery,
Cooking Utensils, Table Ware, Dinner, Tea and Toilet Sets, Coal
Vases, Fire Sets and Stands, and every kind of goods for the
furnishing of a house and table, from the plainest for every-day
use to the richest and most elaborately decorated, all at prices
a great deal below competitors’ figures, as will be seen by
examination of Priced List, which, with Illustrated Catalogue, is
mailed free on receipt of 3c. stamp. Goods carefully boxed and
shipped to all parts.

                        Edward D. Bassford,

               Nos. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 17

                        _COOPER INSTITUTE_,

                       (Cor. 3d & 4th Ave.)

           And Astor Place (8th St.), Opp. Bible House,

                          NEW YORK CITY.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         HAUTE NOUVEAUTE.

                           Grand Opening

                                OF

                    NOVEL AND BEAUTIFUL STYLES.

                           THE DEMOREST

                 _Representative and Cosmopolitan_

                       EMPORIUM OF FASHIONS

Furnishing the World’s Ideal of Artistic Beauty, Novelty, Utility,
       Variety, Accuracy, Economy, and Fashionable Elegance.

Always First Premium in every competition, including the World’s
Fair; American Institute, New York; Mechanics’ Institute, Boston;
Mechanics’ Institute, Maryland; New York and other State Fairs,
and the exclusive award over all competitors at the Centennial
Exhibition.

                     PARIS, LONDON, NEW YORK,

                     And Agencies Everywhere.

                    RELIABLE PATTERNS IN SIZES,

                    Illustrated and Described.

                =_Prices from 10 to 30 Cents each,
                   or 5d, to 1s. 3d. Sterling._=

      SEND FOR CATALOGUE, with direction in French, English,
              Portuguese, Dutch, German and Spanish.

                   DEMOREST’S MONTHLY MAGAZINE,

        25 cts.; 1s. Sterling; Yearly $3.00; 12s. Sterling,

                    with a Magnificent Premium.

                  The Demorest Quarterly Journal,

    5 cents; 3-1/2 d. Sterling. Yearly, 10 cents: 5d. Sterling.

                   Mme. Demorest’s What to Wear,

                    15 cts.; 7-1/2 d. Sterling.

              Mme. Demorest’s Port-Folio of Fashions,

          15 cts.; 7-1/4 d. Sterling. _Either post-free._

                          NEW YORK HOUSE:

                    17 EAST FOURTEENTH STREET.

          =11 Bouverie St., London. 5 Rue Scribe, Paris.=

       *       *       *       *       *



                 *       *       *       *       *


                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          STOVES, RANGES,

                 Furnaces, Fire-Place Heaters, &c.

         THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT AND VARIETY IN THE MARKET.

                        EXCLUSIVE MAKERS OF

                 _P. P. Stewart’s Famous Stoves_.

We continue to make a discount of twenty-five per cent. from our
prices on these well-known Cooking and Parlor Stoves, to Clergymen
and College Professors. Orders and letters in response to this
notice, addressed to our New York house, will receive prompt
attention. ☞ Special terms to _=Clergymen=_ on all our Goods. ☜

Send for Catalogues and Circulars to

                                FULLER, WARREN & CO.
                                        236 Water St., New York.

  TROY.               CHICAGO.                        CLEVELAND.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Young America Press Co.,

                     35 Murray St., New York,

[Illustration]

manufacture a variety of hand, self-inking, and rotary printing
presses, ranging in price from $2 to $150, including the
=Centennial=, =Young America=, =Cottage=, =Lightning=, and other
celebrated printing machines. Our new rotary press, the =United
States Jobber=, for cheapness and excellence, is unrivalled. Other
presses taken in exchange. Lowest prices for type and printing
material. Circulars free. Specimen Book of Type, 10 cts. A sample
package of plain and fancy cards, 10 cents.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY, N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                           Imperial Soap

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                      The Laundry,

                                  The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

                _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N.Y._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         “Home Building.”

[Illustration]

A splendid book, 400 quarto pp., 45 original designs of buildings
of all classes, with specifications and costs. By E. C. HUSSEY.
_Invaluable to_ ALL _building or making improvements._
=$5= post-paid. Send money order to =E. C. Hussey=, Architect
and Practical Builder, 245 Br’dway, N. Y. Sketches and estimates
furnished on application. No charge for plans where I receive the
contract for building. ☞ SEND FOR CIRCULAR. ☜


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Case’s Bible Atlas.

Quarto Size. Accurate and _up to the times_. 16 Full Page Maps,
with Explanatory Notes and Index. Designed to aid Sunday-school
Teachers and Scholars. Every family needs it. Price $1.00. Sent by
mail on receipt of price.

=AGENTS WANTED= in every Township. _Liberal terms given._ Address
=O. D. CASE & CO., Hartford, Ct.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

Besides giving news from the Institutions and Churches aided by the
Association among the Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the
Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa,
it will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, and shall be glad to increase
the number indefinitely, knowing from experience that to be
informed of our work is to sympathize with, and desire to aid it.

The Subscription Price will be, as formerly, =Fifty Cents a Year,
in Advance=. We also offer to send =One Hundred copies to one
address=, for distribution in Churches or to clubs of subscribers,
for $30., with the added privilege of a Life Membership to
such person as shall be designated. The Magazine will be sent
gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons indicated on Page 92.
Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                   H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t Treas.,
                                         56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for
which our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially
valuable. Our readers are among the best in the country, having an
established character for integrity and thrift that constitute them
valued customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed to
the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE
RATES” for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine
paper, and superior printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=,
are advantages readily appreciated, and which add greatly to the
appearance and effect of business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the
month, in order to secure insertion in the following number. All
communications in relation to advertising should be addressed to

                       J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                       56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  KINGSFORD’S
  OSWEGO
  PURE AND
  SILVERGLOSS STARCH
  MANUFACTURED BY
  T. KINGSFORD & SON
  TRADE MARK.
  STARCH
  Is Perfectly PURE—UNIFORM and STRONGER than any other.
  THE BEST and MOST ECONOMICAL in the WORLD.
  Ask for KINGSFORD’S, and BE SURE YOU GET IT.
]




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation and spelling were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. The punctuation changes are too numerous to
list; the others are as follows:

The original text at the bottom of page 115 was unreadable, and
extended to read “...soldiers?”, as that was the logical conclusion
of the sentence.

“T Life Members” changed to “To Life Members” on page 126.

What appears to be “5 Rue Serebe, Paris” on page 128 was changed
to “5 Rue Scribe, Paris”, as that is the correct address for The
Demorest.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 04, APRIL 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.