VOL. XXXII.                                    No. 5.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            MAY, 1878.

                            _CONTENTS_:

  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                         129
    IN A NUT-SHELL—OUR FINANCES                        130
    OUR NEW CARTRIDGES                                 131
    THE BOARD OF INDIAN COMMISSIONERS                  132
    KING DAVID AND KING SOLOMON                        133
    GEN. O. O. HOWARD                                  134
    NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES                             135
    NOTES: FREEDMEN                                    136
    INDIANS                                            137
    THE PRESS.
    CONSECRATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS. Rev.
      James Powell                                     137

  THE FREEDMEN.

    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISSISSIPPI                   139
    VIRGINIA: The Church and School at
      Franklin—Beginnings and Results                  140
    GEORGIA: A Large Sunday
      School—Faithful Teachers—A Temperance S.
      S. Concert.—The Old Midway
      Church—Returning Courage and
      Prosperity.—Interest in Church and
      Sunday-School.—Needs of this
      Field.—Ogeechee                                  141
    ALABAMA: The Alabama Conference—Science and
      Religion                                         143
    LOUISIANA: Part of a Day Among the Poor            145
    KENTUCKY: Temperance and Evangelistic
      Work                                             146

  THE AFRICAN MISSIONARIES.

    THE FREEDMEN’S MISSIONS AID
      SOCIETY—A Public Meeting in Liverpool            147
    WANTED—Cloth, Bibles and School-books              148

  THE INDIANS.

    S’KOKOMISH AGENCY, W. T.:
      Sunday-School Progress—An Indian
      Festival—Temperance and Order                    148
    GREEN BAY AGENCY: Education Among the
      Menomonee Indians                                149

  THE CHINESE.

  A REBUKE AND A RESPONSE                              150

  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                  151

  RECEIPTS                                             152

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                         156

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           A. Anderson, Printer, 23 to 27 Vandewater St.




                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

  HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THATCHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    AUGUSTUS E. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               VOL. XXXII.    MAY, 1878.       No. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *

We are glad to recognize in the columns of papers friendly to our
work, articles, items and condensations from the pages of the
MISSIONARY. It is a matter of far less moment to us to
be credited than to be copied. What we want is, to have the minds
of the American people filled with the facts which may lead them
to appreciate the importance of the work in which we are engaged.
Further than that, we shall be glad to have them use the A. M.
A. as the almoner of their charities, so far as they may prefer
this channel. But, above all, we want the general work to be known
and prosecuted. Use us, then, friends—use us freely—we feel
no cuts, even of sharpest scissors, if you insert us into your
own circulation. Only, when it will serve your ends, as well as
ours and the common good, add at the end: “For particulars, see
AMERICAN MISSIONARY.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our missionaries in the South, who has had long experience
in the work, and has made close observations, writes thus in
respect to the need of a female missionary:

“BROTHER STRIEBY: I feel that it is necessary to have a
female missionary in this city. There is work to be done which only
such a worker can do—a work in the homes of the people, with the
_women_, young and old. We are not reaching the women as we should.
A man cannot do the needed work. The women of the North want to
do something for their colored sisters of the South. Here is an
opportunity for them. The homes of these people must be reached.
As many of them are, morality is well-nigh impossible. The vice
that is engendered in them is frightful. Do, my brother, give me a
missionary. Do beg the Christian women of the North to help in this
matter. Oh, the fearful degradation and ruin that stream from some
of the homes of these people!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. Mr. Cutler, of Chattanooga, Tenn., desires to acknowledge,
through us, the receipt of one dollar, from “Tennie’s Yankee
Friend,” West Medway, Mass. Mr. C. has received from various
sources, in response to his plea for this poor girl, sums amounting
to about seventy-five dollars.

While temperance revivals, under various auspices—of men and
women, of ribbons red and blue—are noted through the land, our
Southern field is not neglected. Our readers will see, in a
majority of the communications from our schools and churches in
this number, references to the increase of a temperance sentiment,
and an abstinence practice; here in a church, and there in a
school; here in the reformation of dissipated lives, and there
in the preoccupation of the minds of the young. Intemperance is
a giant evil South, as well as North, among the colored people
and the Indians, as well as with the whites. Thank God for every
victory. Pray God for wisdom and patience with which to withstand,
and then to stand.

       *       *       *       *       *


IN A NUT-SHELL.

The only caste-oppressed races in America are the Negroes, Indians
and Chinamen.

—The quarrels of the white people in America over the negro have
caused more bloodshed, and wasted more treasure, than all other
causes combined, and we are not yet at peace among ourselves about
him.

The South contains a little more than one-third of the population
of the country. It has 3,550,425 persons over ten years old who
cannot read; the West has only 409,175. The South has 1,137,303
_voters_ who cannot read their ballots; the West has only 217,403.
Have _patriots_ no duties here?

The Negroes in the South are more accessible to the Gospel than any
other people on earth; they welcome it; they are near us, speak our
language, their fervency will add a warmer element to our piety,
and they seem called of God to carry the Gospel to the land of
their fathers. Have _Christians_ no duties to them?

—The American Missionary Association bears to these
caste-oppressed races the help they need in education, practical
morality and piety. It has founded or fostered permanent
educational institutions for training ministers and teachers. In
its forty-five schools are 6,962 scholars, and its former students
are now teaching 100,000 pupils.

Its church work lays sure foundations. Sixty-two churches are under
its care, with 4,127 members—an average of sixty-six—nearly
all the growth of fifteen years. It has seventy-four theological
students in training; has prepared many ministers of the colored
race, and has sent out nine colored missionaries to Africa.

Seldom, if ever, has so much been accomplished in so short a time
at so small a cost.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR FINANCES.

We have reached the half-way station in our annual journey. The
statement of receipts, in this number of the MISSIONARY,
is the sixth since the last annual meeting. Our friends and patrons
naturally desire to know how we have weathered the stormy seas, and
what the prospect is of reaching port in good condition, and we
desire to tell them frankly and fully. We might refer them to the
monthly report, but we know that many of them are too busy to keep
accounts for us, their agents.

We know too well how the financial pressure of the year has
crippled one and another of them. Their letters—not empty,
either—have told us, in confidence, from time to time, of their
losses, and we know that their gifts this year have testified to
unusual self-denials, and to deepening convictions of the greatness
of their work through us. And the best of it all is, that these
gifts have not diminished from either of the classes from which
our work is supported, the living or the dead. For the ability
to make this statement, and in times like these, we thank you,
generous friends, and we thank Him whose money you are permitted to
administer. We take courage, and congratulate the poor for whom we
labor, and whose hope is in your remembrance of them.

In addition to the receipts above mentioned, we have received,
towards the payment of our debt, to April 1st, $8,921.72, and
also pledges, for the same purpose, of $6,950, the most of which
is conditioned on the payment of the whole debt within the year.
These figures encourage us to hope that our friends will go on, in
the same quiet and inexpensive way, until our whole debt shall be
entirely extinguished, and our hands unloosed for a more earnest
grapple with the great task of lifting up the needy and ignorant,
and yet hopeful races, for which we labor in America and in Africa.

Brethren, we may not be thought politic by all, but we believe in
perfect frankness with our donors and the whole public. We have a
diminishing debt, curtailed expenses, and an increasing revenue.
What, then? Shall any one withhold a dollar designed for us on
that account? By no means. Rather continue to endorse our policy
of economy and thrift. You are showing your confidence; do not
withhold it. And the need? The work is pressing on us from all
sides. We have to plan continually how to make each dollar do the
work of two.

The facts given in this number of the MISSIONARY, and
those of the past few months, show some of the wants which crowd
upon us continually. A new and commodious building must be erected
at Tougaloo, Miss., to accommodate the overflow of students, whose
beds have crowded into recitation rooms and out-buildings, and who
are now sheltered in temporary barracks of rough boards. A new
building is greatly needed at Atlanta, to accommodate its enlarged
work, and to meet the just expectations of the State Legislature,
which has granted it $8,000 a year, for several years, for current
expenses. The finishing of the church at Golding’s Grove, and the
enlargement of the school building there, are absolute necessities.
These are but specimens of the claims of this sort pressing upon
us. Added to these, is the imperative demand for the extension of
our church work in new and promising fields, stretching down to
the farthest limits of Texas. The enlarged African work is making
increasing demands upon our treasury. Besides all this, the three
coming months will witness the return of our Southern workers, when
the payment of their last bills and traveling expenses must be met.
With such an outlook before us, we are compelled, while uttering
our gratitude for the liberality of our friends, to entreat them
not to forget the pressing wants near at hand.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR NEW CARTRIDGES.

We have prepared with much care, and have in hand, a series of
pamphlets, to which we desire to attract the attention of our
readers.

No. 1 is a brief history of the origin and growth of the A. M. A.
It is contained in sixteen pages; shows the Providential opening
up of the work on this side and on that, and serves to answer many
questions—_e.g._, how we came to have a mission in Africa—many
of our friends, even, being ignorant of the fact that this was our
first work, and that we have a permanent fund set apart by its
donor for this very purpose. The same is shown to be true, in part,
as to the work among the Indians and Chinamen; while the demands of
the freedmen, and the opportunities after emancipation, are their
own vindication in the statement of the facts.

No. 2 is the African pamphlet, and contains (1) a history of the
Mendi Mission, carefully compiled by Dr. Dana, now of Minnesota. It
is much more full and detailed than that read by him at Syracuse,
and printed in the December MISSIONARY. The valuable
suggestions at the close of the paper are repeated only in their
headings. (2) A brief supplement brings the history down to the
departure of the second party of colored missionaries, Feb. 23rd,
1878. Large extracts are given (3) from the sermon by Dr. Scudder,
of Brooklyn, full of information, quaintly put, as to the land,
its products and its people; (4) from an address by Dist. Sec.
Pike, on “The Relation of the Freedmen to Tropical Africa”; (5)
from Secretary Strieby’s address, before the National Council, on
“America and Africa”; and (6) from a paper by Dr. Bevan, of the
Brick Church, New York, on the “Relations of England and America
to Africa”. The history, the present aspects, and many important
relations of the African Mission, are set forth with great fulness
in this pamphlet of forty-eight pages.

No. 3 contains the address by Rev. Joseph Cook, at the Annual
Meeting in Syracuse, revised and corrected by him. Those who heard
it will not need to be reminded how vividly, in his own inimitable
way, he set forth the perils to the nation from the three despised
races, if suffered, by neglect, to remain in ignorance and
degradation.

No. 4 is on the educational work of the Association. Its contents
are excerpts from various papers, sermons and addresses. (1) “The
Negro and his Needs,” by Gen. S. C. Armstrong, of Hampton, Va.;
(2) “Who are Affected?” by Rev. Dr. Brown, of Newark, N. J.;
(3) “Can he Care for Himself?” by Dr. Noble, of New Haven, Ct.;
(4) “The Weapons of our Warfare,” by Rev. Washington Gladden,
of Springfield, Mass.; (5) “Southern Attitudes,” by Dr. Rankin,
of Washington, D. C.; (6) “A Southerner’s Approbation,” by Col.
Preston, of Virginia; (7) “Rome in the South,” by Dist. Secretary
Powell, of Chicago; and (8) “The Special Needs of the A. M. A.,” by
Secretary Strieby.

These four pamphlets are not intended for indiscriminate
distribution, nor for a temporary need. Rather, we have prepared
them to serve as fixed ammunition, to be drawn upon by requisition,
according to need. They are cartridges which will fit any gun,
anywhere. If sent to individuals from our office, it will be always
with a purpose, and for an end. But they will be most gladly sent
in answer to requests from pastors, or from friends who may be
seeking information on the special departments of our work. If we
find these useful, and in demand, we may hasten the publication of
other four, which are in process of preparation; on (5) The Church
Work in the South; (6) The Chinese Work; (7) The Indian Work; and
(8) Systematic Beneficence.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BOARD OF INDIAN COMMISSIONERS.

The Ninth Report of the Board of Indian Commissioners is full of
condensed information and valuable suggestion.

The tabulated results of the peace policy during nine years
appeared in the MISSIONARY for March. In view of these
figures, the Report says:—

  “These results in industry, education, and Christianity in the
  short space of nine years confirm our belief, often expressed in
  former reports, that the peace policy is the only right policy,
  and there should be no longer any doubt as to its continuance as
  the permanent policy of the government. And yet every year the
  proposal is renewed to recommit the management of Indian affairs
  to the War Department, and abandon the work of civilization
  so well begun. The grounds upon which the transfer is urged,
  namely, greater economy, a more honest purchase and distribution
  of Indian supplies, more complete protection of the frontier
  settlers from Indian massacres, and a more effectual prevention
  of Indian wars—these are repeated year after year, in Congress
  and in the public press, and as often patiently answered and
  fully refuted.”

As to economy, a tabular comparison is published, which shows that
“supplies contracted for and furnished to military posts have cost
much more—in some cases thirty-eight to seventy-eight per cent.
more—than at the neighboring Indian agencies.”

It is asserted that the quality of goods supplied, as well as
the prices paid, command the approval of all competent and
disinterested judges, while the vigilance exercised over the
transportation and delivery of these supplies has been productive
of most satisfactory results in securing for the benefit of the
Indians the appropriations made in their behalf.

The Report refers to the conclusion of the wars with Sitting Bull
and Joseph, and calls attention to the fact that, though it may
have appeared as though the disturbances had been quite general, in
fact only a few hundreds, even of the Dakotas and Nez Perces, have
been engaged in them. The wars of the last nine years (of the peace
policy) have been more limited, and have cost far less than in any
other equal period of our history as a nation. During the forty
years preceding 1868, the direct cost of the Indian wars averaged
twelve and a half millions a year. Even the war with Joseph
demonstrated the effect of civilizing agencies, in its freedom from
the barbarities to women and children, which have attended such
outbreaks in former years.

Civilization and ultimate absorption into the body politic should
be the one purpose steadily pursued. Military means cannot
accomplish it. “Civilizing agencies must come from civil life.” The
testimony is that the influence of military posts in or near Indian
reservations is generally prejudicial to good morals, good order,
and progress in civilization. To teach Indian children to read and
write, or Indian men to sow and reap, are emphatically civil and
not military occupations.

The summary of recommendations, which are not new, but none the
less worthy of consideration on that account, is as follows:

  1st. Government of Indians by law.
  2d.  Division of reservation lands and homestead rights.
  3d.  Larger appropriations for the support of schools.
  4th. Consolidation of agencies, and reduction of expense.
  5th. Gradation of salaries on an equitable basis.

In view of the excellent results, and the greater promise _of
the peace policy_, and of the imminent danger of the speedy
transfer of the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the War Department, it
behooves every friend of the red man, who hopes for his ultimate
civilization and citizenship, to bring every legitimate influence
to bear upon our legislators to prevent the consummation of this
scheme.

Reader, do you know the mind of your senator and representative
upon this subject? If you do not, will you not find it out, and do
all that you can to make him a minister of peace, and not of war,
to these poor people?

       *       *       *       *       *


KING DAVID AND KING SOLOMON.

The fourth article in _Scribner’s_, for April, is entitled “King
David.” That regal personage proves to be only David King—a
long, lank, awkward, shy, near-sighted Yankee, who, up among the
New Hampshire hills, felt an inward call to go South and teach
the blacks. He was a man not much missed from his old home, and
not warmly welcomed at his new one. He was good, but not wise
nor practical. The blacks came to him, young and old, in flocks,
to learn to read, and he taught them morning, noon and night.
But all the while the white planters “regarded the schoolmaster
as an interloper, a fanatic, a knave or a fool, according to
their various degrees of bitterness.” He tried the experiment of
offering work to the idle blacks, but with little success. And now
a Northern carpet-bagging politician, of the baser sort, came into
his vicinity, and finding him an honest man, with some influence
over the poor freedmen, set himself to overthrow it by offers
of whiskey and promises of power. And poor David, innocent, and
ignorant of human nature, makes weak and ineffectual fight with
him, as he had before with haughty planters and ignorant negroes,
yields the ground and goes home again, baffled and discouraged.

This charmingly told story has but one fault, and that, probably,
is without intention. It may give the impression that King David
is a fair sample of the Northern teachers in the South, and that
his ill-success is the record or the prophecy of their general
disaster and defeat. The true lesson of the story, and that which
may have been, if any, in the writer’s mind, is only this: That
this David was no Solomon. That goodness, unsupported by wisdom,
is not sufficient capital for educational work. That a man who is
a failure at home, amid favorable surroundings, will not be likely
to succeed abroad, alone, with everything against him. That the
lame, the halt and the blind do not make good recruits for the war
against ignorance and sin.

Just to offset this story, which has doubtless had its counterpart
in Southern as in Northern schools and villages, we give the
story of one of our teachers in the State of South Carolina,
as written to us by himself only a few months ago. Its simple,
straight-forward truthfulness will, we think, make amends for its
lack of the spiciness and crispness of expression, which give so
delicate a literary flavor to the story of King David:

“I was born in Western New York, and, as all my friends continue
to reside there, I still call it my home. I have been a member of
the Household of Faith since 1859; I have been engaged in teaching
the freedmen since the fall of 1866, and, for the greater part of
the time, my salary has been quite small; but I love the work, and
expect my reward hereafter.

“I came to this place in 1872, and organized a Normal school, and
am still at its head. I met with much opposition, but I put my
trust in God, and went on doing what I thought was right, and soon
saw a change coming over the people. Students began to come in from
neighboring counties, and those who had talked most against me now
came to visit me. I organized the first temperance society for the
colored people in this part of the State, and thus got quite a hold
on the people. The organization is still continued, and is doing
much good. Several of our students, who are out teaching, have
organized similar societies, and I hear good reports from them.

“Early last fall, a couple of young men from another county, asked
me if they could not stay in a vacant room in the building and do
their own cooking. I, of course, gave them permission, and did
what I could to assist them in preparing the room. I had some old
lumber in the wood-shed, and from it we made a bedstead and table;
had boxes for chairs and newspapers for window shades. It was soon
reported that we had good accommodations for boarders, and, before
winter had fairly set in, there were nineteen men living in the
room, which measured 30 x 22. We had only enough lumber for four
bedsteads, and on these the nineteen men slept for four months.
A part of them would retire at 8 o’clock, and sleep till after
midnight; then arise and let the others take their places. They all
did their own cooking, and, as we had but one cooking vessel, they
were all night doing their cooking for the next day. Those who sat
up the fore-part of the night spent the time in cooking, and while
they were asleep the others were cooking in the same room.

“Twenty-three of our students are teaching in three counties, and
over 700 pupils are under their care. One of these closed his
school for a week, and walked sixty miles, in order to be present
at our closing exercises in June.

“We have a weekly prayer-meeting, which is well attended, and is
very interesting. We also spend an hour and a half each Sabbath
afternoon in reading and explaining the word of God.”

       *       *       *       *       *


GEN. O. O. HOWARD.

We wish to add our congratulations, to the many which have already
been given, to Gen. Howard, upon his final release from the legal
difficulties that have so long perplexed him. It is not easy to
understand the reasons for the persecutions heaped upon Gen.
Howard’s head. His Christian life, so kind in its spirit, and so
efficient in its activities, should not, in this day, provoke
enmity. His record as a soldier, making one among the bright pages
in the history of our Civil War, and his recent campaign among the
Indians, in which he was conspicuous for his active energy, as well
as for his courtesy to a brother officer, do not find critical
censors. It is in his connection with the Freedmen’s Bureau that
the rock of offence is found. We claim to know something about
that Bureau, and, therefore, speak the more freely. We believe
that no appropriation made necessary by the results of the
rebellion was more wise, nor has any trust under the Government
been more conscientiously executed than that of Gen. Howard in
its administration. So far as any part of the sum was used to
relieve physical suffering, it was divided impartially; and, in
the appropriation of the larger part of it to the education of
the colored people, there was the clearest comprehension of their
highest wants. The money was appropriated with just reference to
the claims of the different religious bodies co-operating with the
Government, and the educational institutions founded by it will be
perennial sources of blessing to this people, and will bear their
testimony more and more distinctly, as the years roll on, to the
wisdom of the Government in its bestowment, and of Gen. Howard in
its disbursement.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES.

RALEIGH, N. C.—“About twenty united with the church April
6th. Seven were members of the choir.”

WOODBRIDGE, N. C.—“A wave of the Gospel temperance
revival has reached Woodbridge. Brother Peebles printed two large
pledges, one for the ‘Band of Hope,’ and the other the ‘Murphy
Pledge.’ He also promised to print all the names that would sign
either pledge, and to-day there are upon the chapel walls the names
of eighty under the Band of Hope pledge, and it is expected soon
to have fifty names under the other. Already more than half that
number have signed.”

MACON, GA.—The church and Lewis High School have, after
an interval of a little more than a year since their buildings were
burned, a home again, in a substantial brick building, together.
The upper story is for the church. The hall will seat about 450
persons, and is neat and tasteful. It was dedicated a few weeks
ago, with appropriate services. Rev. S. S. Ashley, of Atlanta,
preached the sermon. A description of the lower part of the
building, which is designed for the High School, we hope to furnish
in our next issue.

SAVANNAH, GA.—Church building needs to be enlarged. One
hundred and eighty scholars present in Sunday-school, and good
teachers, “as faithful as Moses and as zealous as Peter,” always on
hand in time.

EAST SAVANNAH, GA.—Will be recognized by council
very soon. Three united with the church March 17th. Has eighty
Sunday-school scholars.

WOODVILLE, GA.—“Still in the midst of a revival. Nine
school children and four adults received to church membership April
7th. Six were baptized by immersion in the Savannah River—nearly
500 people were present; and one was baptized by sprinkling in the
church—the edifice could not hold the people. All the persons
baptized are members of Twichell School, held in the church.”

OGEECHEE, GA.—Received five members March 10th.
Sunday-school doubled in last four months.

LOUISVILLE and BELMONT, GA.—Numbers and interest
increasing.

MARION, ALA.—Mr. Hill writes: “The work is increasing
in interest. Our Sunday-school has more than doubled since we
came, numbering seventy-one. Twelve or fifteen had never been in a
Sunday-school or church before. Last Sabbath I visited a mission
organized, about a year since, by one of our church members, four
miles from here. The average attendance is forty. I found an
audience of seventy-five crowding the little school-house.”

ATHENS, ALA.—A larger number of scholars than heretofore
is reported, and a deepening religious interest. Several have
professed faith in Christ, and many more have been seeking the Lord.

SAND MOUNTAIN, ALA.—The church has no pastor, and only
about a dozen members, but meets every Sunday, and a sermon is read
by one of the members. The Sunday-school is also kept up.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES—FREEDMEN.

—There are in the State of Georgia 81,164 colored voters, who own
457,635 acres of land, valued on the tax list at $1,244,104, and
city property valued at $1,790,525, and about $1,000,000 worth
of horses, cattle, etc., and $2,100,000 on other property not
enumerated.

—The Atlanta _Republican_ asserts that a Campbell county negro
farmer raised, last year, seventeen bales of cotton and thirteen
hundred bushels of corn on nine acres of land, his only help being
a bob-tailed yearling.

—A Kentucky law orders the sale of certain convicts for a term of
servitude to the highest bidder. A negro was sold for six months
the other day at Hickman. It seems to many that the aim of the law
is altogether at the colored people. Is it not a dangerous weapon,
even if constitutional?

The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, in 1874, decided,
after thorough discussion, to continue its Freedmen’s Committee,
as then located and constituted, for five years (_i.e._, until
1879), “during which period its affairs shall be conducted with the
view to the final merging of the Committee with the Board of Home
Missions, the churches to be transferred as soon as possible to the
Board.” During this fourth year of the proposed five, this last has
been done; all the missionaries exclusively engaged in preaching,
and their churches are thus transferred. Evangelical work is still
retained by the Committee.

—The shrinkage in value of real estate has reduced the income of
the Peabody Educational Fund from $100,000 in 1876, to $60,000 in
1877. It may be still less this year.

—The Congressional Committee on Education recommend that the
proceeds of the sale of all public lands be set apart as a fund for
school purposes, the income for the first ten years to be divided
among the States on the basis of illiteracy.

—The Kentucky Legislature propose to make of their share an
endowment for the State University, against which the colored
teachers of Fayette County protest, as a gross injustice to the
common-schools, in the following resolutions:

  “WHEREAS, The _per capita_ for each colored child in
  this Commonwealth is only forty-five cents, while that of a white
  child is at least four times as great; and, whereas, the passage
  of the proposed education land bill by Congress presupposes the
  granting of equal school facilities to all; therefore, be it

  ”_Resolved_, That we regard the attempt, both of the Legislature
  of this State and the friends of Kentucky University, to maintain
  that institution at the expense of the colored common-school
  system of Kentucky, as an act unjust to the colored people of
  this Commonwealth, unworthy of the chivalry of the age, and as an
  act deserving the execration of a generous and magnanimous people.

  “_Resolved_, That we urge the friends of humanity in Congress to
  defeat the bill now pending in the Senate of the United States,
  unless it can be so modified as to render futile all efforts of
  the enemies of the colored common-school system to misapply the
  aforesaid funds.”

—At a meeting held in Baltimore, March 3d, under the auspices
of the P. E. Board of Missions, it was stated that there are in
the South thirty-seven chapels for colored worshippers of that
denomination, fifty-seven clergymen and teachers (five of whom are
colored) and one colored evangelist.

—In this Assembly it was held that of the 5,000,000 colored
people, one-third had, since the war, risen to a higher
civilization and a higher life; one-third had gone down to a lower
plane, and one-third were left victims of circumstances. If this
last estimate be correct, the upper third will work more and more
effectually upon the lower two-thirds to lift them to its level.

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIANS.

—General Howard testified the other day, as the result of his
personal observation among the Indians, that “wherever there has
been faithful teaching of the Scriptures, there have been most
abundant and remunerative results in civilization.”

—The representatives of the Five Nations, in the Indian Territory,
in their memorial to Congress, opposing the transfer of the Indian
Bureau to the War Department, appeal to the history of the more
than half century in which that department had complete control of
the Indian affairs. After setting forth the evils connected with
that period, they say, “May God spare us, and our race, from even
the possibility of ever again witnessing the recurrence of such
scenes.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PRESS.


       *       *       *       *       *


CONSECRATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS.

BY REV. JAMES POWELL.

Not long since, I spent a Sabbath in a well-known Ohio town, where
are two of the largest Congregational Churches in the State. In
one, the annual offering to the work of the American Missionary
Association was made that day. But, before the contribution
was taken, the pastor offered a prayer that both impressed and
instructed me. It was a prayer of special consecration of the
offerings that were about to be made. He prayed that the people
might give thoughtfully and intelligently; that God’s blessing
might rest upon the gifts, accompany them to the treasury, and
out upon the mission field of the society. No mere formality was
this petition, but a glowing, heartfelt prayer for the object
in view. I am quite prepared to hear that many other pastors
are equally thoughtful to publicly consecrate the benevolent
contributions of their congregations, although my observation leads
me to believe that such fidelity is exceptional. But why should
it not be the rule? Indeed, when one comes to think of it, the
wonder is that it is not. So large and important are the interests
involved—interests connected with the extension of Christ’s
kingdom; so sacred are many of the gifts—the devising of generous
hearts and the fruits of self-denial—surely very tender should be
the spirit of the occasion when the offering is made.

Yet not only on account of this should consecrating prayer be
offered when church contributions are taken, but also on account
of the money that is thoughtlessly, and often unwillingly, thrown
into the contribution box. It would be an interesting revelation
to have placed before us just what proportion of the so-called
benevolent contributions is consciously given as an offering to
the Lord. I fear it would be startlingly small. Now, all this
money that is thrown into the Lord’s treasury, by givers who have
no higher prompting than that which governs them when they toss a
nickel to an organ-grinder on the street, needs to be consecrated.
It is rather sarcastic to couple the word “benevolent” with such
contributions; they sadly need prayer before they go out on their
mission of benevolence.

Consecrating prayer would tend to correct this great evil by
inspiring thoughtfulness. “How much owest thou thy Lord?” would
have a recognized place in deciding the amount to be given. The
Lord is a party in the transaction. In the persons of the poor
and the perishing, He stands over against the treasury, and
rightfully asks for evidence of loyalty to His cause. Are crumbs
that fall from an over-supplied table, are drops that trickle
from an overflowing cup, a sufficient evidence? Christ knows the
heart. Think of what it is to bring to Him the mere waste of our
plenty, and call that charity. There is a possibility of actual sin
here, whose guilt is but increased by explanation. It was given
thoughtlessly—no reference to the debt owed, no reference given
to the needs of the cause to be aided—thoughtlessly! That is
precisely where the Christian conscience should sting most keenly.
For thoughtlessness in what is paid to Christ, is a most aggravated
form of sin. Grocery bills, clothing bills, rent and taxes shall
be paid with thoughtful reference to what is justly due, and the
world shall label him dishonest who tries even to quibble about the
point; but upon this transcendently higher plane of obligation,
involving the question of what the soul owes its God and Saviour,
many Christian men will do what, on the lower plane, they would
scorn as highly dishonorable. Prayerful thoughtfulness will work
reform in this respect, and develop a more genuinely benevolent
Christian character.

The money, too, that comes from unwilling hands needs consecration.
Many of the dimes and quarters that keep the deacons so long after
the service laboriously counting, had they voices and permission to
speak, would tell a story complimentary neither to the generosity
nor benevolence of their donors. They would say: “We are here
chiefly because the contribution box was passed, and our donors did
not like to appear niggardly. The hand that dropped us was so held
that the man passing the box could not see us had he wished to, but
we made quite a noise as we clinked down into our places, and by
our clatter produced an impression that there was a good deal more
to us than there is.” The hypocrisy entering into this portion of
the contribution needs casting out by prayer.

Another good would be secured by the offering of a consecrating
prayer when benevolent offerings are made in the churches. The
contribution box would be held in worthy esteem as a genuine
means of grace. By many it is so held; it should be by all. It
is no intruder in the sanctuary; it has the sanction of Divine
appointment, and is the necessary outgrowth of “pure religion
and undefiled” in the heart. Its visits to the pews should be
hailed with delight, for it brings even a greater blessing to the
giver than it carries away to the receiver. Still, it is not thus
welcomed by every one. Indeed, such an aversion have some people to
it that an announcement a week beforehand that it is to be used, is
to make certain that Sunday will find them sick. The nature of the
contribution-box sickness need not be particularly inquired into,
but “indisposition” is a good-sounding word with which to designate
it, and it is so elastic in meaning withal, that it can be made
to stretch over into the domain of conscience. Yet a very serious
sickness it is, and should be so regarded. Next to willingness
and ability, is opportunity to do good. To turn away from the
opportunity is to confess unwillingness; and such confession, the
Apostle James unqualifiedly affirms, is denial of having love to
God. Indisposition, therefore, means, on apostolic authority, that
the love of God dwells not in the heart.

I desire to commend the example of the Ohio pastor to all
pastors who desire to increase the benevolent contributions of
their churches. Let the contributions be consecrated by special
prayer. It interferes with no method that may be in use to take
contributions. It will impart new power to all.—_Advance._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.


       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISSISSIPPI.

REV. G. STANLEY POPE.

General View.

This is one of the youngest of the A. M. A. schools. Some of our
sister institutions have the advantage of us by four or five years.
None have had such frequent changes in managers and instructors.
At the commencement of the present year, there was almost an
entire change in the workers. In the face of many discouragements,
there is a remarkable degree of confidence on the part of the
pupils. This is manifest in the increased attendance, which, in
the Normal and Intermediate Departments, is sixty per cent. larger
than last year, and this without special effort on our part. The
ladies’ hall is full, and some are compelled to occupy a room in
the mansion. The young men’s dormitories have been more than full,
so that we have been obliged to put up some rough barracks, for
the accommodation of twenty young men. Before the building could
be finished, half the rooms were taken. Recitations are heard
in Professor Miner’s office and private sitting-room, as well
as in the public sitting-room at the ladies’ hall. Letters are
continually coming in, asking for work with which to pay board. It
seems more like the first two or three years after the surrender
than anything I have since seen. One young man walked fifty miles,
carrying his trunk on his back, to get here. There ought to be
means furnished us to help all such “tramps.”

The school will accomplish the work intended by its founders, when
it shall send out each year a class of well-trained teachers, who
will build up good schools and churches. It is not proposed, at
present, to enter upon a higher course of training than is given in
our best Normal schools.

Our location could not well be bettered, being almost in the very
centre of the State, and upon the great through line from New
Orleans to Chicago. The place is both beautiful and healthful. The
ground is high and rolling, and the great oaks, with their heavy
hanging moss, lend a grandeur and charm to the place. There are
only two schools of similar grade in the State open to colored
people—Alcorn, in the extreme south-west, and Shaw University,
in the extreme north. The field is before us. Mississippi, with
her 350,000 souls, over sixteen years of age, who cannot read
and write, is calling for our teachers. Chicago and New Orleans
are ready to consume our berries and hay just as soon as we can
produce them in sufficient quantity to ship. The farming community
around us is calling for shoes and harnesses. But our buildings are
entirely inadequate. The _immediate need_ is a plain, substantial
three-story brick building, that will cost $12,000, the first floor
for recitation rooms, and the second and third for dormitories
for young men. We ought to have it before our opening next year.
The ladies’ hall must also be enlarged, for we cannot put the
young women into barracks as we have the young men. There is every
indication of greatly increased attendance another year. We must
not close our doors. Will the readers of the MISSIONARY
give us the means to open them wide? The demand is for a forward
movement. Shall the demand be met?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Farm.

PROF. D. I. MINER.

Since the present school year commenced it has been a matter
of a good deal of study with us, who are now in charge of this
institution, how to so employ the labor of the students as to have
it a source of _some_ income to the school. During the past year,
the farm brought in very little revenue, owing to drought and other
unfortunate circumstances, and we have been compelled to purchase
largely some things which the farm ought to produce in _excess_ of
our needs.

We are expecting to cultivate seventy or eighty more acres than was
attempted last year, and, with better cultivation and the blessing
of God, it is hoped we shall produce as much corn, hay, potatoes
and vegetables as we consume during the year, even if there should
be no surplus to sell. On April 1st we had over sixty acres of corn
planted.

During the winter term we have had forty-six young men working for
half their board. The principal work in January and February was
preparing wood for a year to come; but since the 1st of March, the
farm and garden have taken all the labor. And this will be true for
the remainder of this school year, which closes in June, when our
heaviest crop (corn) will be “laid by.”

We are hoping gradually to work into crops which will occupy less
ground, and still be more remunerative than corn and potatoes. To
this end, last fall, we commenced in a small way with strawberries
by setting some two thousand plants, which are doing remarkably
well. From these, we expect to increase till we have several acres
in strawberries. Being on the line of the Illinois Central and New
Orleans Railroad, we have direct communication with a good Northern
market for such fruit.

The prime want of the farm is fences. During the war, and the
few years immediately succeeding, the fences in this part of the
country were nearly annihilated, in consequence of which the
plantations are almost all connected together, with no line of
fences between them. We need at least four hundred rods of fence
to divide this farm from neighboring plantations. If there was
_rail timber_ on the place, we would soon have the fences; but such
timber is scarce here, and lumber must be obtained for this purpose
from the pine region, fifty or sixty miles south of us. Much is
lost every year, in consequence of the exposed condition of our
crops.

       *       *       *       *       *

Industrial Department for Girls.

MRS. G. S. POPE.

We deem it of the greatest importance that the girls be taught how
to do all kinds of housework and sewing, neatly and thoroughly. So
our house and laundry work is nearly all done by the girls, their
work being changed every month, as for example: a girl who was last
month in the laundry is in the sewing-room this month, the next
is sweeping and dusting, the next washing dishes, etc. Our sewing
department has only been in existence a part of the year, and we
can hardly tell how it will pay financially. The girls have made
some bedding and done other sewing that was needed; have made and
sold some shirts. If materials are donated for sewing, I know we
can accomplish very much. One of the girls said the other day:
“Well, I have learned to make button-holes this month, any way.”
Another thought she could go to work and make a shirt all alone.
They are all willing and anxious to learn, and to work to help pay
their board.

A great deal yet remains to be done for the girls of Mississippi.
They need our help. We must throw about them such influences as
will restrain them from the terrible evils around them, and lift
them into a better life.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

The Church and School at Franklin—Beginnings and Results.

MISS M. A. ANDRUS, CARRSVILLE, VA.

Ten years ago, the 10th of last month, I was sent by the American
Missionary Association to Franklin, Va. The building I occupied
they called their church. It was a slab building, without any
windows, so that the light had to be admitted by an open door. The
school was large, having, I think, some sixty scholars, and was the
first school ever taught there for the freedmen. After teaching two
sessions, I was providentially called to another place.

In the building spoken of, I also taught my first Sunday-school in
the South. Soon a revival of religion followed, and a number were
added to the church, many of whom are members still, though some
have gone to their reward. One of these converts, after living
three years a happy Christian life, said, to those around his dying
couch: “As a little child rests in the arms of its mother, so I am
resting in the arms of Jesus,” then sweetly fell asleep.

Some three weeks ago, God in his providence brought me again to
Franklin. Instead of the old slab building, there was a new church,
well lighted, lathed, plastered, comfortably seated (they sat on
boards when I went there), and nicely warmed with two large stoves;
and a minister, to whom they pay $400 a year.

I had the privilege of being in the Sabbath-school. After the
lessons were over, the superintendent said, “The founder and first
teacher of the school is with us this morning, and we should all
be glad if she would address the school.” I arose and spoke to
them some words of encouragement, then took my leave. I there
saw some who were once my little ignorant scholars, now teachers
in the Sabbath-school. The superintendent himself was under my
instruction, and the preacher also. I commenced while there a
Woman’s Prayer-meeting, which is still continued, and in which,
last winter, began a revival, the largest they have ever had.

The day-school is now taught by Miss Delia Irving, a young woman
who graduated last June at Hampton, and received the first prize,
awarded to her by the hand of Mrs. President Hayes.

And now, in looking back upon these events and scenes, we behold
some of the little streams which have flowed out of the American
Missionary Association, and which are designed, no doubt, to widen
and deepen, through time and through eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

A Large Sunday-School—Faithful Teachers—A Temperance S. S.
Concert.

MRS. R. F. MARKHAM, SAVANNAH.

For several months past, our Sabbath-school has been gradually and
steadily increasing in numbers and interest. Last Sabbath morning
there were one hundred and eighty-six present. We have a very
faithful and efficient class of teachers—twelve in number. They
are scarcely ever absent. We as much expect to see all our teachers
in their places each Sabbath morning as to see the minister in the
pulpit, and we are almost never disappointed. And their hearts are
evidently in the work. We suggest the example (not boastingly)
as worthy of imitation by some schools at the North, where the
superintendents must, every Sunday, apply to the Bible-classes for
substitutes to fill the places of absent teachers.

Last Sunday evening the school gave a temperance concert. The
programme contained many passages of Scripture condemning the use
of wine and strong drink, also showing the terrible effects and the
final consequences of its use. In addition to the Bible showing of
the matter, we had declamations, dialogues, recitations, music, and
remarks by the pastor, all pertaining to the same subject.

All our classes (except one of very little children) were
represented. We were almost proud of our scholars, they performed
their parts so well, and we had given them very little time for
preparation. We had a crowded house, many stood about the doors,
and many others left, unable to gain admittance. The audience
gave marked attention, and evinced much interest during all the
exercises, and excellent order was maintained, though the house was
crowded. During some of the performances there were indications
of rather noisy demonstrations of delight, which, however, were
readily restrained. The music contributed much to the interest of
the occasion.

We hope that good may result from the effort, as intemperance
presents formidable obstacles to the progress of our work here.

       *       *       *       *       *


_McIntosh, Liberty County._

The Old Midway Church—Returning Courage and Prosperity.

SILAS DANIELS, GOLDING’S GROVE.

When Brother Floyd Snelson was first taken from us to go to Africa,
we almost believed that we should have to strike camp in the
wilderness. It gave us much pain to have him go, and the church
did become very feeble at one time. Since Brother Jos. E. Smith
took the place, we have had fresh courage, and have been going
forward again. Yesterday was our Communion Sabbath. As usual, we
had about 500 persons at the church. One young man was received to
its membership. At the three communions since Brother Smith came,
nine persons have joined the church. The people are coming up to
their church duties with much zeal, and becoming more and more
attached to their minister, and he is doing a good work among them.
Our Sabbath-school, also, has been re-organized, and, with four
teachers added, has an average of twenty-three or more scholars in
each class. We have for the first time introduced the International
Sunday-school Lessons, and all seem to be very much delighted with
them.

We have a large church built by the A. M. A. that can seat five
hundred persons comfortably, and it is pretty well filled every
Sunday with people from all denominations, anxious to hear the true
Gospel preached.

       *       *       *       *       *


Interest in Church and Sunday-School.

REV. JOSEPH E. SMITH.

As the weather grows warm, and the wet, muddy roads become dry,
thus favoring travel, the people from all directions flock in great
crowds to the house of God, eager to hear the “words of eternal
life.” I preached to a crowded house on last Sabbath, and many
wanted to know what they “must do to be saved.” God is with us.
Every Sabbath brings new signs for encouragement. There are marked
evidences of a growing interest on the part of the people to learn
of God through His Word. Especially has this been true since the
“International Lessons” were introduced in our Sabbath-school. It
makes a peculiar impression upon one to see persons fifty, sixty,
seventy, and sometimes eighty years of age, whom slavery has worn
out, sitting in their Sunday-school classes, with white heads
and bent over bodies, with their dim, sunken eyes fixed on the
teachers, and sometimes lips and throat moving as if to swallow
every word. None of them can read, and it is quite amusing at times
to watch them trying to recall the kings of Judah in their order,
telling who the good ones were, and naming some of the good things
they did. The joy and satisfaction which one shares, in being an
instrument in God’s hands for the revealing of His Word unto such
babes, are inestimable.

       *       *       *       *       *


Needs of this Field.

REV. S. S. ASHLEY.

Not only is this field needy, but promising. A majority of
the people, and those living about the old Midway Church, are
nearly all colored. Many of the white landed proprietors are
non-residents. Rice culture is the principal employment. The
colored people are rapidly becoming land owners, and are remarkably
successful in making their payments. Just now, their means are
mostly consumed in this effort, consequently they can expend very
little in improving their habitations; yet there is improvement
in this respect. They are beginning to come out of the swamps and
build by the roadside. As slaves, they were not allowed to dwell
near the “big road”; therefore, the woods and the swamps seem to
them more like home than the roadside. But without instruction they
will not achieve much domestic improvement. In fact, they need
instruction in every direction—in house-building, in road-making,
in agriculture, in domestic economy, in the improvement of time, in
business, as well as in schools and churches. A missionary to this
people should be an Oberlin. An Oberlin’s work will pay richly. The
whole field is accessible to missionary labor. Very many desire
instruction. They listen eagerly to kind, plain, Christian advice,
and will travel many miles for the privilege. Certainly these are
the marks of a good missionary field.

But to energize this prosperity, the meeting-house should be put
into comfortable condition. It is a large but unfinished structure.
In damp and chilly weather, it is uncomfortable—so much so, that
the pastor doubts about the propriety of holding, in the winter,
meetings at night. The place of Divine worship should be, not only
comfortable, but refining and elevating. The people who have good
meeting-houses will have good dwelling-houses. The meeting-house
should be a teacher of neatness, care, attention, thrift and
reverence. Unless the house is attractive, attractive preaching is
well-nigh impossible.

Again, the school-house should be removed to the road, beside the
meeting-house, and enlarged. Its present situation is out of the
way, and it is too small to accommodate the pupils.

These are my impressions concerning the A. M. A. work in
Liberty County. Brother Smith is succeeding well, but he needs
the improvements I have mentioned. I hope that you can aid in
completing the meeting-house. If the building stands a year longer
without attention, it will require repairs as well as finishing.
A portable _saw-mill_ would be a grand civilizing and missionary
agency.

       *       *       *       *       *


Ogeechee.

REV. JOHN K. MCLEAN.

Rejoice with me, for the Lord has answered our prayer for an old
man, who has spent sixty-five years in the service of Satan, but is
now rejoicing in the great grace and love of a forgiving Saviour.
It is quite a change in the old man, to see him in Sunday-school
and at preaching service, and to hear him using his tongue in
telling how good God has been to him, instead of taking His name in
vain, as he used to do. But while we rejoice with this one, there
are others for whom we are praying, and for whom we ask an interest
in your prayers, that they may be brought into the fold of Christ.

I hope to be able to help a few of the young people, but the way
seems dark at present. One of our Northern friends, who is here in
the work, said to me not long ago, “The people North know nothing
of the real condition of the people here; it is so unlike anything
there, that they cannot realize just how it is. Before I came here
I had heard a great deal about the state of things, but had no
thought of finding the people in the condition in which they are.”
I know that what she said is true, and that many of our friends
North, and in England, have but little idea of the real condition
of our people.

I am sure that if the representations that Christ and His disciples
gave of the Christian life be true, there must be a much greater
and deeper work among the people here before the Spirit of God
can make them His. I have thought and said often, and I say it
yet, that the work of the A. M. A., or a work of the same kind, is
the only thing that will save the people of the South. Nine out
of every ten know but little or nothing of what it is to live an
upright life, and, therefore, they have no real communion with God,
such as all His true children do have.

If the people here could be made to see the wrong there is in rum,
and to put it down, there would be some hope for them; but so long
as rum takes their labor, their money, their brains, and their
God from them, there is no hope for them, and but little chance
of doing them good. This is saying a great deal, but the truth
is light, and that is what we want. Fourteen persons have been
received into the church since I came here, and more are expected
to come in with us. I am sure the Lord is waiting to bless this
place.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ALABAMA CONFERENCE.

Papers, Reports, Sunday-School Convention, Theological Institute.

REV. CHARLES NOBLE, MONTGOMERY.

The Alabama Conference met Friday evening, March 29th, in the
college chapel at Talladega; the exercises opening with the annual
sermon, by Rev. Mr. Ash, of Mobile, and an address of welcome to
the delegates, by Prof. Lord. Rev. Mr. Andrews read a paper of very
great interest, on the “Mission of Congregationalism in the South.”
He first dwelt upon the history of Congregationalism, especially
in its freedom from complicity with slavery, its prominence in
the anti-slavery movement, and its comparative freedom from the
sect spirit, as peculiarly indicating its call to work among the
freedmen. He then brought out the peculiar features of the polity,
independence and fellowship, and showed how they tend (1) to
develop and sustain republican institutions, and to fit the church
member for his duties as a citizen; (2) to promote intelligence;
(3) to sustain an unshackeled pulpit, and (4) to develop personal
piety, including moral reform and revivals. This is a very bare
abstract of an essay which aroused great interest, and tended to
encourage and cheer on the workers very much. Other papers were
read, on “How to Develop Benevolence in our Churches,” by Rev.
Fletcher Clark, of Selma; on the “Relation of Talladega College
to our Church Work,” by Prof. Lord; and on the “Mission of the
Young Ministers in the South,” by Rev. P. J. McEntosh—himself one
of those young colored men who have gone out from Mr. Andrew’s
teaching to work among their own people.

The reports from the churches showed a very encouraging condition
of things. One new church has been organized during the year,
making a total of thirteen within the bounds of the State. All are,
at present, supplied with ministers. Almost all reported additions
on profession of faith, and evidence of the special presence of
the Spirit. Though it has not been a year of remarkable revivals,
it has been one of hopeful and vigorous growth. The feeling seemed
general and strong, that these little churches have “come to stay”
in Alabama, and have no idea of dying whatsoever. A great deal
of missionary activity was reported. Talladega College sustains
twenty-five Sabbath-schools; Montgomery and Selma, four each; and
others are not behind, according to their means and opportunities.
It is certainly a suggestive and encouraging fact that, in the
very heart of Alabama, a body of men could come together so full
of enthusiasm for Puritan ideas, and should, without exception,
report that their hold upon the communities in which they labor is
manifestly strengthening.

The Sunday-school Convention opened Monday night, with an address
on “The Object of Sunday-school Effort, Winning Souls,” by Rev.
George E. Hill, of Marion; followed by a lecture on the “Geography
of the kingdom of Judah,” by Rev. G. W. Andrews. Tuesday, Mr.
Clark, of Selma, gave a Bible Reading on Faith; Prof. Lord taught
the lesson for the following Sunday; Mr. Hickok opened the question
box, and gave a variety of helpful answers; and the delegates from
the different Sunday-schools made their reports. These showed that
the work of our churches rests on a good foundation, in numerous
live, growing Sabbath-schools; and that, in trying to save as many
as possible of the present generation, the men and women of the
next thirty years are not being forgotten.

Tuesday night, the Theological Institute began with a very
elaborate paper on the “Relation of Mental Philosophy to Theology,”
by Rev. D. W. Hickok. Wednesday, we were treated with examinations
in Smith’s O. T. History, and the Psalms, conducted by Prof.
Andrews and Mr. Hickok, and a paper on “Future Punishment,” by
Rev. Mr. Hill. Thursday, there were plans of sermons offered for
criticism by Mr. Clark and Mr. Hickok; a paper on “Joseph Cook,” by
Mr. Noble; and an examination on the “Patriarchal Period,” by Mr.
Andrews; closing with a free conference of workers in the evening.

Even more interesting to many of us than the proceedings of
Conference, was our observation of the work of Talladega College.
The Conference met Prof. Lord, for formal consultation in regard
to the College work by a committee; and that committee’s report
will be published. We met the students and faculty constantly at
table, and in the meetings; had a very pleasant picnic gathering in
the woods of the College Farm, and listened to a very entertaining
concert by the “Musical Union.” I cannot forbear expressing, what I
feel sure was the _universal_ feeling, interest and admiration for
the good work Prof. Lord and his co-laborers are doing. Many of us
were specially interested in the “Industrial Department,” and wish
the brethren of the College the greatest success in that effort to
build up manly, womanly, _self-reliant_ characters in the pupils.

My visit at Talladega, and my intercourse with the workers there,
have made me feel more deeply interested in the work than ever. I
could not ask a happier lot than to be permitted to give my life to
this field. It seems to me so _unmistakably_ the work of Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Science and Religion.

REV. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA.

The Theological Department of Talladega College has just been
favored with a special course of lectures on the “Relation of
Science to Religion,” by the Rev. D. L. Hickok, recently of
Kingsville, Ohio. The lectures were full of instruction, and
awakened a great deal of interest among our pupils. Mr. Hickok is
an able thinker, and an inspiring and enthusiastic speaker.

Skepticism has little footing here, and will have still less now
that we have such a flood of light thrown upon what was before
mysterious, and supposed to be known only to the scientist. Let the
scientist give us the “living” from the “not living” if he can, and
let him bridge the frightful chasm between different species of
the animal kingdom, before our faith in his new theories is much
strengthened. We believe in Mr. Cook, and wish we could see him
face to face to thank him a thousand times for his three published
volumes. We hail with joy these lectures by Mr. Cook, and mean to
do our part to reflect the light he is shedding, until it finds its
way, as it is sure to do, into the hearts of the masses, to bless
them with the “rest of faith.” His powerful arguments are taking
strong hold of us all.

Rev. Mr. Hickok is an original thinker, and has done us a good
service by his lectures. It is such men, of commanding influence
and power, that we need in this work of peculiar difficulties among
the freedmen. We wish other and similar institutions might be
favored as we have been.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Part of a Day Among the Poor.

MISS JOSEPHINE PIERCE, NEW ORLEANS.

In the rear of St. Charles Avenue you may enter and see an old man.
He says he has been converted since he was ninety years of age.
The Psalms are all his delight. There has not been a chip of wood
nor a grain of coal in his room all this winter. With the strength
of a hundred years in his muscles, he grasps a crust of bread, and
asks for more. His daughter replies: “Father, you should put your
mind on the Lord, and then you wouldn’t be so hungry; people that
pray all the time don’t have such an appetite.” As if this were not
enough, in this same room, the worse than fatherless baby, Leopold,
has come into New Orleans life, with that stain upon his birth,
which all the waters in the ocean cannot wash away. For these four
generations, from the great-grandfather to the babe of yesterday,
only one woman’s frail hands to keep the wolf from the door, and
hers held from going out to work, by the sickness that cannot spare
her from home. With all Father H’s ever-flowing liberality, there
have been weeks in succession, this winter, when there has not been
twenty-five cents’ worth of corn-meal to give the old man; for if
he had it, Aunt Deborah, who has seen General Washington many and
many a time, would have to go without; and if she had it, blind
Aunt Bagatelle would have to go without; and if she had it, blind
Aunt Milly would have to go without.

Perhaps it will be easier to breathe in the next house. Over the
way, as the mother’s hand is clasped in greeting: “You miss your
boy?” “Yes, James is dead. He wanted white sugar in his tea, and I
couldn’t get it for him. He wanted medicine, and I couldn’t get it
for him. He was hungry-like. So it’s good the Father has taken him;
I gave him the medicine your minister sent him. I put a spoonful of
the medicine that didn’t need sweetening into the medicine that did
need sweetening. It seemed to do him good.”

Let us go to the sunny side, three miles away. “God bless you, my
child,” was all the mother’s gift to Baby Vasa. A foster-mother
welcomed the orphan to her heart and her home. As she stands by
the tub—“I have no bonnet,” she says; “but we have the baby.
We used to have milk in the family, but since the baby came we
haven’t stopped the cart. I don’t know how to make clothes for him,
but I think I can learn.” God bless thee, Baby Vasa, for all the
unselfish love thy little fingers work out in the daily life about
thee! A can of milk for Baby Vasa brought a never-to-be-forgotten
light into the foster-mother’s eyes.

Here is a house without a number. As you lift the wooden latch,
you feel that some one is waiting for a coming step. “I was sick
last night,” Aunt Jemima says. “I thought the angels would come for
me; I sometimes think they will come very soon.” Her bed is under
the rafters, just at the head of those narrow stairs. The room,
without a door, is the only thoroughfare for another family. There
is no sheet on the bed; cotton was given for it, but was saved for
something else. She goes on: “People won’t come in one of these
mornings, and say, ‘Aunt Jemima’s dead, and she’s very poor, and
we’ll have to go right out and buy her some clothes,’ for I have
a skirt and a white dress, and a pair of new stockings.” “But the
stockings were given to you year before last—ar’n’t they worn out
yet?” “Oh, no! you don’t think I would ever put them on. When
the sun shines, I hang them on that pole to air them.” A piece
of sugar-cane is in the ashes for fuel. The old limbs failed the
last time they went out to Lake Pontchartrain for drift-wood. A
satisfied smile lights up the whole face—the ear bends close to
the lips, and they murmur: “I am rich; when the angels come for me,
I have a pair of new stockings.”

       *       *       *       *       *


KENTUCKY.

Temperance and Evangelistic Work.

REV. JOHN G. FEE, BEREA.

For more than two months we have had weekly meetings on the subject
of temperance, attended by large audiences, and securing more
than a thousand names to the Murphy Pledge. The moral effect of
the movement is strengthened by the fact that each pledge is made
whilst invoking the assisting grace of God, and is accompanied by
reading the Scriptures, and Christian song. Taking this one step in
the right direction is a preparation for a complete surrender to
Christ.

During a part of this time Brother Myers, from Hillsdale, Mich.,
has been here preaching at night. Our chapel is occupied during
the day as a recitation room, and though the weather has been
peculiarly unfavorable, yet a goodly number have been in attendance
each night, with some nineteen or twenty conversions, and many
other persons deeply impressed.

Each day brings to us fresh grounds of hope, and enlarged prospects
for usefulness. At no other time since its organization has Berea
College had so hopeful a prospect as now. Once or twice we have
had as many pupils, but at no other time so many of high moral
worth and social influence. Daily, the prejudice against a school
of colored and white pupils is subsiding; and young men and young
women of good habits and character are coming in, and such as
appreciate an education, in connection with just and righteous
sentiments. We feel that the demonstration here—that God leads and
is over us for good—is important for society and our country. We
have an abiding conviction that our heavenly Father approves, and
that we may, in faith, ask for grace and means.

With the people around us, our association is free and pleasant.
With many of the neighboring towns and congregations, exchange of
laborers and speakers is frequent, and to mutual advantage. What we
need is good men, discreet, self-sacrificing and earnest; and this
land will be brought under the power of the Gospel, and of a Jesus
who loves all impartially.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE AFRICAN MISSIONARIES.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE FREEDMEN’S MISSIONS AID SOCIETY.

A Public Meeting in Liverpool.

On the evening of March the 8th, a large congregation came
together in the Great George street church (formerly Dr. Raffles),
to welcome to Liverpool four colored missionaries, ex-slaves,
from Fisk University, and also to bid them farewell on the eve
of their departure; under the care of the American Missionary
Association, for the Mendi Mission, on the west coast of Africa.
The missionaries were very cordially greeted by many of the old,
and also the new, friends of the African race.

William Crosfield, J. P., a life-long friend of the oppressed race,
presided. After an appropriate hymn, prayer was offered by the Rev.
Stanley Rogers. Then the chairman said: “It gives me great pleasure
to preside at such a meeting of this society. These missionaries
before you are the first-fruits from the Fisk University, which was
established at Nashville, Tenn., for the education of those who
were freed from slavery by the late Civil War in America. And now,
here they are ready for work in that great mission field of Africa.
It is a vast field. And it is to be hoped that the British people
will do their part in the aid of this most important enterprise.
Fisk University was introduced to the English people a few years
ago by the Jubilee Singers, who have done wonders towards its
support.” The chairman then turned and added: “We must not forget
the wives of these young missionaries; we must give them a shake of
the hand, as a token of our interest in them.”

The Rev. Dr. O. H. White (one of the secretaries of the Freedmen’s
Aid Society), then gave an interesting statement of the origin of
the American Missionary Association, of its plan and work for the
African race, and of the formation of the Freedmen’s Missions Aid
Society, with the Earl of Shaftesbury as President, to be auxiliary
to the Association in New York. And he stated that the united
societies are now making a special effort to send missionaries from
among the freedmen to that dark and long-plundered continent beyond
the sea—Africans to teach and to save Africans!

The Rev. Andrew Jackson, one of the missionaries, then spoke, and
gave a very interesting account of their call to the work, and of
the great increase of the missionary spirit in Fisk University
during the year, and of the great self-denial on the part of the
colored parents and of pupils, that larger numbers may get an
education, and so be prepared for a greater usefulness among their
own benighted people.

The chairman then called on the Rev. Hugh Stowell Brown, pastor
for many years of the Myrtle street Baptist Church. He stated his
great interest in the Jubilee Singers, and in the efforts making
to send the Gospel to that long-neglected Africa, which is now
so wonderfully opening up to trade and commerce, and especially
to Christianity. He expressed his strong hope that these young
missionaries would be brought safely to their field of labor, and
that they might be greatly successful in their work, and that many
more might follow their example, and go forth to that great African
field.

Rev. Albert Miller (a true type of the African race), then
addressed the meeting, with the warmth and glow peculiar to the
sable children of the summer and more genial climes. He spoke of
the depressed condition of his people in America, and of the need
on that dark continent, to which he and his associates were now
going, under the Divine lead. He expressed the desire of his heart
that all Christians should pray and give for the evangelization of
the benighted millions of Africa.

The Rev. Mr. Pearson, M. A., pastor of the church, next spoke,
in the most cordial manner, of his great pleasure in welcoming
these young missionaries and the freedmen’s cause to that ancient
historic church. He commended the plan for sending educated
Africans to that great work to be done in those vast fields, which
have proved so fatal to Anglo-Saxon life. He said the British
people had special reasons for taking part with the American people
in this effort to redeem Africa from the darkness and doom of the
past centuries. If the work so well begun was followed up, as it
ought to be, the time was not distant when we should see a far
better day for that dark continent with its millions of people.

In the absence of the Rev. Mr. Wech, M. A., who was expected to
speak, his Elder, John Patterson, Esq., was called to fill the
place. He spoke with the pith and pathos characteristic of those
from the Emerald Isle. He recalled a little of the past history
of Liverpool and contrasted it happily with the present state of
things, when so many, from the different denominations of the city,
could come together so harmoniously to greet the young missionaries
from Fisk University, on their way to the west coast of Africa to
teach the knowledge of the Gospel to the benighted of their race.

The Rev. Wardlaw Thompson, in a few words, cordially commended the
Freedmen’s cause to the hearts and to the pecuniary support of
the friends of Africa. He then led the congregation in an earnest
prayer for the blessing of God upon the missionaries, in their
voyage to their distant home, and upon their work for many years
among their own people.

An appropriate hymn was then sung, and the services, which had been
highly satisfactory, were closed with the Benediction.

       *       *       *       *       *


Wanted—Cloth, Bibles and School-books.

REV. FLOYD SNELSON, SHERBRO ISLAND, W. AFRICA.

I must “strike while the iron is hot.”

There is very little of anything found here. Most of the children
and parents go naked, with the exception of those who wear a
handkerchief or country cloth. When you ask them to send their
children to school, they show a willingness, but render, as excuse,
that they have no clothes, and that they are unable to furnish
them. Cloth here is very high, and in most cases their excuse
is reasonable. If some person would be so kind as to send out a
quantity of cheap cloth, to be made up for clothing, it will prove
a blessing to many a suffering one.

The disadvantages and sufferings through which this people have
to pass are indescribable. I have had many calls for Bibles, but
regret to say I have been unable to honor any. We have a very
flourishing Sabbath-school, and are in great need of Sabbath-school
papers and tracts. The day-school is larger. Some of the scholars
are unable to pursue their studies for want of books. We cannot
keep the number together we now have, unless this evil is removed.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


S’KOKOMISH AGENCY, W. T.

Sunday-School Progress—An Indian Festival—Temperance and Order.

REV. MYRON EELLS.

Our Sabbath-school is accustomed to make a specialty of inducing
the children to learn the lesson in the Bible, believing that the
Bible is the best Sabbath instruction with which we can store their
minds. Learning six verses places a child on the roll of honor,
and reciting them perfectly gives him two credit marks. For four
Sabbaths during the past year there was no Sabbath-school, hence
the highest number which a child could receive was ninety-six.
That number was received by one Indian girl, and it is the best
that has ever been done in the school. Last year the highest number
was eighty-six, and that was better than the year before. Ten
others, out of about thirty who can read English, received over
fifty credit marks.

In January and February, I was absent some three weeks at an Indian
festival, ninety miles from here. They are wholly heathenish, but
thus far it has been about as impossible to prevent them as it is
to prevent a river running down stream; hence, the next best thing
is to guide them. Drunkenness at such places is one of their worst
dangers, and the principal Indians are beginning to realize it.
About 550 Indians were present, seventy-five of whom went from
this reservation. I have made the trip by canoe several times in
the summer, and in the winter by steamer, but the prospect was not
pleasant of traveling 180 miles in an open canoe; camping out when
it might rain, snow or freeze all the time. But the chiefs there
and here urged me to go, and assist in guarding against worthless
white men and Indians. There was no one else to go, and it did seem
that if they should get on a “big drunk,” and I should be asked
why I did not go and try to prevent it, and should reply, because
I was afraid it would be stormy, it would be a poor excuse. It
was a hard place to attempt to elevate the Indians, though I held
several services with them, but there was a prospect that I might
prevent their falling as deep into the pit as they would otherwise.
The result justified the work. One drunken Indian was arrested,
one drunken white man and wife were sent home; and it was plain
that, had I not been there, no one could have told where it would
have ended. Out of the seventy-five who went with me, I do not know
of more than half a dozen who have been drunk within four years,
although nearly all drank more or less previous to the adoption of
the present policy; and it is considerable to say that 550 Indians
were together for a week, and that there was only one case of
drunkenness, and only one of quarreling.

       *       *       *       *       *


GREEN BAY AGENCY.

Education Among the Menomonee Indians.

JOS. C. BRIDGMAN, KESHENA, WIS.

Education among the Menomonee Indians is making very perceptible
headway. At the suggestion of Colonel E. C. Watkins, United States
Indian Inspector, the three day-schools upon the reserve were
merged into a boarding-school, in September, 1876. This has proved
a success beyond our most hopeful expectations. No like school
among white children, so far as my observation goes, shows more
enthusiasm on the part of the scholars, more zeal on the part of
the teachers, or better progress, when the obstacles to success are
taken into consideration.

It is almost impossible to induce the children to talk English.
Only when forced to do so, will they speak in other than their
vernacular tongue. Naturally very timid, a proper and pleasant
familiarity with them is a sure inroad to their confidence, and the
knowledge of them thus gained convinces us that they are capable
of comprehending and grasping ideas of knowledge. We have no
difficulty in filling our limited accommodations; and, could they
be increased sufficiently, we should expect an average attendance
of one hundred children. This tribe very enthusiastically voted
$6,000 of their own funds, to be expended in the erection of a
school boarding-house; but the possibility of part of the tribe
becoming citizens within a few years, leads the Indian Bureau to
delay the building, so much needed and desired.

The Indian problem will never be satisfactorily solved until
education and citizenship are brought to the foreground, and take
the prominence they deserve.

This is strictly a government school. The two teachers are
Protestants, the assistant matron a Catholic. When first
established, the Romish priest attempted to break it up; but
understanding the agent’s aim, that it should be free from
sectarianism on the part of both teachers and matron, he has kindly
and wisely withdrawn all opposition, and is in pleasant harmony
with both agent and school.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *

“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Rebuke and a Response.

The following communication is clipped from the San Francisco
_Chronicle_. The club which expresses its mind after this sort,
is a society of so-called (miscalled) “workingmen,” followers
of Dennis Kearney. Bernal Heights is in the immediate vicinity
of Bethany Church, of which Rev. W. C. Pond is the pastor. The
production has marked peculiarities, not only in moral tone, but in
grammar and rhetoric as well, and affords to our readers all the
elements necessary for a correct and vivid picture of its authors:


  “BERNAL HEIGHTS CLUB.

  “The Bernal Heights Club met last evening, in Ewald’s Hall, J.
  Clancey in the chair. The following resolution was read and
  adopted:

  “The Committee on Chinese, in the discharge of the duties
  assigned them, do submit the following, with the recommendation
  that the same may be communicated to the parties addressed,
  either through the public press or by letter, as follows: To
  the Rev. Pond, pastor of the Bethel[A] Congregational Church
  Society, and members of the aforesaid society: We, the members
  of the Bernal Heights Club, having been informed that you, and
  the members of your society, are devoting your energies in the
  endeavor to teach and instruct Chinese in the English or our
  language, in order to Christianize them, and bring them up to
  our standard in all their requirements (a futile undertaking),
  knowing as we do that they consider their theory of spiritual
  economy and their doctrines concerning the soul’s immortality,
  and such things, far superior to our own, and they treat us and
  all our endeavors to bring them over to the theory and belief
  with absolute contempt, should convince us, without doubt, of the
  fallacy, we take this method of expressing our disapprobation of
  the course that you are pursuing, in encouraging Chinese in this
  country. We do not object to your following the commands of our
  Divine Master. Where He enjoins you to go out to all the world
  and teach and preach, He did not command the whole world to come
  to you. He said go out to the world and preach. Therefore, if you
  must preach and teach Chinamen, go to China, and you will there
  find an opportunity to unburden your full load of Christianity
  for the heathen lepers. We tell you now, and we shall tell you
  again, in all earnestness and candor, that we shall and will
  handle this question without gloves, and that the Chinese must
  go. Our organization is perfecting to attain that end, and the
  beginning of the end is not yet. We tell you these facts in all
  friendship. Do not think that we array ourselves as enemies, but
  as friends of our race we will defend and protect you as far as
  we can, consistently with our obligation; but we tell you you
  must stop this Chinese business. If there is no other way to
  perpetuate Christianity in this country but through the medium
  of the Chinese, why, let Christianity slide; if you cannot get
  a society of your own race and kind to support you, without the
  help of Chinamen, quit the business you are at, and try something
  else. Do not think we have signaled out your especial case.
  Other similar Chinese Christian factories will receive their
  full share of attention in due time in their own districts. To
  expel the Chinese from our shores is a duty we owe to ourselves
  and to posterity, and we will not relent one particle until that
  end is attained; and, in our struggle to attain that end, we
  have a right to expect the sympathy of all. We have a sufficient
  guarantee to warrant us in asserting that every member of the
  Workingmen’s Party of California will do his duty in this regard.”

Justice to San Francisco demands that we append to this deliverance
of the club the following editorial response, which appeared the
same week in the _Mission Mirror_, a paper published in the
section of the city in which Bethany Church and Bernal Heights are
located:


  “MOBOCRACY.

  “If that Bernal Heights Club don’t quit fooling with the bull,
  the first thing they know, that animal will turn and gore them.
  Their late pronunciamento against the Protestant Christian
  churches generally, and Rev. W. C. Pond in particular, for
  teaching the English language to the ignorant heathens in our
  midst, stamps the majority of that club as a body of men who, in
  point of civilization, stand away below the ignorant, helpless
  pagans at whom they profess to strike. No one for a moment
  believes them so reckless as to mob a Christian church. It is
  only another one of those little bluff games, for which political
  anti-Coolieites have become famous, and in which they propose to
  frighten somebody into their way of thinking. We greatly mistake
  the callibre of Mr. Pond if he is not more than a match for the
  whole mob. We agree with the great body of intelligent people on
  this coast that “the Chinese must go,” but the course proposed by
  this club will only tend to prolong their stay in this country.
  There is, at least, abundant opportunity yet for the fool-killer,
  if not the hangman, to reap a rich harvest on Bernal Heights.”

FOOTNOTE:

[A] A mistake for _Bethany_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

ALBERT, THE SLAVE BOY.

MRS. A. K. SPENCE, NASHVILLE, TENN.

Twenty-three years ago, in one of the northern counties of
Mississippi, there was born a little slave boy. No white blood
coursed in his veins. No one cared for his birth save, perhaps, his
weary slave mother. Some one called him Albert, and that was all,
for slave children had only one name. No future opened before him,
for slave children had no future, but service to a master. He grew
up to a life of poverty and toil and neglect, and early learned
what it was to be cold and hungry and sorrowful.

By and by began the fierce struggle between slavery and freedom.
The slaves were sent from place to place, to prevent their escape
to the Union army. Albert wandered about with them—to Tennessee,
to Texas, to Georgia—till the close of the war found him back in
Tennessee, and near the city of Nashville. Here he picked up his
letters, and, at the age of fourteen, learned to read. In 1869, he
went to a school taught by one of the first student teachers from
Fisk University, who encouraged him to look to something higher
than the spelling-book and reader.

In 1870 he entered that institution. Then began the long, hard
struggle for an education. For two years he groomed horses and did
housework. For two years more he took care of a drunken young man,
the son of wealthy parents in Nashville; and often might Albert
have been seen with his Greek or Latin book, far into the night,
sitting in some saloon or grocery, waiting for the young man, whose
aged mother had made him promise that he would never leave her son
in a saloon at night. Poor, awkward, and dressed out of missionary
barrels, often the recipient of student aid, sometimes well-nigh
disheartened, but always pressing on; once bought off by Mr. Spence
for the sum of ten dollars, when his father wanted him to work in
the field, he toiled slowly on, step by step, winning honor and
respect, and loved by his teachers as, perhaps, few students of
Fisk University were ever loved.

Always good in scholarship, always among the first of his class, in
nine years he passed from the alphabet to within three mouths of a
college diploma.

He was converted in 1872, and at once gave himself to the ministry.
In common with most students of Fisk University, he had thought,
though not very definitely, of missionary work in Africa.

On the 1st day of February, there came a call for two men for
the Mendi Mission. Albert had his plans. He hoped to graduate
from college, a thing few colored youths have attained. He had
two orphan brothers and a little sister, to whom he purposed to
give an education and Christian training. Perhaps he had also his
ambitions in the ministry, where educated colored men will soon
rise so high; but he laid them all aside when God called, and with
a fellow-student, whose soul was mightily stirred by that call, he
said, “Here am I, Lord, send me.” He said, “How I should feel, to
have God call, and I not be ready!”

His last request to the students of Fisk University was that they
would make this its motto:

  _“Her sons and her daughters are ever on the altar.”_

To-day Albert Miller is on the shores of Africa. The prayers,
the tears, the affections of the institution, are with him. The
prayers of the Christian heart of America will be with him, and his
companions, in that distant land. Did not God, who chose Abraham
and David, and Paul and Luther, choose him for such a time as
this, and make all the years of his slavery—his privations, and
his discipline—but the means to fit him for this great work of
carrying the Gospel to Africa?

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR MARCH, 1878.


       *       *       *       *       *

  MAINE, $146.95.

    Andover. Mrs. E. P.                                        1.00
    Bangor. First Parish Sab. Sch.                             6.00
    Bath. “Friend” $50; Mrs. J. C. 25c                        50.25
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Biddeford. J. N. A.                                        1.00
    Bluehill. M. E. Johnson.                                   5.00
    Brunswick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.00
    Calais. First. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.55
    Castine. Lucy S. Adams.                                   20.00
    Kenduskeag. Rev. J. S.                                     1.00
    Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     8.64
    Newport. M. S. N.                                          1.00
    Sweden. Cong. Soc.                                         7.00
    West Bethel. Mrs. E. C.                                    0.51


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $967.54.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $51.53.—“Memorial
      Union” $20; _for Wilmington, N. C._                     71.53
    Bennington. Miss Emily Whittemore, _for a
      Student, Atlanta U._                                    75.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.75
    Colebrook. J. A. H.                                        0.50
    Concord. C. T. P.                                          0.50
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $72.11.—Ladies of Second Cong. Parish $3,
      and bbl. of C. _for Wilmington, N. C._                  75.11
    Fitzwilliam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           30.50
    Francestown. Young Men’s Christian Ass’n.                  9.75
    Haverhill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             27.67
    Keene. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of 2d Ch., bbl. of
      C. and $3 _for freight_.—Mrs. N. R. C. 50c               3.50
    Lebanon. Mary L. Choate.                                   5.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  20.94
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.37
    New London. M. K. T.                                       0.25
    Orford. Ladies, bbl. of C. and 60c, _for
      freight_.—Miss A. E. 50c                                 1.10
    Peterborough. Mrs. E. H.                                   1.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.94
    Portsmouth. ESTATE of Dea. Joshua
      Brooks, by Henry A. Yeaton, Ex.                        500.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 3.10
    Troy. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  10.03
    —— “A Friend”                                            100.00


  VERMONT, $205.41.

    Burlington. Third Cong. Ch. $32.02; Rev. D. G.
      $1                                                      33.02
    Bridport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.25
    Cambridge. Dea. S. Montague                               10.00
    Fayetteville. Individuals, by Austin Birchard              2.00
    Granby and North Victory. Cong. Ch.                        2.00
    Ludlow. Mrs. P. M. $1; N. M. P. $1.20                      2.20
    Marshfield. Lyman Clark                                   10.00
    North Waterford. S. E. H.                                  1.00
    St. Johnsbury. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $99.44; W. W. T. 50c                                    99.94
    Strafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Williamstown. Individuals, by R. D. Nichols                1.00
    —— “Life Member” $9.50; Mrs. S. D. 50c                    10.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $1,232.07.

    Abington. Mr. Talbot                                       5.00
    Amherst. Second Cong. Ch. $17.75; E. T. S. 50c            18.25
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.40
    Athol Centre. Mrs. Emily Eaton                             2.00
    Belchertown. D. B. B.                                      0.50
    Boston. Mrs. E. C. Ford $25; Mrs. E. C.
      Parkhurst $20; L. F. H. 50c.; Smith Organ
      Co., 1 Organ, val. $100                                 45.50
    Brimfield. Benev. Soc.                                    41.00
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Aux. of Pilgrim Ch.
      $40, to const. MRS. R. V. RUGG, L.
      M.; Mrs. I. J. 50c                                      40.50
    Clinton. MRS. MARTHA C. GIBBS, to
      const. herself L. M.                                    30.00
    Coleraine. Miss E. McG.                                    1.00
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   2.00
    East Douglass. Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll., to
      const. MRS. MARY JANE WILLIS, L. M.                     30.22
    East Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $13; H. D. 50c            13.50
    East Woburn. Wm. Temple.                                   2.50
    Fall River. M. E.                                          1.00
    Fairhaven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
    Foxborough. Mrs. W. P. P.                                  0.50
    Fitchburgh. W. L. B. $1.—Rollstone Benev.
      Soc. 1 box of Bedding, _for Atlanta U._                  1.00
    Florence. Two S. S. Classes of Cong. Ch.,
      “Little Pets” $2.74; “Pilgrims” $3.63                    6.37
    Granby. Cong. Ch.                                         27.17
    Groveland. Mrs. M. A. R.                                   1.00
    Hanover. Mrs. McLauthlin and Mrs. Allen,
      bundle of C.
    Haverhill. North Cong. S. S. $50; John B. Case
      $5; Dea. J. Flanders $5                                 60.00
    Holden. Bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
    Hopkinton. Ladies                                          1.50
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Hampton
      N. and A. Inst._                                        70.00
    Lancaster. Ladies of Trin. Cong. Ch., 1 bbl.
      of C., _for Atlanta U._
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Malden. “A Friend” $3; Mrs. C. F. B. 50c                   3.50
    Mansfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             23.45
    Matfield. Mrs. O. Grover                                   2.00
    Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc. $36.11;
      E. N. Chapin $4.50                                      40.61
    Monson. Miss E. A. W.                                      1.00
    New Braintree. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         24.10
    Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         11.74
    Newburyport. P. H. Lunt                                   25.50
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   19.28
    Newtonville. Mrs. A. W. G.                                 0.50
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          34.00
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $15; “A Friend”
      $10                                                     25.00
    Norwood. Mrs. W. B.                                        0.50
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Princeton. “Ladies”                                       14.00
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                       25.00
    Rochdale. Miss A. G. L.                                    0.50
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             103.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. J. French $5; Robert Tobey $5;
      Silas Fish $3                                           13.00
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $16.55; Dr. Bacon
      $5.00                                                   21.55
    Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch. and Soc. $13;
      Prospect Hill Sab. Sch. $9                              22.00
    South Dartmouth. Mrs. M. P. S.                             1.00
    South Deerfield. Mrs. M. B.                                0.50
    South Framingham. G. M. Amsden                             5.00
    Tolland. Cong. Ch. $2.74; Rev. D. J. O. 50c                3.24
    Wakefield. H. L. H.                                        1.00
    Walpole. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      12.00
    Waverly. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student,
      Atlanta U._                                             17.72
    Westborough. E. J. G.                                      0.50
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.56
    West Dennis. Mrs. S. S. C.                                 1.00
    Westfield. Mrs. J. F.                                      1.00
    West Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.50
    Weymouth. ESTATE of Abby C. Pratt, by
      Henry Dyer, Ex.                                        193.56
    Weymouth and Braintree. Union Ch. _for Marion,
      Ala._                                                   45.35


  RHODE ISLAND, $1.

    Pawtucket. Mrs. G. W. K. and A. B.                         1.00


  CONNECTICUT, $3,075.99.

    Bantam Falls. Miss C. B.                                   1.00
    Brooklyn. D. C. R and S. H. T. 50c. ea.                    1.00
    Canton Centre. Mrs. S. B. H.                               1.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        39.00
    Colchester. Mrs. H. T. Newton                              5.00
    Cornwall Hollow. K. W. S.                                  0.50
    Derby. Cong. Ch.                                          25.00
    East Berlin. M. W. W.                                      1.00
    East Windsor Hill. Mrs. J. S. Clapp                        3.00
    East Windsor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    10.00
    Ellington. ESTATE of Mrs. Mary Pease
      Collins, by C. B. Pease, Ex.                           566.82
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch., to const.
      DEA. ALBERT ROWE, L. M.                                 49.27
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              22.00
    Glastonbury. Cong. Ch.                                   115.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                         30.36
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch.                               61.88
    Hartford. Member of Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.                 10.00
    Hebron. “A few lady friends,” by Mrs. Jasper
      Porter, bbl. of Bedding and $2 _for
      freight_, _for Tougaloo U._                              2.00
    Huntington. Mrs. Sarah A. Nichols                          2.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch. to const. SAMUEL
      UPSON, L. M.                                            39.00
    Meriden. Centre Cong. Ch. $38; C. H. Learned
      $30, to const. MRS. ELIZA G.
      LEARNED, L. M.                                          68.00
    Middle Haddam. Second Cong. Ch. ($10 of which
      from Dea. D. Dickenson)                                 30.00
    Middletown. First Ch.                                     22.10
    Morris L. J. W.                                            0.50
    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                     130.00
    New Britain. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    150.16
    New Preston Village. Cong. Ch. $29.50; Mrs. B.
      A. 50c                                                  30.00
    Newtown. Miss E. Leavenworth                               5.00
    New Haven. First Cong. Ch. $200.63 (of which
      $25 from Rev. Wm. Patton, D.D., _for Howard
      U._)—“A Lady” $3; B. P. $1                             204.63
    New Haven. ESTATE of Elias T. Foote,
      by Gardiner Morse, Ex., to const.
      EMERSON L. FOOTE, ARTHUR H.
      FOOTE, EMMET L. CROSBY,
      SAMUEL F. CROSBY and AMELIA L.
      FOOTE, L. M.’s                                         200.00
    North Haven. Cong. Ch.                                    50.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch.                                236.90
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            33.95
    Plainville. “A Friend”                                     2.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Ch. $203.57—Mrs. E. P.
      Hotchkiss $5, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._            208.57
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Stanwich. Subscribers, by David Banks                      3.00
    Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              23.00
    Warren. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          47.50
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. (in part)           596.37
    Wapping. Mrs. H. S.                                        1.00
    West Killingly. Miss M. W.                                 1.00
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch.                                   6.48
    Windsor Locks. Mrs. L. P. Dexter                           6.00
    Woodbury. Benj. Fabrique $20.—Mrs. C. P.
      Churchill $3, _for Tougaloo U._                         23.00


  NEW YORK, $568.58.

    Albany. V. S. K.                                           1.00
    Albion. Primary Dept. Presb. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              20.00
    Batavia. Mrs. A. D. L.                                     1.00
    Binghamton. “A Friend” $12.50.—G. S. N. 50c               13.00
    Brooklyn. Miss E. Cutler                                   2.00
    Buffalo. E. J. Buttolph                                    2.00
    Camden. S. S.                                              1.00
    Canoga. ESTATE of S. Chatham, by B.
      M. Chatham and G. W. Bockoen, Ex.’s                    241.40
    Crown Point. Mrs. Loraine H. Page                         25.00
    Dryden. Mrs. L. C. Phillips                               10.00
    East Bloomfield. R. B. Goodwin                             5.55
    East Palmyra. Mrs. Laura E. Dada, _for
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Fayetteville. O. D. B.                                     1.00
    Flatbush, L. I. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    Fulton. S. C. R.                                           1.00
    Griffin’s Mills. Cong. Ch.                                 6.00
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                        5.88
    Hobart. Mrs. N. C. Blish                                   5.00
    Homer. “A Lady”                                           50.00
    Holley. Mrs. Matilda Huff, $5; Miss Columbia
      Harrison and Mrs. Laura Farwell $3 ea., _for
      Berea C._                                               11.00
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch. $55, and Sab. Sch. $17                 72.00
    Jefferson. S. Ruliffson                                    4.00
    Kiantone. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Lebanon Springs. B. S.                                     1.00
    Le Roy. Mrs. S. Covert                                     5.00
    McDonough. C. Sawtelle                                     1.50
    Marcellus. H. B.                                           1.00
    Mexico. A. W.                                              1.00
    New Hamburgh. Miss S. H. S.                                0.50
    New York. L. B. B. $1.—Biglow and Main, 60
      copies “Fountain of Song,” _for Atlanta U._              1.00
    North Rose. G. A.                                          1.00
    Oneida. Stephen H. Goodwin $5; Edward Loomis $2            7.00
    Pulaski. S. C.                                             1.00
    Salem. B. C.                                               1.00
    Schenectady. A. W. V.                                      0.25
    Spencerport. “A Presbyterian”                             10.50
    Strykersville. Cong. Ch. $5; Dea. M. W. 50c                5.50
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. S.                                        1.00
    Union Valley. Dr. J. Angel                                10.00
    West Java. Cong. Ch.                                       9.00
    Whitney’s Point. Presb. Ch.                                8.50


  NEW JERSEY, $186.64.

    Newark. C. S. Haines                                      50.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  65.88
    Paterson. Benj. Crane                                     20.00
    Rahway. Mrs. B. T.                                         0.25
    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        20.00
    Summit. “A Friend”                                        30.00
    Westfield. Mrs. P. W. C.                                   0.51


  PENNSYLVANIA, $45.25.

    Candor. Miss I. C.                                         1.00
    Mount Jackson. A. N.                                       1.00
    North East. C. A. T.                                       1.00
    Pittsburgh. Rev. A. C. McC.                                1.00
    Prentissvale. Rev. M. W. Strickland $20 and
      Mrs. C. A. B. Lovejoy $10, to const.
      MRS. NETTIE S. MORSE, L. M.; C. S.
      A. 25c                                                  30.25
    Sharpsburgh. Joseph Turner ($5 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                             10.00
    West Elizabeth. J. W.                                      1.00


  OHIO, $320.74.

    Bellevue. J. S.                                            0.27
    Burg Hill. J. J. $1; Mrs. H. B. 75c                        1.75
    Chagrin Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  11.20
    Chatham Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 27.00
    Cincinnati. Rent $98.92, _for the poor in New
      Orleans_.—Sab. Sch. of Storrs Ch. $30, to
      const. MRS. HORACE WILSON, L. M.                       128.92
    Clarksfield. Mrs. H. B. Fraser $8; W. A. A.
      and J. M. F., 50c. ea.                                   9.00
    Cleveland. F. M. S.                                        0.50
    Columbus. Miss M. E. H.                                    0.50
    Elyria. Presb. Ch., by Birdsey Nevins                      5.00
    Four Corners. W. C. St. J.                                 0.50
    Hartford. S. C. B., Miss H. J. and A. N. $1
      ea.; Mrs. B. 50c                                         3.50
    Hubbard. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   5.87
    Jersey. Mrs. Lucinda Sinnet $10; L. N. 25c                10.25
    Lake Breeze. M. L. R.                                      0.50
    Lorain. H. L. K.                                           1.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           26.34
    Mansfield. Miss S. M. Sturges                              5.00
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch.                                  63.88
    Painesville. Ladies of First Ch. $5.26, and
      box of Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._—Mrs. L.
      S. $1                                                    6.26
    Rochester Depot. Mrs. W. S. and E. L. C.                   0.50
    Savannah. J. A. Patterson                                  5.00
    Strongsville. Isaac I. Gifford                             6.00
    Steuben. Levi Platt                                        2.00


  INDIANA, $10.

    Union City. Mrs. John Commons                              5.00
    Wolcottville. Jonathan Law                                 5.00


  ILLINOIS, $3,231.05.

    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                             5.00
    Chicago. Lincoln Park Ch. $30; Bethany Ch.
      $7.74; New Eng. Ch. Mon. Con. Coll. $9.48               47.22
    Crystal Lake. ESTATE of Simon S.
      Gates $1,500, and $421.20 on account of
      Interest, by Wm. D. Gates, Ex.                       1,921.20
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                          6.25
    Earlville. Cong. Ch., to const. MISS EVA
      SEELEY, L. M.                                           34.50
    Elgin. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Galesburg. E. A. Cooley                                    3.00
    Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                    24.90
    Hutsonville. C. V. N.                                      1.00
    Mendon. ESTATE of Jireh Platt, by Rev. H. D.
      Platt, Ex.                                             346.53
    Mendon. Mrs. J. Fowler ($100 _for Florence
      Chapel_)                                               100.50
    Metamora. A. C. Rouse                                      5.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. A. Aldrich                             5.00
    Morrison. John Roy $2; —— $1;—— $1                         4.00
    Oak Park. Mrs. J. Huggins, _for Student Aid_              10.00
    Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                        30.50
    Peoria. Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Griswold, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                  100.00
    Plainfield. Rev. Edward Ebbs                              10.00
    Polo. Robert Smith                                       500.00
    Princeville. W. C. Stevens                                 5.00
    Quincy. Lucius Kingman                                     5.00
    Rockford. Ladies of First Cong. Ch. $25 _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._—Ladies of First Cong.
      Ch. $13, _for a Student, Talladega C._                  38.00
    Wyoming. Cong. Ch.                                         3.45


  MICHIGAN, $1,138.18.

    Adams. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Armada. Miss Lydia A. Jackman                              5.00
    Calumet. Cong. Ch.                                       231.75
    Charlotte. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 8.38
    Covert. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                12.00
    Dexter. “A Friend”                                        10.00
    Hadley. Mrs. L. H.                                         0.55
    Leland. Rev. G. T.                                         1.00
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Memphis. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $5.—Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch. $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                10.00
    Mount Morris. Amasa Currier                               10.00
    Michigan City. Miss C. J. Parry, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Olivet. A. T.                                              1.00
    Port Huron. ESTATE of Mary J.
      Sweetser, by John P. Sanborn, Ex.                      750.00
    Portland. Rev. J. L. Maile                                 4.00
    Royal Oak. Rev. C. S. C.                                   1.00
    Three Oaks. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Unadilla. Mrs. Wm. S. Bird                                 5.00
    Union City. Mrs. L. B. Webber $2; Mrs. E. J.
      H. 50c                                                   2.50
    Wheatland. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        42.00
    Ypsilanti. F. C. C.                                        1.00


  WISCONSIN, $80.75.

    Appleton. Ann S. Kimball $30; “W. J. A.” $2;
      A. C. B. 50c                                            32.50
    Mazo Manie. R. L.                                          1.00
    Oconomowoc. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
    Racine. Individuals, by Mrs. S. B. Peck                    7.00
    Ripon. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           28.25


  IOWA, $162.55.

    Atlantic. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.50
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        26.42
    Clinton. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Fisk U._             15.00
    Dewitt. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            3.65
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           30.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. C. C. R.                                     0.50
    Green. R. L.                                               0.50
    Hillsborough. John W. Hammond                              5.00
    Independence. S. W. N.                                     0.50
    Iowa City. Ladies’ Sew. Soc., _for Tougaloo U._            2.15
    Logan. Cong. Ch.                                           6.72
    New Hampton. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                            1.50
    Osage. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           21.31
    Sibley. C. E. Jenney                                       5.00
    Tabor. Friends, by Julia E. Williams                       6.50
    Waterloo. Mrs. W. W. T.                                    0.50
    Wittenburg. Cong. Ch. $24, and Sab. Sch.
      $2.80, to const. REV. SETH A.
      ARNOLD, L. M.                                           26.80


  MINNESOTA, $119.03.

    Afton. Cong. Ch.                                           4.50
    East Prairieville. Mrs. Mary Adams                         5.00
    Litchfield. Mrs. S. B. Cathcast $2; W. E. C.
      50c                                                      2.50
    Marine. Cong. Ch.                                          2.04
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch. $19.22; Plymouth Ch.
      Sab. Sch. $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               44.22
    Northfield. Individuals                                    2.00
    Plain View. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                             8.00
    St. Paul. Plymouth Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Winona. Cong. Ch.                                         25.77


  NEBRASKA, $3.

    Steele City. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00


  DAKOTA, $15.

    Fort Berthold. Rev. C. L. Hall                            10.00
    Riverside. Rev. Lewis Bridgman                             5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $515.90.

    National City. Theron Parsons $5; J. T. $1.                6.00
    —— Receipts of “The California Chinese
      Mission”                                               509.90


  OREGON, $31.00.

    Forest Grove. ALVIN T. SMITH, to
      const. himself L. M.                                    30.00
    Hillsborough. Rev. J. S. G.                                1.00


  DELAWARE, $2.50.

    Felton. Talmon Dewey                                       2.50


  MARYLAND, $100.

    Baltimore. T. D. Anderson                                100.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $0.50.

    Washington. H. N. F.                                       0.50


  KENTUCKY, $11.85.

    Berea. Cong. Ch.                                          11.85


  TENNESSEE, $186.53.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   144.25
    Nashville. Fisk University                                42.28


  NORTH CAROLINA, $267.49.

    Raleigh. Public Fund $140; Washington Sch.
      $18.45                                                 158.45
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $94.05; Cong. Ch. $5.54           99.59
    Woodbridge. School                                         9.45


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $229.30.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  229.30


  GEORGIA, $463.31.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University $122.50.—Rev. S.
      S. Ashley $12, _for Student Aid_                       134.50
    Atlanta. Storrs School.                                  183.10
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    64.55
    Savannah. Beach Inst. $77.16; First Cong. Sab.
      Sch. $3                                                 80.16
    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., _for Indian M._                    1.00


  ALABAMA, $717.75.

    Athens. Trinity School                                    33.75
    Long Island. Mrs. Chubbuck and Miss Standish
      700 Apple Trees, _for Atlanta U._
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                     79.50
    Montgomery. Public Fund $440; First Cong. Ch.
      $75                                                    515.00
    Selma. Rev. Fletcher Clark $9.55, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._—First Cong. Ch. $8.10                 17.65
    Talladega. Talladega College                              71.85


  MISSISSIPPI, $91.40.

    Jackson. S. Lemley and Son, _for barracks,
      Tougaloo U._                                            20.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University $60.40.—Rev. G.
      S. Pope $9, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._              69.40
    Verona. Sab. Sch., _for Mendi M._                          2.00


  MISSOURI, $2.50.

    Index. F. P. M. $1; Others $1.50, by W. B.
      Wills                                                    2.50


  LOUISIANA, $157.25.

    New Orleans. Straight University                         157.25


  TEXAS, $1.

    Whitman. A. F.                                             1.00


  CANADA, $23.23.

    Montreal. John Dougall & Co. $8; A. Spaulding
      $5; Robert Dunn $5; P. H. Barton $3; R. W.
      Cowan $2; Premium 23c                                   23.23


  SCOTLAND, $5.89.

    Innellan. Young Women’s Prayer-Meeting, by
      Mrs. P. Taylor, _for Cal. Chinese M._                    5.89


  AFRICA, $2.

    South Africa. Miss Emelia F. Brewer, _for
      Raleigh, N. C._                                          2.00
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             14,319.13
        Total from Oct. 1st to March 31st                $85,752.83

                                                 H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                       _Ass’t Treas._

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Keene, N. H. “A Friend”                                    0.50
    Cambridge, Vt. Madison Safford                            10.00
    Dedham, Mass. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., M. C.
      Coll.                                                   11.39
    Enfield, Mass. Edward Smith                              300.00
    Newburyport, Mass. H. Lunt                                25.00
    Salem, Mass. Joseph H. Towne                              50.00
    —— Mass. “Worshiper at Indian Orchard”                   500.00
    Waterbury, Conn. Chas. Benedict, of Second
      Cong. Ch.                                              500.00
    Cazenovia, N. Y. Mrs. Mary Woodward                       10.00
    Homer, N. Y. “A Lady”                                     50.00
    Spencerport, N. Y. “A Presbyterian”                       10.00
    Hampton, Va. Helpers in Hampton N. & A. Inst.,
      by J. F. B. Marshall, Treas.                            25.00
    Greenville, Mich. M. Rutan                               500.00
    Ripon, Wis. Rev. H. W. Carter                              5.00
    Danville, Iowa. Mrs. H. Huntington                         5.00
    Index, Mo. W. B. Wills                                     4.00
                                                             ——————
                                                           2,005.89
    Previously acknowledged Feb. receipts                  6,915.83
                                                             ——————
        Total                                             $8,921.72


Receipts of the CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E. Palache, Treasurer,
from Sept. 26th, 1877, to March 20th, 1878:


  FROM AUXILIARIES, $64.20.

    Petaluma Chinese Mission. Chinese Pupils                  30.70
    Santa Barbara Chinese Mission. Friends                    20.00
    Stockton Chinese Mission. Mrs. M. C. Brown $6;
      Chinese $5                                              11.00
    —— By D. W. C. Putnam, Treas.                              2.50


  FROM ANNUAL MEMBERSHIPS, $68.50.

    1876-1877. Paid at Annual Meeting                         39.00
    1877-1878. Paid at Annual Meeting                         29.50


  FROM CHURCHES, $141.70.

    Benicia. Cong. Ch., Ladies $25, to const.
      REV. J. A. BANFIELD, L. M.; J. A.
      B. 50c                                                  25.50
    Oakland. First Cong. Ch.                                  38.00
    Redwood. Cong. Ch.                                         8.30
    Sacramento. Cong. Ch.                                     11.20
    San Francisco. First Cong. Ch. $18.70;
      Plymouth Ch. $30                                        48.70
    Santa Cruz. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00


  INDIVIDUAL CONTRIBUTIONS, $115.50.

    San Francisco. Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D., and
      C. T. Christensen, Esq., $25 ea., _for
      Barnes Mission House_.—Rev. Joseph Rowell
      $20; Miss Ella M. Pinkham $2.50; Rev. W. C.
      Merritt (annual membership) $2                          74.50
    Sacramento. Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D. $1; Cash
      $1                                                       2.00
    Sonoma. Rev. F. B. Perkins $5; “A Friend” $5              10.00
    San Francisco. Chinese $13.50; Chinese at
      Central School $11                                      24.50
    Bethany. Chinese                                           4.50


  FROM EASTERN FRIENDS, $120.

    Bangor, Maine. Mrs. E. H. Coe (gold)                      25.00
    Portland, Maine. State St. Cong. Ch.                      40.00
    Boston, Mass. Mrs. James Means                             5.00
    Granby, Mass. Cong. Sab. Sch. Mrs. John
      Church’s class, $18; Mrs. R. H. Davis’ class
      $12                                                     30.00
    Norwich, Conn. Mrs. E. B. Huntington $20, bal.
      to const. REV. F. B. PERKINS, L. M.                     20.00
                                                             ——————
        Total                                               $509.90

       *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 11;
Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 4.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.
_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11; _Other
Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS—Among the Freedmen, 209;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign lands, 10.
Total, 252. STUDENTS—In Theology, 74; Law, 8; in College Course,
79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404. Scholars taught by
former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under
the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accomodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

  Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
  office, as below.

  NEW YORK     H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON       Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO      Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
“American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be applied
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       E. REMINGTON & SONS,

                         MANUFACTURERS Of

Military, Hunting, Sporting and Target Breech-Loading Guns, Rifles
   and Pistols. Also, Cartridges, Shells, Bullets, Primers, &c.
      Likewise, Sewing Machines, Agricultural Implements, &c.

[Illustration: THE REMINGTON CREEDMOOR RIFLE.]

                           IN THE GREAT

                INTERNATIONAL RIFLE MATCH OF 1877,

Great Britain _vs._ the United States, Charles E. Blydenburgh, with
a REMINGTON Breech-Loading Rifle, made 429 points out of a possible
of 450, the greatest score ever recorded. Also, Dudley Selph, New
Orleans Team, made 219 out of a possible of 225.

REMINGTON’S

[Illustration: REMINGTON’S BREECH-LOADING DOUBLE-BARRELED GUN]

The Best ever offered the American Sportsman, combining all the
most desirable features of the best imported, together with
some valuable improvements not found in any other. Top Lever,
Snap-Action, Centre-Fire. For sale by the trade everywhere.

  [From the “Rod and Gun,” Nov. 18, 1876.]

  THE REMINGTON GUN.—Judge H. A. Gildersleeve, of the American
  Rifle Team, 1874, 1875 and 1876, thus writes under the date of
  November 10:

  “I have just returned from the Big South Bay, where I have been
  gunning for ducks. I tried, for the first time, the Remington
  10-gauge Gun I purchased from you last summer. My success with it
  was excellent. In my judgment, its shooting capacity cannot be
  surpassed. I want no better gun, and if I did, I don’t believe I
  could find it, even among the expensive grades of English guns.

                                             H. A. GILDERSLEEVE.”

[Illustration:

  REMINGTON’S NEW LINE REVOLVERS, 30, 38 & 41 _Calibre_.
  RIM or CENTRE-FIRE.
]

                           SEND FOR OUR

                      Illustrated Catalogue,

                    Treatise on Rifle Shooting

                                AND

                            PRICE LIST.

                   ☞ DISCOUNT TO DEALERS ONLY. ☜


               _Armory, Ilion, Herkimer Co., N. Y._


WAREHOUSES:

  283 Broadway, New York. P. O. Box, 3994.
  237 State Street, Chicago, Ill.
  149 Tremont Street, Boston, Mass.
  47 German Street, Baltimore, Md.
  54 Queen Victoria Street, London, England.

                 *       *       *       *       *


 From 20 to 40 per cent. of customary outlays for Paints, Roofing,
   &c., can be saved. Send for Samples and Reduced Price Lists.

                           H. W. JOHNS’

                     [Illustration: ASBESTOS]

                          LIQUID PAINTS.

Pure, Undiluted Paints, Full Body and Full U. S. Standard Measure.

No other paints for structural purposes equal ours in richness
and purity of color, covering capacity and durability. They are
especially adapted for exposed wood and iron, but are equally
desirable for inside and general work. Two coats of these paints
form a handsomer and more durable protective coating than three
coats of the best white lead and linseed oil, or any other paints
in use. We can therefore guarantee a _saving of from =20= to =40=
per cent. of the usual cost of painting_.

☞=The Contract for Supplying Paints for the Gilbert Elevated
Railroad of New York City was Awarded to Us.= _This is the largest
contract ever made for painting any single structure in this
country._ ☜

=_ROOF PAINT_= for tin and shingle roofs, iron work,
agricultural implements, fences, out-buildings, etc. _We guarantee
this to be a better and more economical paint than has ever before
been offered to the public for similar purposes._

☞_This Paint was used with entire success, when all others failed,
upon the roof of the =Exhibition Buildings at Philadelphia=, the
largest area of Tin Roofing in the world._ ☜

=_FIRE-PROOF PAINT_= for the protection of inside wood-work
of factories, bridges, boiler rooms and other wooden structures in
danger of ignition from sparks, cinders or flames.

☞_This Paint has been applied to more than four and a half acres of
wood-work in the two immense Dry Goods Stores of_ =Messrs. A. T.
Stewart & Co.= of New York City.☜


                         ASBESTOS ROOFING,

                  With White Fire-Proof Coating.

This well-known Roofing is now in use in all parts of the world,
and is the only reliable substitute for tin. It is suitable for
steep or flat roofs in all climates, and forms the coolest and most
durable portable roofing in use. In rolls ready for use; costs only
half as much as tin; easily applied by any one.

☞_The Asbestos Roofing is used in preference to all others by the_
=Kingsford Oswego Starch Factory=, =Remington & Sons=, =Cheney
Bros.=, =Columbus Car and Wheel Works=, _and by the most extensive
Manufacturers, Builders, Railroad Companies, etc., in the United
States._☜


                    ASBESTOS BOILER COVERINGS,

Consisting of =ASBESTOS CEMENT FELTING=, to be applied like a
mortar, and =ASBESTOS AIR CHAMBER COVERING=, in sheets and rolls,
for Hot Air and Steam Pipes, Boilers, and other heated surfaces.
The most durable, effective and economical appliances known for
preventing Radiation of Heat; will save from =25= to =40= per cent.
of fuel.

      Used by the United States Navy Department and in most
                    extensive Public Buildings.

     Asbestos Steam Packing, Boards for Gaskets, Sheathings,
       Fire, Acid and Waterproof Coatings, Cements for Gas
                    Retorts, Leaky Roofs, etc.

        ☞_All these materials are prepared ready for use,
              and can be easily applied by any one._

       LIBERAL INDUCEMENTS TO GENERAL MERCHANTS, BUILDERS,
                       AND LARGE CONSUMERS.

    Send for Samples, Illustrated Catalogues, Price Lists, &c.

                H. W. JOHNS MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

                     87 MAIDEN LANE, NEW YORK.

☞_The public are cautioned against purchasing worthless imitations
of these materials._

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

                             BANKERS,

              59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                 66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment.

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.

They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         “Weekly Witness.”

  “We are great readers in our family, taking twelve of the leading
  New York papers; but when the WITNESS comes, the others are
  thrown aside until we have read the WITNESS. There is something
  in it that I cannot understand—the more you read it, the more
  attractive it becomes.
                                                  COUNTRY BOY.”

The above is the close of one of the numerous letters we get from
young folks all over the Union, sometimes nearly one hundred a week
(of which we can publish only a few), and it shows what a hold the
WITNESS has on them. It has a similar hold on the older members of
families, for we receive four or five times as many letters for the
Home Department (83 last week) as we can insert. These are chiefly
from ladies, and are on all topics of domestic and social interest,
containing, we think, the best three columns a week of reading
matter that is to be found. The other departments of the WITNESS
are full of interest and improvement.

Terms, =$1.50 a year=, or $1 for 8 months, or 50 cents for 4 months.

                           JOHN DOUGALL,

                     “Witness” Office, No. 7 Frankfort St. New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        LIFE INSURANCE CO.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS,

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

                  C. Y. WEMPLE,
                            _Vice-President_.

                  J. L. HALSEY,
                            _Secretary_.

                  S. N. STEBBINS,
                            _Actuary_.

                  H. Y. WEMPLE,
                  H. B. STOKES,
                            _Assistant-Secretaries_.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.

                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish

Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo. $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich. $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Acts, $1.75: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._”

                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE SINGER

                         Leads the World!

[Illustration: Works of the Singer Manufacturing Co.,
               Elizabeth, N. J.]

Notwithstanding the great depression of business, THE SINGER
MANUFACTURING COMPANY made and sold

  282,812 Machines in 1877—BEING 20,496 =MORE= THAN IN ANY
                                           PREVIOUS YEAR.

_PRICES REDUCED_ =$30= _ON EACH STYLE OF MACHINE_. _Send for Circular._

☞The public are warned against a counterfeit machine, made after
an _old abandoned_ model of our Machine. To get a genuine “SINGER
SEWING MACHINE,” buy only of our authorized Agents, and see that
each Machine has our Trade-Mark stamped on the arm.

  THE SINGER M’F’G CO., Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Warren Ward & Co.

                     MANUFACTURERS OF ARTISTIC

                            FURNITURE,

Invite attention to a very large stock, including new =Eastlake=,
=Queen Anne=, =Japanese=, Modern and other choice styles,
exclusively of our own design and manufacture, which we fully
warrant, being made of the best seasoned material, and of
unsurpassed workmanship.

We keep on hand a large variety of =Chamber Suites= in Ash Walnut
and Mahogany, from =$30= up; =Parlor Suites= in all the varieties
of covering, from =$50= up; =Enameled Suites=, a large variety in
new styles, from =$17= up; =Library Furniture= of all kinds and
styles; =Dining Room Extension Tables=, =Sideboards=, =Chairs=,
=&c.=, at Lowest Prices; =Hat Stands=, =Hall Chairs= and =Hanging
Glasses=; also, =Superior Hair Mattresses=, =Pillows=, =Spring
Beds=, =Curtains=, =Lambrequins=, =Window Shades=, =Cabinets=,
=Centre Tables=, =Easels=, =Pedestals= and other fancy articles for
the Parlor, &c., &c.

Designs furnished and estimates give for Furniture of all kinds
requiring to be made.

We fully guarantee all our work, and our prices are as low as any
other manufacturers’ for the same quality of goods.

                        75 & 77 Spring St.,

                         Cor. CROSBY ST.,

  One Block E. of Br’dway, bet. St.
  Nicholas & Metropolitan Hotels.                   _New York_.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         E. D. Bassford’s

                (COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK CITY,)

Are just receiving from European and Domestic Manufacturers
their new stock of fresh and beautiful goods for spring season.
Every department of this great emporium is being re-stocked with
the Newest and Best =House-Furnishing= and =Table Wares=, in
=Hardware=, =China=, =Glass=, =Cutlery=, =Silver= and =Woodenware=,
and everything in these lines for the complete furnishing of =House
and Table=—=Dinner= and =Tea Sets=, =Chamber-ware=, =Cooking
Utensils=, =Tinware= and

                            BASSFORD’S

                Celebrated Nonpareil Refrigerator,

_The only Charcoal-lined Refrigerator_ made. Goods promptly
delivered in city, or shipped daily. Complete Price Lists and
Catalogues sent free, and every attention paid to inquiries by mail.

                        Edward D. Bassford,

               Nos. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 17

                        _COOPER INSTITUTE_,

                          NEW YORK CITY.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          STOVES, RANGES,

                 Furnaces, Fire-Place Heaters, &c.

         THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT AND VARIETY IN THE MARKET.

                        EXCLUSIVE MAKERS OF

                 _P. P. Stewart’s Famous Stoves._

We continue to make a discount of twenty-five per cent. from our
prices on these well-known Cooking and Parlor Stoves, to Clergymen
and College Professors. Orders and letters in response to this
notice, addressed to our New York house, will receive prompt
attention. ☞Special terms to _=Clergymen=_ on all our Goods.☜

Send for Catalogues and Circulars to

                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.
                            236 Water St., New York.

  TROY.                      CHICAGO.               CLEVELAND.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                    The Laundry,

                                The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N. Y._

Samples will be sent free by mail on receipt of 10 cents for
postage.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  CABINET
  ORGANS

HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXHIBITIONS. _Only American Organs
awarded such at_ ANY. _Before buying or renting, send for our_
LATEST CATALOGUES and CIRCULARS, with NEW STYLES, REDUCED PRICES
and _much information_. _Sent free._

                     MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO.,

                                    BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Case’s Bible Atlas.

Quarto Size. Accurate and _up to the times_. 16 Full Page Maps,
with Explanatory Notes and Index. Designed to aid Sunday-school
Teachers and Scholars. Every family needs it. Price $1.00. Sent by
mail on receipt of price.

=AGENTS WANTED= in every Township. _Liberal terms given._ Address
=O. D. CASE & CO., Hartford, Ct.=

                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Young America Press Co.,

                     35 Murray St., New York,

manufacture a variety of hand, self-inking, and rotary printing
presses, ranging in price from $2 to $150, including the
=Centennial=, =Young America=, =Cottage=, =Lightning=, and other
celebrated printing machines. Our new rotary press, the =United
States Jobber=, for cheapness and excellence, is unrivalled. Other
presses taken in exchange. Lowest prices for type and printing
material. Circulars free. Specimen Book of Type, 10 cts. A sample
package of plain and fancy cards, 10 cents.

[Illustration]

                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY, N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]

                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.


                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, giving news from the
Institutions and Churches aided by the Association among the
Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the Chinese on the
Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa. Price, =Fifty
Cents a Year, in Advance=.

OUR NEW PAMPHLETS.

No. 1.—=History= of the Association.

No. 2.—=Africa=: Containing a History of the Mendi Mission, a
Description of the Land and the People, and a presentation of their
claims on America.

No. 3.—=The Three Despised Races in the United States=; or, The
Chinaman, the Indian, and the Freedman. An Address before the A. M.
A., by Rev. Joseph Cook, of Boston, Mass.

No. 4.—=The Educational Work.= Showing the nature and reality
of the black man’s needs; the way to help him; the sentiment of
Southern men; the work of the Romish Church; the wants of the A. M.
A.

_Will be sent free to any address, on application._

                  H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t-Treas., 56 Reade St., N. Y.


                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for
which our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially
valuable. Our readers are among the best in the country, having an
established character for integrity and thrift that constitute them
valued customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                                   J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                         56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  KINGSFORD’S
  OSWEGO
  CORN STARCH
  —FOR—
  PUDDINGS | BLANC MANGE | CAKE, ETC.
  PURE AND DELICATE.
  PREFERABLE TO BERMUDA ARROW ROOT.
  ☞Inferior and spurious articles are often sold for =Kingsford’s=.☜
  To avoid GROSS IMPOSITION, see that =T. KINGSFORD & SON=
    is on each =BOX= and on each =PACKAGE=.
]




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation, spelling and grammar were changed only where the error
appears to be a printing error. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

“our” changed to “four” on page 135 (doubled in last four months).

“thec ontribution” changed to “the contribution” on page 138 (the
contribution needs casting out).

“fa ar” changed to “a far” on page 148 (we should see a far better
day).

“Cougregational” changed to “Congregational” on page 156 (Room 21,
Congregational House).

“aud” changed to “and” on page 160 (Hall Chairs and Hanging
Glasses).







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 05, MAY, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.