VOL. XXXII.                                                No. 6.

                               THE

                      AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                *       *       *       *       *

              “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                *       *       *       *       *

                           JUNE, 1878.




                           _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                161
    PRINCIPLES AND PLANS                                      162
    DEPARTURE OF THE AZOR.—THE INDIAN BOYS AT HAMPTON         163
    A SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONCERT                                   164
    AN EDUCATED MINISTRY.—ATLANTA AND FISK UNIVERSITIES       165
    NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES                                    168
    ITEMS FROM THE SCHOOLS.—GENERAL NOTES                     169


  THE FREEDMEN.

    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY                                       172
    VIRGINIA: Additions to the Church—An Indian’s
      Creed—A Good Beginning                                  174
    SOUTH CAROLINA: History of “Avery” Graduates              174
    GEORGIA: Pilgrim Church and Sunday-School—Band of
      Hope—Twitchell School.—School  Children Farming—
      Their Parents Buying Farms.—A Growing School—A
      Literary Society                                        175
    MISSISSIPPI: An Old School—Temperance Work—The
      Gourd Family                                            176
    THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY               177
    THE INTERNATIONAL SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONVENTION.—ANNUAL
      MEETING OF THE SOUTH-WESTERN CONFERENCE                 178
    THE SINGERS TO THE MISSIONARIES, GREETING                 180


  AFRICA.

    ARRIVAL OF THE NEW MISSIONARIES.—FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF
      AFRICA—A SUNDAY SERVICE—A SCHOOL CELEBRATION            181
    ADVANTAGES OF COLORED MISSIONARIES                        182


  THE INDIANS.

    SCHOOL WANTS AND FARM WORK                                182
    AN INDIAN WANTS A COW                                     183


  THE CHINESE.

    FUNG AFFOO’S BIBLE CLASS—VISALIA AND PETALUMA             183


  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                         185


  RECEIPTS                                                    185


  CONSTITUTION                                                189


  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                                190

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            NEW YORK:

        Published by the American Missionary Association,

                     ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                *       *       *       *       *

               Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                *       *       *       *       *

          A. Anderson, Printer, 23 to 27 Vandewater St.

                *       *       *       *       *




               _American Missionary Association_,

                     56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    AUGUSTUS E. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or,
when more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made
payable to his order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of
each letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and
State in which it is located.




                               THE

                      AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXII.     JUNE, 1878.      No. 6.

                *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


As will be seen elsewhere, our new missionaries arrived at
Freetown, Sierra Leone, March 23d, just one month from the date
of their leaving New York by steamer for England. They had only
the ordinary discomforts of a sea voyage, and reached their
destination in good condition. Their first impressions of the new
field seem to be quite favorable, and their desire to be to enter
on the new work at once. We look to the Lord of the harvest for
His blessing on the lives and labors of all those who have gone
from us to the Mendi Mission.

       *       *       *       *       *

We read with unfeigned regret of the disasters and delays which
the English and Scotch missionaries have met with, in attempting
to begin their new work in Central Africa. The expedition of
the London Missionary Society was, from July to January last,
trying to push its way with its supplies to its destination on
Lake Tanganyika, but was obliged to encamp for the rainy season
at Kirasa, only about one-third of the way. It is hoped that
during the present year they may reach the lake, and establish
themselves there. The mission of the Free and United Presbyterian
Churches is in danger of being driven from its station at
Livingstonia, on Lake Nyanza, by so insignificant an enemy as a
fly. The bite of the tsetse, deadly to all domestic animals, has
sadly impoverished them, impeded their industrial operations,
and curtailed their usefulness in advancing the civilization of
Africa. The station may have to be moved. A new site must be
sought with great care, which will not be liable to this pest.

In South Africa another missionary institution has been
endangered by the Caffre War, three English officials having been
murdered not far away; while missionaries Smith and O’Neill, of
the Church Missionary Society in Central Africa, have been killed
by hostile natives, on their way back to Uganda, the capital of
King M’tesa. We believe that our forces at Good Hope and Avery
are not liable to any of these perils. The station is accessible
and reached; no deadly venom is in the insect life around them,
nor are there unfriendly nations near. Only the dangers common to
such regions are there to threaten them. And yet we must not set
our hopes too high, or base them too confidently on any of the
uncertainties which the future still holds. In a land of delays
we know not what may hinder; amid a thousand possibilities, we
cannot tell what peril lurks. Our hope is in the Lord—that He
will suffer no evil to befall them, but give them strength for
patient continuance in well-doing.

Our friends at Talladega College miss their names from the
Institutions we mentioned in the May MISSIONARY, as needing
greatly, and at once, enlarged accommodations. We did not mention
their wants, as indeed we did not other important needs; and
perhaps the reason was, as they suggest, because, appreciating
the strain laid upon our resources this year, they have
considerately refrained from pressing the case which, last year,
they laid before us. They say “It is difficult for us to see how
any institutions in the South can be in more pressing need than
we of a new dormitory.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Whidby’s fears that a colored delegate to the Atlanta
Sunday-school Convention would be either “lionized or snubbed”
to that extent that it would be better for him not to come,
proved to be not well grounded. The warned man did not come; but,
fortunately, another did, of similar complexion, and that from
Texas. He was received and treated just as the others were, and
he behaved as well. The fact is, they were much busier devising
for Sunday-school work than applying a color metre to each
other’s faces. We are very glad the Texas brother was there.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRINCIPLES AND PLANS.

—This Association does not affirm that races, any more
than individuals, are equal in physical or mental fibre and
development. Some races, as well as individuals, are manifestly
below others in some respects. All that we claim is, that all
men shall be regarded as equal _before God and the Law_; and
that hence, in all churches of Christ, no distinction be made,
on account of race or color; and also that, in the enactment and
administration of the laws of the land, all races be equally
protected in person and property, and that whatever immunities or
privileges are granted to one, be extended to all.

—This Association does not found exclusively colored churches.
They are only exclusive because they are not exclusive. They are
open to all races, and hence but few white persons unite with
them. But, while the work of the Association has been principally
among the colored people in the South, as being at present most
accessible, yet it has always favored the establishment of
churches, mainly white, where the distribution of population
calls for them, and which allow colored persons freely to
unite with them. Thus, the early efforts of John G. Fee, its
first missionary in the South, was in the formation of white
churches in Kentucky. So, also, the counsel of its officers was
sought and given in the organization of the Second (or white)
Congregational Church in Chattanooga, Tenn. Its first minister
was Rev. J. A. Thome, a life-long friend of the A. M. A., and at
one time its agent in Great Britain. The Congregational Church
in Jacksonville, Fla., was organized, and its house dedicated,
under the auspices of Rev. C. L. Woodworth, its Boston Secretary,
who spent a month in Jacksonville preaching and laboring for that
purpose. Not long since, the Association appointed a missionary
in Kentucky, who has surveyed the field in the vicinity of Berea
College, and expects to organize five or six churches, to which
he will preach in turn until each can sustain a minister. These
will be mainly white churches, but open to colored people. In
like manner, the Association has promised missionary aid to
a church, of similar character, about to be organized in San
Antonio, Texas.

—The educational institutions of the A. M. A. in the South are
in order to its religious work in America and Africa. Its best
and most promising churches are established near the schools and
colleges, and receive intelligence and strength from them. These
schools furnish hundreds of Christian teachers, who instruct
thousands of pupils in day and Sunday-schools, and carry a
salutary influence into the homes, churches and neighborhoods
where they reside. The schools and theological departments also
send out many ministers and missionaries, who carry the Gospel to
their people in the South and in Africa.

—The work of the Association is a providential growth, each part
having a relation to the whole, and its plans, while at present
embracing mainly the “Despised Races,” as they have been called,
are restricted in principle to no race or continent.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEPARTURE OF THE “AZOR.”

The departure of the _Azor_ with the first instalment of the
African exodus, from Charleston, S. C., marks an epoch in the
history of the colored race.

It may have been a question in some minds whether the freedman
could be aroused by the missionary spirit. By some, even of the
teachers in our schools, fears have been felt that, perhaps, the
call for missionaries might come and the people not be ready to
respond. The question is decided that, whenever this call shall
be made, there will be no lack of men. We have more to fear now
from unbridled enthusiasm than from want of zeal.

This African Exodus Association had its origin, undoubtedly,
among disaffected politicians, but it soon became a sort of
religious crusade. It gained but little progress among the
people, until the idea was suggested that it be made a missionary
enterprise. From the time the _Azor_ sailed into the harbor
until her departure, on the 21st of April, with her living
freight for Liberia, the wharves and streets of the city were
thronged with people of all sexes and ages, eager to view the
African “Mayflower.” Hundreds, who had engaged their passages
months before, were left behind, for want of room. How long this
enthusiasm will continue, and what may be the success of this
first company, of course are questions to be answered by and
by. We dare not venture any prophecy, either good or evil. It
is an experiment, some features of which are not in the line of
our ideas; but if, in the providence of God, it shall prove to
be to Africa what the Pilgrim enterprise has been to America,
we shall rejoice. We should prefer to have a different class of
emigrants undertake this work, and lay the foundation of African
civilization upon a broader foundation. Our object is to raise up
men of intelligence, and sound and broad religious principle, for
this work, and we naturally look with some anxiety to the effect
of turning loose in Africa the freedman, as we find him in the
South at present. We hope for the best, however, and shall pray
for the success of the movement, that God may overrule all our
fears, and make it for good. This one question we are glad to
have settled, as we think it is by this movement, that there is
no lack of enthusiasm in the negro heart for his fatherland; and
that, when the call shall come for more laborers in that field,
we shall have this enthusiasm on our side.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN BOYS AT HAMPTON.

Visitors to St. Augustine, Fla., during the last three years have
been directed to Capt. Pratt’s Indians as among the objects of
interest in Fort Marion. There they were carried, as prisoners of
war, in the spring of 1875, after the terrible massacres which
had taken place in the Indian Territory by the Five Tribes. They
went South, each with his legs fastened to a log with chains.
They were filled with hatred over their real or fancied wrongs.
One jumped from the cars, and was shot by the guard; one killed
himself on the way. They wore only their Indian blankets, and had
great brass hoops in their ears. They knew no word of English.
It was their good fortune to fall into the hands of a Christian
army officer, who, by his skill in management, and patience in
seeking to do them good, at length won their confidence, and
succeeded, with the help of a few benevolent ladies, in teaching
them some of the simplest elements of civilization and learning.
A few of them can read very well.

At the end of their second year, Mrs. Dr. Caruthers, of
Tarrytown, N. Y., who had been teaching among them, determined to
secure, if possible, the education of two young men of her class.
She obtained permission from the Indian Commission, and raised
money for the purpose. Other means and offers of help came in.
At length it was found that twenty-two of them desired to go to
school. They are now discharged from their imprisonment. The old
chiefs go back to their people, greatly changed for the better.
Fifteen of the young men were left at Hampton, April 13th, to be
educated in the Normal Institute. They have begun their regular
studies, and have been detailed to various departments of work,
in shop and on farm. They seem perfectly happy and contented, and
their new comrades treat them with kindness and consideration.

Here is another of those curious comminglings, and crossings of
lines, of which life is so full, and yet which never cease to
surprise us. The African and the Indian meet at Hampton, to be
trained together, to be intelligent citizens and Christians, and
the teachers of their people. Thus the two races are brought face
to face—“the two races whose past involves America’s greatest
responsibilities; whose future, some of her hardest problems.”

It costs $115 to keep one of these Indian boys at Hampton for
a year—that, with what he is able to earn by his labor. This
amount has been pledged by individuals alone, or together, for
the education of most of the number. Mrs. Caruthers, having done
so much, has asked the A. M. A., through its President and its
Secretary, to assume the tuition of one of her wards, and the
Executive Committee desire to do so; and Zone-ke-nh, twenty-one
years of age, of the Kiowa tribe, will go to Hampton, in addition
to those already there, as the pupil of the Association, if some
of our friends, who may be especially interested in the elevation
of the Indians, will make up this small amount, and help on this
work, in which the elements are combined of romance, beneficence,
and personality.

       *       *       *       *       *


A SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONCERT.

Nothing is more welcome in these days than new ideas for use in
Sunday-schools. What to do with the Concert, has been a question
which has perplexed teachers and superintendents year after year,
as the months come, one after another, in rapid succession. The
verses containing “faith” and “hope” and “heaven” must be nearly
all learned now in some quarters, and the new suggestion is, try
a Missionary Concert, or, if you please, an American Missionary
Concert.

But, how shall it be done? The answer is at hand. The pattern,
even, can be sent, like Demorest’s or Butterick’s, in paper and
by mail. We have one in our hands, about six inches by eight,
four pages. It consists of a series of questions and answers
(prepared originally by Rev. A. E. Winship, of Somerville,
Mass.) upon the nature and the work of the A. M. A., and we are
almost surprised to find so much valuable and exact information
compacted in this form, and in so taking and interesting a shape.
Coupled with this is a small sheet collection of eight or ten
Jubilee Songs, to be sung at intervals during the Catechetical
Exercise. We hear that this exercise has been used with great
interest and success in several Sunday-schools at and near
Boston; and we commend, most cordially, the thought and plan to
the consideration and use of Superintendents and Presidents of
Missionary Societies. The twenty-sixth article in the programme
is a collection, and a legend instructing generous youth how
to address their gifts to us. A new edition is in preparation,
or in press. The questions and songs may be obtained in
quantity, on application to District Secretary Woodworth, at the
Congregational House, Boston.

District Secretary Powell has issued recently, from Chicago, an
appeal to the Sunday-schools in behalf of the “Colored Student’s
Aid Fund.” He says: “It is estimated that we are reaching (by
student and graduate teachers) not less than a hundred thousand
children in the South. But there are two millions of them to be
reached.” He urges every Sunday-school to help in this good work.
To know, is the first step toward supplying the want.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN EDUCATED MINISTRY.

It is quite remarkable that the uneducated ministers among the
colored people of the South should be in such earnest sympathy
with the work of educating their people. Occasionally, we hear
one intimate that he is a trumpet for the Lord to “toot” through,
and express fear that the tone of the instrument might be injured
by the application of science; but the expression of such
sentiments is rare.

In the dark days, when States did not allow people of a certain
color to read, or any one to teach them, preachers were _born_,
not _made_. The wether of the flock put a bell around his own
neck, and led off. As the Indian who could bring home from the
war-path the most scalps, or from the hunt the greatest amount of
venison or furs, was the man for chief; so the exhorter who could
pick up the most texts of Scripture, and evolve from his own
understanding the greatest amount of rhetoric, and with arrows of
his own manufacture pierce the largest number of souls, was the
minister by universal consent.

Schools do not make brains; they only develop and bring out what
Nature implanted in a man. Leaders by the voice of God need not
fear those made leaders by the voice of a theological seminary.
They who, by their quickness of perception, tact and experience,
control men, need not fear that those who depend chiefly upon
ability gained from books will steal the hearts of their people.

Now, in saying all this, as the expression of my own thoughts,
as well as the felt sentiments of the uneducated ministers
among the colored people, I have no intention of placing a low
estimate upon the schools. These uncultured giants might have
attained to a larger growth, if they had been supplied with
good mental nourishment, and no one feels this more than they.
The BEST minister combines natural ability of a high order with
liberal culture. The tendency of the times is toward an educated
ministry; and although the present pastors of the flocks may be
secure in their places without learning, the next generation will
insist upon education in their ministers.

                  PROF. T. N. CHASE, IN THE _Christian Recorder_.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA AND FISK UNIVERSITIES.

A recent visit to these institutions has resulted in some
observations, which may be worthy of record. The location of both
is unsurpassed. In these cities Atlanta and Fisk Universities
occupy, respectively, two of the most commanding and beautiful
sites. They are seen from afar, a perpetual reminder of the
importance of the work they represent. The buildings of both
institutions are good; Jubilee Hall surpassingly so. Our party
approached it late in the evening, when it was lighted from
top to bottom, as the students were studying in their rooms.
“Hallelujah!” cried one of our number, enthusiastically, “God be
praised for this great lighthouse in the South.” And not one of
us looked upon it without emotion.

The teachers in both institutions are among the choicest of
educated Christian people. A more intelligent, cultivated and
consecrated body of instructors it would be hard to find. They
are doing their work at much personal sacrifice. Their social
privileges in both cities are few or none at all, and some of
them, for the sake of the work they are in, have refused tempting
offers from Northern schools. They are teaching the colored race
from a high sense of duty, and are filled with a missionary
enthusiasm in their work. Often did the eye flash and the face
glow, as they spoke of the trials and advancement of their pupils.

The students in these institutions are, of course, the flower
of the colored race. Only those are likely to undertake so
many years of study, with the self-denials involved, who have,
to begin with, tolerably clear ideas of the privileges of an
education, and in whom are unusual elements of character. They
are procuring an education under great difficulties. There are
few to encourage them or aid them. But they are eager to fit
themselves for future usefulness, and burdened with a longing to
help their race. They work, therefore, with an enthusiasm needing
little urging or government. It is not strange, then, that when
both teacher and scholar are fired with a religious fervor, the
results should be unusually favorable.

Among these results in both institutions, the good order is
specially noticeable. At the table, where teachers and scholars
eat together, all stand quietly till the teacher in charge takes
his seat. There is no loud talking or laughing, but, while no
restraints are put on conversation, only a gentle murmur of
voices, which does not prevent the slightest signal from being
heard. The least tap of a bell suffices to dismiss the hundred or
more boarders from the tables. In passing through the school-room
at Fisk University, we noticed that no teacher was present,
though perfect order was maintained. “Have you no instructor or
monitor here,” we asked, “to secure good order?” “Why, no, sir,”
one replied, wonderingly, “we do not wish to be disorderly.” We
could but recall certain days of our own student life when, if
our instructor chanced to step out of the room for a moment,
there were instantly missiles flying about, and students darting
here and there.

There is a striking degree of refinement among the students. They
impress one at a glance as ladies and gentlemen. There is nothing
about them, in dress, or manner or language, to offend the most
fastidious. Never was there a better illustration than at these
institutions of the power of a Christian education to change the
whole character and appearance. A cultivated soul shines out from
these dark faces, and, in our admiration for the soul, we totally
forget the color of the skin.

The education of these students is rapidly progressing. We must
remember that most of them were born in slavery, and have learned
to read since the war. A generation or two must pass before we
can see the results of life-long training in schools. What we
now see, however, is sufficiently surprising. It would be hard
to find at the North better teachers or better schools than the
two Universities of which we speak; and their influence over the
pupils is marvelous. Many of the recitations were very fine. The
normal training of Fisk University seemed to deserve special
commendation. We were also much pleased at a recitation in
Xenophon’s _Memorabilia_, in which three young men were reciting
to one of their own race, a graduate of the University—Miss
Laura S. Cary. It would not be strange if this were the first
instance of the kind in the history of the world. Perhaps a more
valuable evidence of educational progress than recitations was
the correctness of speech and richness of thought manifest in the
conversations and remarks of the students. We were permitted to
be present at a prayer-meeting, in which students of both sexes
took part freely. There are few pastors in the North who would
not be glad of such clear thought and apt expression in their
meetings as we there heard.

The discipline of these institutions is evidently giving
the pupils rare qualities of earnestness and self-reliance.
Undoubtedly those who have these qualities inborn are the
ones who are most likely to be in the schools. But once in the
course of study, all the influences tend to develop a manly and
persevering spirit. The students are accustomed every summer
to scatter through the South, in search of schools. These, in
most of the States, they do not find ready to their hand. There
are few organized schools and few school-houses for the colored
people outside the cities. The University students desirous of a
school must first hunt up children who will agree to come; then
secure the use of some little colored church at the cross-roads,
or, perhaps, of a vacant log-cabin; then they must obtain
permission of the county commissioner to teach the school. It
evidently requires courage and resolution to succeed under such
circumstances, and yet these students earn every summer, in from
three to five months of teaching, about a hundred dollars apiece.
Sometimes parents are willing and able to educate their children,
without throwing them thus on their own resources. After Fisk
University was established, a colored man bought land near by,
built him a comfortable house, and made his home there, with the
express purpose of educating his large family of children. But
such cases are rare. The youth who desire an education generally
are obliged to secure the means themselves. We were much touched
with the story of one young lady (as truly so as any in our
Northern seminaries), who, at the age of fourteen, determined to
go to Fisk University, and went to teaching till she had earned
the means. For five years she has been securing an education,
paying her way by teaching every summer. Another student was
pointed out to us, whose persistence under difficulties is still
more remarkable. For the work of two successive summers, he
has been unable to collect a dollar of the money due him; and
for last summer’s work, when he was able to get a school that
would pay only half the average sum, he has as yet received
only a small portion of what he has earned. And yet he is not
discouraged, but works on cheerfully. At Fisk University, Mrs. A.
K. Spence is making efforts to secure gifts from Sabbath-schools
in the North, to supplement the meagre sums earned by the
students. One hundred and fifty dollars annually will carry a
student through. (We heard a gentleman say that it cost his
son a thousand dollars a year at a Northern college.) If any
Sabbath-school desires to assume the additional fifty dollars for
the support of one of these pupils, Mrs. Spence will be glad to
receive a letter on the subject. The great trouble is to induce
the students to receive aid. They are eager to do for themselves.
Recently, some kind words were addressed them by a visitor, on
the subject of self-reliance. “Oh,” said one of the teachers, “it
is a pity he said that; it was natural he should, but he does not
know them. It made them wince, and we shall have harder work than
ever to persuade them to receive the help they need.”

We were greatly pleased at the piety of the students in both
institutions. Most of them, particularly among the boarders, are
earnest and consistent Christians. We were much moved at some
of their prayers, they were so tender, earnest and child-like.
The prayer of one of their number is still treasured up in the
memory of the instructors. Jubilee Hall had just been completed.
It seemed a paradise to the colored people. A farewell meeting
was held in the old dingy barracks, in the centre of Nashville,
where the school had hitherto met. It was then that one of the
students prayed—“O Lord, Thou knowest how eager we are to enter
this beautiful new building; but if Thou wilt not go with us, we
do not wish to go. Unless Thou wilt go, also, let us stay here.”
The Lord did go with them, and they have enjoyed frequent seasons
of revival ever since.

The aims of these students are very high. They justly feel that
the elevation of nearly five millions of people rests largely
on them. They have a worthy ambition to be the leaders of their
race in everything pure and noble. Conjoined with this, a new
ambition has recently fired their hearts. The four students who
have just gone from Fisk University to Africa have left behind
them an enthusiasm for missionary work. The students are now
praying and planning for the conversion of Africa by missionaries
of their own color. There is nothing that so lifts up a people as
a definite and high aim. These students justly feel that in this
land, and abroad, there is work for them to do. A glorious future
lies within their reach, and the fact stimulates them to faithful
study and gives them Christian manliness, as could nothing else.

It was a grief to us to learn that a shadow of financial anxiety
hung over Fisk University. Funds that were relied upon from
Great Britain for current expenses had failed, and retrenchment,
where expenses had already been cut down to the quick, was under
consideration. Surely the friends of this noble Institution will
not let it suffer.

                                          REV. ADDISON P. FOSTER.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES.

HAMPTON, VA.—Four students received to the church by profession
May 5th. One of the Indian students lately received gives
evidence of Christian character.

RALEIGH, N. C.—“Our church has shared with others in a revival
blessing this spring.” Twenty were received to the church April
8th, which now numbers 72. Mr. Smith, the pastor, writes: “There
are several of the young men connected with our church and school
who are anxious that I should teach them theology. I think, if
I can get some simple, cheap work on that subject, that I will
form them into a class, and have them recite two or three times a
week. I want to do all I can to help the young men on.”

ORANGEBURG, S. C.—Mr. and Mrs. W. L. Johnson have been two years
in this church and school. The church membership has increased
two-thirds. Two members received in April. Sunday-school thriving
and increasing, and feeding the church. A Woman’s Foreign
Missionary Association is organized, and has contributed to the
A. M. A. debt, and missions in India and Africa. Fifteen have
been in training for teachers this year.

BYRON, GA.—“The church is active; Sunday-school increasing in
numbers steadily. A day-school will soon be opened. Young people
are asking for prayers every Sunday evening.”

SAVANNAH, GA.—One of the workers in Savannah writes: “Our church
work is very encouraging. The Sabbath-school is splendid. I have
twenty boys from twelve to sixteen years of age in my class, and
am deeply interested in them. Never before, since I have been
here, has the church been so prosperous.”

MARION, ALA.—The Sabbath audiences are steadily increasing.
Three or four are to unite with the church at the next Communion.

FLORENCE, ALA.—Mr. L. C. Anderson reports the attendance on
church services good, and one member received on profession at
his last visit.

ABBEVILLE, LA.—The church has been holding special meetings,
crowded every night. Two have been received to membership; others
are under deep conviction. Rev. Charles E. Smith is the pastor.

MEMPHIS, TENN.—A genuine interest is manifested in the teachings
of God’s word, and a higher standard of personal godliness
sought. “The question, how to utilize the combined power of the
Church for its own unification and enlargement, is discussed
in the prayer-meetings with growing frequency, and manifestly
deepening interest. The church has passed in safety and triumph
through its financial straits, deficiencies have been made up,
current expenses provided for, and a small surplus is on hand for
the summer demands.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE SCHOOLS.

CHARLESTON, S. C.—The Avery Normal Institute held its thirteenth
anniversary April 17th. The school numbers 294. The pupils were
examined in Natural Philosophy, Grammar, Arithmetic, Botany,
Physiology, Spelling, Mental Arithmetic, History, Latin,
Grammatical Analysis, Reading, Geography, Algebra, Writing, etc.;
and an exhibition was held the following day, with music and
recitations, to the great delight of a large assembly.

MACON, GA.—The school building was dedicated, with the chapel,
March 24. There are three rooms occupying the ground floor of the
building. The large one will seat 110 pupils; the smaller, or
recitation-rooms, twenty-five or thirty each. The whole building
is lighted with gas and heated by a furnace. Mr. Harrington
writes:—“We are credited by the people of the city—by the
white people, especially—with having the prettiest chapel and
school-rooms in the State.”

FORSYTH, GA.—School-house built last year—“a two-story
building, without a chimney, plastering, or even laths.” Occupied
since February last. Attendance good. “A deep concern about the
most familiar truths of the Bible has led to a short lecture
every morning,” by Mr. Jackson, the teacher. That the young
people can only stay in school two or three months at a time,
is the greatest drawback. The white people are very kind, and
respond generously to every call for aid.

CUTHBERT, GA.—There has been going on for over two weeks a
glorious revival. Nearly all the pupils of the school are
converted; all of the highest class but one, and that one an
inquirer. Three ministers are attending school regularly. A
reading-room has been opened. Mr. Wright divides his efforts
between the two (Methodist and Baptist) Sunday-schools of the
place.

FORT VALLEY, GA.—The day-school is improving by degrees. The
Sunday-school is growing rapidly. The cold weather has prevented
many from coming out, but the prospect is that very soon the
school will be crowded. A small sum is in hand, with which to
purchase catechisms and lesson-papers.

NEW ORLEANS, LA.—“The year has been in every way delightful
and profitable. God has blessed us in every department of our
work. Every month, and indeed every week, has brought some
new expression of the Divine favor. Upon our catalogue, soon
to be issued, between 280 and 300 names will appear, and they
represent as good a class of students as were ever gathered in
the University. So much for numerical success. What is better,
there has been entire harmony and affectionate co-operation in
the Faculty.”

MOBILE, ALA., EMERSON INSTITUTE.—The new two-story brick
building, 34×64, with wings 10×21, was dedicated May 1st with
exercises of great interest. A full account was received just too
late to be inserted in this number, but in good time for the July
MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Negro.

—We were misled by a usually reliable authority in regard to the
income of the Peabody Educational Fund. In 1866, its trustees
distributed, in eight States, $35,400; in 1873, in ten States,
$137,150; and in 1877, $89,400. We give the figures from their
report, and take the largest and smallest.

—April 21st, the barque _Azor_ sailed from Charleston, S. C.,
with 250 emigrants, one-fifth being children. They go under the
auspices of the Liberian Exodus Association to Boporo, about
sixty miles north-east from Monrovia. It is intended to purchase
a steamship to make regular trips to Monrovia. A reporter from
the Charleston _News and Courier_ accompanies the _Azor_.

—Mr. Orcutt, General Secretary of the American Colonization
Society, writes that vessels will sail under their auspices in
June and November. He fears for the new exodus movement, as
having more zeal than knowledge; and remarks that, “at the very
outset, they were subjected to disappointments and annoyances,
which evinced the need of a competent controlling agency in the
management of their affairs.”

—A meeting of colored men was held at Washington, a few weeks
ago, to organize a colony for the West, and measures were taken
to promote that object. They denounced the Liberian exodus.

—Senator Ingalls has written a letter, in which he promises to
all the colored people who may choose to emigrate thither, a
cordial welcome to Kansas, the protection of her laws, and equal
facilities for education.

—“We starve and pinch the American Missionary Association,
giving little more than $200,000 a year towards founding
Christian schools, and planting Christian pulpits, among four
million freedmen, in the pit of ignorance and degradation; we
do little to speak of among the Celestial pagans on the Pacific
slope; and our labor among the Indians is light. But our Romish
friends are now said to be spending $600,000 a year among the
freedmen, among whom they have 150,000 pupils under priestly
schools. There are 137 Catholic missionaries and teachers among
the Indians.”—_President E. P. Tenney, Colorado College._

—“The Roman Catholic Church has purchased a tract of 7,000 acres
of land within nine miles of Chase City, Va., and propose to
colonize it, and educate the freedmen, on the industrial farm
plan.”—_Evangelist._

—A correspondent of the _Christian Observer_ is informed that
there are twenty-five Romish schools in the three States of
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, with free board and tuition.

—The following is the closing sentence of an affidavit, signed
by Gen. Lopez Analto, and sworn to before a U. S. Commissioner in
Florida:

  “I further declare and say, to the best of my knowledge and
  belief, that there are negroes from the United States at
  different places on the Island of Cuba, who are to this day
  held as slaves, shipped from the United States, under various
  pretexts, since the rebellion in the United States, and upon
  American vessels.”

The investigation of this matter was interrupted by the sudden
death of Judge Leonard.

—The delays, and partial defeat, of the various Central African
Missions, are referred to on an editorial page.

—One of the results to be anticipated from the establishment of
new missionary stations in the interior of Africa, is the effect
which such civilized settlements among the hunting-grounds of the
slave-traders will have in suppressing that terrible evil. It is
still the whole business of thousands to buy or steal Circassian,
Abyssinian, and negro boys and, especially, girls.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinaman.

—In the United States Circuit Court, at San Francisco, Judge
Sawyer has rendered a decision, in the case of the Chinaman who
applied for naturalization papers, holding that Chinamen are
not white persons within the meaning of the term as used in the
Naturalization Laws, and are not entitled to become citizens.
“White,” he holds to be equivalent to Caucasian; and that, by
exact construction of the provision, all but white persons, and
persons of African nativity and descent, are excluded forever
from citizenship. The case will probably be appealed.

—We commend the story of Yung Wing, as told by Rev. Joseph
Twichell, in his recent lecture at New Haven, to those who are
either hopeful or hopeless as to the Chinese in America. Under
his care, the Chinese Government is expending annually $100,000
in maintaining about 120 Chinese boys at schools in Connecticut,
where they are receiving a thorough course of education.

—The Chinese in San Francisco paid, in 1866-67, more than
$42,000 in school taxes. California law omits Mongolian children
from the apportionment of school funds, refuses them admission
to the common-schools, and opens no schools for them. Thirteen
hundred Chinamen have petitioned the Legislature for separate
schools for their three thousand children of proper age. Such are
provided for those of African and Indian descent. The petition
was at once laid on the table. A leading paper stigmatized it
as a dangerous and aggressive indication of a movement on their
part to “obtain larger wages,” and showing a desire “to mingle
their youth with ours, with a view, doubtless, to more thorough
assimilation in the body politic.” And yet, the burden of the
complaints against them has been that they will not assimilate,
and will work cheap! If consistency is a jewel, it is evidently
not a “California diamond.”

—A correspondent of the _Intelligencer_ asserts that the
opposition to the Chinaman is instigated mainly by the
liquor-sellers and the Roman Catholic priests, neither of whom
has John any use for, and whose patrons he displaces.

—A Chinese church is to be organized at Oakland, Cal., composed
in part of members from Dr. Eells’ church, and the mission under
the care of Rev. J. M. Condit. This is the second church in
California, all the members of which are Chinese.

—Prof. Mooar in _Evangelist_: “Our greatest danger in regard to
this problem is not that the Chinaman will be too pagan for us,
but that we shall fail to be Christian enough for him.”

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indian.

—A writer in the _Advance_ says that there are 6,500 persons
in the Indian Territory, formerly slaves of the Choctaws and
Chickasaws. The treaty of 1866 provided for their citizenship
among the tribes, and an allotment of fifty acres of land to
each. In the first Indian Legislature after the treaty, a law was
passed refusing to comply with the treaty; so that, in the land
where they were born, and where they toiled in slavery to enrich
their masters, they can own no land, cannot send their children
to the nation’s schools, are not permitted to vote, and have no
protection from, nor access to, the Indian courts of law. So, the
big fish eat the little fish, all the way down.

—The various plans for organizing the Indian Territory under
a territorial government, are in the face of solemn treaties,
and the opposition of the various tribes to whom it has been
promised. It is only another of the wrongs to which the poor
Indian has been subjected by the cupidity of his white neighbors,
and their disregard of the rights of so-called inferior races.

—The Bill creating the Territory of Oklahoma has been agreed
upon by the House Committee on Territories.

—As to the rebel Indians, Gen. Sheridan allows a Nez Percés
prisoner to go to the Canadian frontier, to offer immunity from
punishment to the fugitives of that tribe, if they surrender to
the military. Some have left Sitting Bull, and refused to fight
with him longer. A band are raiding in Texas, in the neighborhood
of Fort Ewell. The Bannocks at Lemhi Agency, in Idaho, complain
that the agent has defrauded them, and threaten trouble. To
Sitting Bull’s inquiries about peace, Gen. Miles answers that,
when the Indians give up their ponies and guns, they will receive
cattle and other property of greater value; and that when peace
is made, the Government will provide for them, as it does for all
friendly Indians.

—The Nez Percés Indians take a Turkish bath every morning.—See
Leavenworth _Times_. The _Christian Recorder_ (A. M. E.) says:
“No people can go down who make a plentiful use of soap and
water.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.


       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

New Orleans, Louisiana.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, PRESIDENT.

The Institution was incorporated June 25th, 1869, and the first
school building was completed in February, 1870. The American
Missionary Association and the Freedmen’s Bureau co-operated
in the establishment of the University. From the first, great
numbers flocked to the school to enjoy its advantages, so that
the capacity of the building was taxed to its utmost. The
eagerness of the freedmen for education in 1870, and the two or
three years following, was, perhaps, more intense and general
than now. Between three and four thousand have been enrolled
as students in the University during the eight years of its
existence.

It bears the name of Hon. Seymour Straight, of Ohio, who is one
of its steadfast friends and benefactors.


LOCATION.

New Orleans, a city of 220,000 inhabitants, of whom 80,000 are
colored people, is a most important point to be occupied in
missionary work among the freedmen. As the commercial centre of
the South-west—as the great cotton, sugar, and rice market of
the Union—it out-ranks all others. In its intimate connections
by river, bayou, and railroad with the most thickly populated
negro districts of the old slave States, it is second to none.
Texas, Mississippi, and Florida are constantly adding to the
negro population of Louisiana. By the census of 1875 there were
369,000 colored people in this State, and each year swells
the number. Already it is fifty-five per cent. of the entire
population. Without disparagement to any other section, we claim,
also, that the colored population of New Orleans represents
the highest intelligence yet attained by the race in America.
It includes the genuine African, the mulatto, the quadroon,
the octaroon, and yet other shades and grades; and in this
mingling of races we see, also, the diffusion of intelligence,
and a corresponding increase in the capacity of culture and
development. It would require the quick eye of an “expert” to
detect, in the fair complexion and delicate features of many who
throng our churches and schools, the faintest trace of African
descent. Without speculating upon the cause, certain it is that
we find among the colored people of the Crescent City a quickness
of intelligence, and a capacity for the best culture and the
noblest development, and withal a thirst for knowledge, which is
worthy of our best sympathy and most generous benevolence.


THE RESULTS WE HOPE TO ACCOMPLISH.

In a word, our aim is Education, in its broadest and best
meaning. The elevation, the prosperity, the highest manhood,
and the co-ordinate rank of the African race in America, in the
friendly rivalry of races, are still in the future—whether in
the near or remote future, depends largely upon the race itself
to determine. Education, under Divine guidance, is the gateway
to that longed-for future. That I mean education as allied with
religion, will be assumed. That the race is not educated, is
by no fault of theirs. That they desire education, is to their
credit. To help them to this education is both our duty and our
privilege.

The courses of study in this Institution include in the Academic
Department, the Collegiate, the Normal, and the Preparatory; and
in the Professional Department, the Theological and the Law.

We have a preparatory course, that we may secure better material
for the higher courses. In the Normal course, special attention
is given to those studies which will furnish young men and women
with the education needed in the various branches of business
life open to them, and which especially will qualify them as
teachers, for which there is, and must continue to be, a great
demand. In the Collegiate Department—which includes, among other
studies, the higher Mathematics, Mental and Moral Philosophy,
and Latin—a higher grade and wider scope of studies will be
added so soon as there is a demand for them. The school is yet
in its infancy, and the number of those who are fitted to pursue
to advantage the highest grade of studies is, of course, very
limited.


LAW DEPARTMENT.

An able corps of Professors has been secured. Jurists of
reputation and successful practice at the bar of Louisiana have
kindly offered their services, with little hope of adequate
compensation, and every facility is provided for young men of
talent, who are attracted by the profession of the law, to
fit themselves for honorable and successful practice. Regular
graduates from this department, at the conclusion of a two years’
course of study, and a well sustained examination, are admitted
to the bar of New Orleans, with authority to practice in all the
courts of the Commonwealth.


THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT.

College graduates, who can be instructed in the original
languages in which the Scriptures were written, are greatly
desired, and until they can be secured, this department will
but partially accomplish the object for which it was organized.
The churches need thoroughly educated ministers, with carefully
cultivated minds, who can intelligently preach the word. The
degree of suffering for the lack of such ministers cannot be
told. In the meantime, it is our aim to make the best use of
the material we have, and transform it from a state of utter
crudeness to one of partial fitness for the present demands of
the churches. Men of piety and ability to speak and to teach are
received, and advanced as far and as rapidly as their imperfect
preparatory education will admit. Louisiana, with a colored
population of 370,000, is ripe for a glorious spiritual harvest.
The churches are calling in vain for intelligent laborers to go
forth into the harvest. I wish the prospect was brighter for a
large class of intelligent, spiritual, and enthusiastic students
to enter this department, and to lift it to a high grade of
usefulness.


THE NEW UNIVERSITY.

The building on Esplanade street, built in 1870, was entirely
destroyed by fire February 16th, 1877. Since that disastrous
event, our sessions have been held in Central Church, which
is also the property of the American Missionary Association.
A new site, more convenient and attractive, was purchased in
January last. It is located on Canal street, the most beautiful
avenue in New Orleans. It comprises a half square of land, 150
feet front by 310 feet in depth. The new building, for whose
design great credit is due to Prof. Thomas N. Chase, while not
adhering strictly to any style of architecture, may be classed
as _Italian_, as it approaches more nearly to that order. The
dimensions of the building are 72 feet by 51½ feet. The five
large recitation rooms are 30 feet by 50½ feet. The halls are
10 feet in width. The building is conveniently arranged, and all
the requirements of the school, we think, have been anticipated
in its design. The funds at the disposal of the Association did
not admit of ornamentation; but the building, when completed,
will be substantial, convenient, and comely. It will be ready
for dedication and occupation at the opening of the fall term,
October 1st. Grateful as we are for this new structure, we are
not satisfied; neither should the friends of the freedmen in the
North be satisfied. Straight University, in order to fill the
measure of its usefulness, and cultivate the territory open to
its occupation, must furnish accommodations for students from
abroad—from towns outside of New Orleans, and from adjoining
States. It must have _dormitories_. Two buildings, one on
either side of the main building, are urgently needed, and at
the earliest possible day. Then, when our group of buildings
are completed, we can invite and welcome the best talent of the
race, at whatever distance from New Orleans it may be found.
Then our beloved University will become, among the educational
institutions of the South-west—and especially of the Gulf
States—the magnet, attracting to itself the best in intellect,
in heart, and in promise of future good.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

Additions to the Church—An Indian’s Creed—A Good Beginning.

REV. RICHARD TOLMAN, HAMPTON.

Four students united with the church by profession the first
Sabbath in May. It is several years since any Communion season
has passed without some additions to the church.

The fifteen Indians who have lately joined the school have taken
hold of study and of manual labor with commendable zeal, and
give promise of becoming good teachers and guides of their race.
One of them now shows evidence of Christian character. Their
promptness and decision, as to the duties required of them, were
put to the test in reference to the use of tobacco, to which they
were so strongly attached that, as one of them said:—“There are
three things I love: I love God; I love Jesus; I love smoke.”
When asked if they would comply with the rules of the school,
prohibiting the use of tobacco, after considering the matter
awhile in silence, one of them gave an expressive sign that he
would cut loose from tobacco; and then all the others gave the
same significant pledge—a pledge which, their teacher assures
us, they will never break.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH CAROLINA.

History of “Avery” Graduates.

PROF. A. W. FARNHAM, CHARLESTON, S. C.

Avery Normal Institute was organized in Charleston, S. C.,
October, 1865. The first formal graduation occurred in June,
1872, at which time eleven young people received diplomas from
the Institute. A class has been graduated each succeeding year,
numbering as follows: In 1873, fourteen; 1874, six; 1875,
fifteen; 1876, nineteen (including one post-graduate); 1877,
twenty-two—giving a total of eighty-six. Of this number, death
has taken five.

Our school aims to fit its graduates to be competent teachers.
Forty-six have been engaged in the public schools of the
State—schools first in rank, in scholarship, and discipline.
Forty-one of the forty-six are teaching to-day; seventeen hold
State certificates.

One young man of the class of 1872 is an ordained minister. He
was also graduated at South Carolina University in 1877. Another
from that class, and one from the succeeding class, are studying
with the ministry in view—one at Madison University, New York,
the other at Atlanta University, Georgia. Three others from later
classes are in higher institutions, preparing themselves to
preach the Gospel.

Our graduates bid fair to represent all the professions. One is
in Howard University, studying medicine, and one in the leading
Normal school of our county, preparing for teaching. The total
number in higher institutions is seven, while four more have
already received the degree of A. B. Five others were in South
Carolina University when it closed its doors. These young men
were ready to enter the Junior year of the College course when
their studies were so abruptly ended. With one exception, they
are teaching.

Thirty-eight of our graduates are members of Evangelical
churches; twenty at present are engaged in Sunday-school work.

“By their fruits ye shall know them.” But is this all that Avery
has done? No! Her influence has pervaded the homes of hundreds,
and the lives of thousands. Her light has shone in every quarter
of the State; and other lands are destined to share in her
gifts, for the good ship Azor is carrying three of her pupils to
“Africa’s sunny fountains.”

The questions are often asked: “What per cent. of your school is
brown?” “Don’t the browns receive instruction more readily than
the blacks?” The query, in the minds of so many, has led to an
actual count of the graduates with regard to color, which gives:
_Black_, 19; _brown_, 55; _fair_, 12. But, “the Lord is the maker
of them all;” nor is He “a respecter of persons.” We sow “beside
all waters.” “What shall the harvest be?”

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Pilgrim Church and Sunday-School—Band of Hope—Twichell School.

REV. JOHN H. H. SENGSTACKE, WOODVILLE.

This small settlement of colored people is situated three miles
west of Savannah, Ga. It was bought by a Northern agent, and
divided into half-acre lots, which are now selling, on the
instalment plan, for seventy-five dollars each. The houses are
very small and uncomfortable; but since the American Missionary
Association has erected a new meeting-house and parsonage, the
people have commenced to put up better dwellings, and a strong
love for home comforts is gradually taking hold upon the masses.
The inhabitants of Woodville obtain a living by selling in the
city market, or laboring in gardens and on rice plantations. In
this settlement there are two groceries, and three on its border,
where strong drink is sold, even on the Lord’s day.

The only house of worship in this place is the Pilgrim
Congregational Church. This church was organized in 1871 as the
Woodville Church, and re-organized in 1875 as the Pilgrim Church.
A new site was chosen, and the present meeting-house was erected
in the same year. This church has been a great blessing to the
people. A deep religious feeling has prevailed in our midst, and
many have become savingly acquainted with the Lord Jesus Christ.
Rev. Mr. Markham is deeply interested in this little church,
and a great assistant to the young pastor in charge. A revival
is still in progress; twenty persons have been recently added
to the church, and seven are waiting to be received at the next
Communion.

The Sabbath-school is prospering. We have no well qualified
teachers as yet, but Twichell School is preparing instructors for
this work. We need lesson papers and other papers. Who will help
us in this direction? Our Band of Hope consists of both adults
and children. This society is working hard to save men from a
drunkard’s grave, and hell. It has much opposition to overcome.
The rum-sellers and whisky-drinking church-people are its worst
enemies.

TWICHELL SCHOOL.—This school is held in the church, and is
taught by the pastor. Through the benevolence of the A. M. A.
and the Congregational Church Sabbath-school at Grand Rapids,
Mich., we have been able to instruct hundreds of children, and
it is pleasing to know that our labor has not been in vain, for
many of the little ones are rejoicing in Christ the Lord. Mrs. S.
N. M., of Dubuque, Iowa, “the Merry Workers,” at Grand Rapids,
Mich., and other Northern friends, deserve our sincere thanks
for the deep interest they have taken in this work. Every effort
put forth in the name of Jesus to elevate this ignorant people
deserves the heartiest encouragement.

       *       *       *       *       *


School Children Farming—Their Parents Buying Farms.

SEABORN SNELSON, MCINTOSH.

Our school is very small, as it always is at this season of the
year, the children having to assist their parents in farming.
For that reason, during the summer months of the previous years,
we have had to teach about two hours at night, for the benefit
of those who could not come in the daytime. We have not yet
commenced night-school this year, though it is desired by many.

There are many children in our neighborhood who belong to our
school, but we find it very difficult to get all, or the most of
them, to attend school regularly. We have a pretty good average
attendance, but do not at all times have the same scholars, which
causes much discord and delay.

The children seem to be anxious to learn, but it is done in
the midst of hardships which are uncommon to children in many
other places. The older people are not as much interested in the
education of their children as they should be, by a great deal.

Only two schools for the colored children are kept up during the
year in this county, namely, Second Midway and Old Midway. There
are other places I know of in this county, where much might be
done in the way of instructing the people in the right way, and
they would be very glad to receive it; but the aid is wanting.

About two-thirds of the colored people in this county are trying
to buy land, and really some have succeeded in so doing; but it
is done by about four years’ _hard_ labor and strict economy.
There is very little money in this county, and it will be so
until the colored people pay for and take possession of these
lands. After a couple of years they will be able to do much for
themselves in many ways.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Growing School—A Literary Society.

COSMO P. JORDAN, MARIETTA.

The Mission School at Marietta was opened Oct. 15th, 1877,
with four pupils only. The 2d day of January, 1878, there were
fourteen. The end of January found a roll of thirty-seven, which
has steadily increased to seventy-two. It may be seen that the
growth of this school was not very rapid, from the fact that it
was opposed by many of the colored people in the city. But the
more water they threw on this little spark, the brighter and
faster it burned, till it has become a centre of attraction.
Friends of this work are fast multiplying, and the future seems
bright.

My school is composed of some very bright and promising young
men and women, seven of whom go out every summer to teach. The
studies are spelling, reading, writing, geography, composition,
grammar, and arithmetic.

To this work is attached a literary society, known as the Junto,
the exercises of which consist of reading, speaking, discussions,
and singing. It was likewise opposed, but is now as largely
attended as any church in the city.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

An Old School—Temperance Work—The Gourd Family.

MISS ANNA HARWOOD, GRENADA.

Our school, in age, ranks among the older ones, having been
established in the Spring of 1866, and we have been its teachers
continuously up to the present time. First, we were missionary
teachers; after a time the Freedmen’s Bureau lent us its aid,
until the organization of free schools by the State; thereafter,
we taught the public school until last year.

During all these years of varying fortunes our school has
steadily progressed, until there has grown up around us a
generation of young people, not great, nor wise, nor learned,
only as they are compared with those who have gone before them;
but, standing out from the blackness of darkness of twelve years
ago, they furnish a bright and hopeful outlook.

We organized a Temperance society early in our work here, and it
has never died out. We, several years ago, gave the control into
the hands of the young people, being only members, for service,
when needed. They have changed names, and banners, and badges
more than once—just now it is blue ribbon—but the object has
always been the same. Our Sunday-school has always claimed our
best efforts, and we are glad to know that more than two-thirds
of our older scholars are professing Christians. But the work
done is but a drop compared with that which is not done. We
have lived to see very many hopes and dreams fade out, and to
learn that manhood and womanhood are not plants of the gourd
family—Jonah’s kind, at least. The knowledge of what we have
not done, and cannot do, is sometimes very hard to bear; and,
perhaps, we have thus learned to do what we can the more gladly,
feeling sure that we, ourselves, grow thereby. And maybe this is
a part of the work, for we, too, are our Father’s children.

       *       *       *       *       *


THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Its Catholicity—Closing Exercises.

The year of the Theological Department of Howard University has
just closed. This department is under the joint care and support
of the Presbytery of Washington, and of the American Missionary
Association. The former sustains Rev. L. Westcott, as Professor
of Revealed Theology and Biblical History, and Rev. A. W. Pitzer,
D. D., as Professor of Biblical Studies and Moral Science; the
latter supplies the instruction given by the President, Rev.
Wm. W. Patton, D. D., in Natural Theology, the Evidences of
Revealed Religion, and Hebrew, and by Rev. John G. Butler, D.
D., in Pastoral Theology, Church History, and Homiletics. The
theological students this year have numbered thirty-two. These
are in all stages of preparation for their expected work. Several
are already ministers, and are preaching, every Sunday, as
pastors of colored churches in Washington; but, having had no
early advantages, they are making up deficiencies as best they
can.

The theological students come from seven different denominations,
while their instructors represent four. This is an unusual
illustration of Christian union, and shows how much can be done,
on a simple evangelical basis, for meeting the pressing wants
of the colored population of our land. The work needs to be
conducted on a broad, generous basis. We can thus introduce a
powerful leaven of truth and righteousness where it is especially
needed. The plan of instruction has been, to meet the special
wants of each individual according to his age, his forwardness
or backwardness of study, the time that he could remain, etc.
Such as have enjoyed a classical education, are encouraged to
take the regular three years’ course pursued in all theological
seminaries. Others are taught what is found to be most needed
to fit them for their work, in the form of English studies. Six
have studied the Hebrew this year, and they passed a creditable
examination in the grammar, and in translation, averaging quite
as well as ordinary white students in theological institutions.
These students also attend the Bible-class conducted by the
president on the morning of the Lord’s day, and his preaching
service in the afternoon, in the latter of which he has lately,
in a series of discourses, pointed out the weakness and absurdity
of modern skepticism, as an antidote to the influence of the
infidel lecturer, popularly called “Bob” Ingersoll, who has taken
up his abode in Washington.

Although the theological students have numbered thirty-two this
year, it so happens that but one has completed his course; and
as a distinguished clergyman who, it was hoped, would deliver
the address at the anniversary, failed us at too late a moment
to substitute any one else, the closing exercises took the form
of a debate by eight of the young men, on this question: “Has
a church a right to make total abstinence from intoxicating
drinks a condition of membership?” This point was debated with
much earnestness and shrewdness, and arguments, _pro_ and _con_,
were drawn ingeniously from reason and Scripture in a way which
testified favorably to the abilities of the speakers. One of
the Judges of the Supreme Court of the United States takes a
deep interest in this department of the University, and lately
expressed himself emphatically in favor of encouraging and
endowing it, as an important means of elevating the colored
ministry and churches of all denominations. Its friends
anticipate for it a future bright with usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INTERNATIONAL SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONVENTION.

MRS. T. N. CHASE, ATLANTA.

As gems are valued by their rarity, so you can imagine how such a
gathering as the Sunday-school Convention seemed to us in Georgia.

We were favored, not more by hearing the appointed speakers in
the great Convention, than by the personal presence and good
words of many of its delegates in our own school-room. Gen. Fisk,
who has given not only his name, but his heart and hand to our
Fisk University, took Atlanta and the Convention by storm with
his happy address of welcome. It seems to me our young men can
never lose the inspiration of hope and courage that must have
come to them from him, whose youthful struggles had even exceeded
many of their own. Then we heard Dr. H. M. Parsons. All who
ever listened to him will understand how, at the close of his
words, we felt that, next to the Rock Christ Jesus, there was
not beneath the sun so firm a foundation as our blessed Bible.
Another day, Dr. McVicar, a college president from Montreal,
warned us of the Jesuits, with an earnestness such as, perhaps,
only a good Scotch Presbyterian could feel. Then we had “Hope
Ledyard,” the charming correspondent, whose young life seems too
exquisitely moulded to have always escaped the loving Father’s
crucible.

Best of all, we had good words from many not heard in the
Convention, and, perhaps, unknown to fame. There was Judge
Harman, of Oswego. How his clear eye took in the large
possibilities of our work, and how his great heart went out
toward us! As he warned us of the perils of a life without Jesus,
and the depths of despair into which life’s trials could plunge a
soul unsupported by the Everlasting Arms, his peaceful face and
silvery hair assuring us he knew whereof he affirmed, some of
us had rare glimpses into the blessed beyond. The words of Rev.
A. P. Foster, Dr. Tully, and several that I was prevented from
hearing, so lifted both teachers and pupils above the plane of
plodding school life, that we almost trembled to look down. The
fact that many such men, of kindred mind and heart, filled the
silent pews of the Convention, seemed to me the secret of its
power. We had heard as good papers from other platforms, but the
sight of such a body, all delighting in the Master’s command,
“Feed My lambs,” was enough to send us to our homes feeling, as
one of our girls expressed it, “I know I shall be a better woman
for having attended the Convention.”

In response to an invitation for the delegates to visit our
school, Governor Colquitt, who presided, remarked to the
Convention: “The University is a good place to visit, and is
doing a good work”; and added that he had a servant who had
attended our school some years, and the instruction received
there had not pushed him above his position—he was the same
humble, faithful boy about his work. Every summer he came to him
for a recommendation to teach, which he cheerfully gave him, and
the boy always returned in the fall the same good, modest young
man.

Dr. McVicar also took a public occasion to express his
appreciation of our work. After the close of his sermon, at
the Central Presbyterian Church here, while recounting to the
audience the many things of interest he had enjoyed in their
city, he remarked that he had recently visited most of the
universities of Europe, and added that nothing in Atlanta, or
the great universities abroad, had interested him so heartily as
their Atlanta University.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SOUTH-WESTERN CONFERENCE.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER.

New Iberia was the place selected for our Annual Meeting this
year, April 3-5, and one more attractive, or more important to
the general interests of our work, could not have been chosen.
This church was organized in 1866, and has a membership of 117,
of which thirty have been received on profession of faith the
past year. The population of the city is about 3,000, of whom
nearly, if not quite, fifty per cent. are colored.

The South-western Conference is composed of fourteen
Congregational churches, of which twelve were represented at our
Annual Meeting.

The reports from the churches showed very clearly that the past
year had been one of marked activity and spiritual prosperity.
Several churches, as the Central, in New Orleans, and St. Mark’s,
in Terrebonne, have been blessed with revivals of great power.
Other churches have been cutting off dead branches, and putting
themselves in condition for better service. In tabulating the
reports, I find that the present membership of the churches of
our Conference is 806. There have been added on profession during
the year (ending April 1st, 1878,) _one hundred and thirteen_,
and four by letter. Forty-seven adults and _eighty babies_ have
been baptized.

As I have already spoken of the precious revival in Central
Church, in which more than fifty were converted, and the church
itself greatly quickened and refreshed, I will not recite the
facts again. The church of Brother Clay (one of the veterans and
pioneers of Congregationalism in Louisiana), in Terrebonne, has
passed through joyful and glorious experiences. The church has
been thronged for days and weeks. Mr. Clay said: “I did not know
where all the people came from. The church and church-yard were
filled with a dense mass of people. It seemed as though they
sprung out of the ground.” Night after night the earnest truths
of the Gospel were preached, and night after night “mourners”
crowded the anxious seats, crying for mercy. The people came from
long distances, five and seven miles. God put honor upon His
word, and many have been converted, and still the good work goes
on. Pastor Clay’s heart is filled with joy and thankfulness.


QUESTIONS DISCUSSED.

Among the topics considered at the Conference were the following:

_Revivals_: The best method of promoting and conducting them.
_Education_: The demand of the hour; how shall we meet it?
_Faith_: Its nature; how can we secure greater faith? Its joys
and its triumphs. What more can we do to reach the people with
the Gospel?

These questions were discussed with vigor and interest. Of
course, no speeches had been prepared in advance, and I was
surprised at the real excellence of the addresses. Mistakes in
grammar were sometimes made, and there were not many classical
allusions, but the speeches had the true ring, and good will come
of them.


PUBLIC SERVICES.

The opening sermon was given by the Moderator, Mr. Alexander,
from Matthew 1, 23: “They shall call his name Emmanuel; which
being interpreted is, God with us.” It was a great pleasure to
speak to such an audience. The church was densely packed, the
entry was filled; people took positions under the windows on
the outside, and fully one hundred, having sought admission in
vain, went reluctantly away. Mr. Hall, of New Orleans, preached
the second evening; after which, the Moderator made an address
on “Christian Unity,” in the hope of removing or modifying some
of the asperities and jealousies existing among the colored
churches. The address was received with strong expressions of
sympathy. One good old “auntie” said the next day: “Don’t you say
anything against that minister. He is trying to build up both
sides. He don’t wish to break down anybody.”


ORDINATION.

On Friday evening Mr. Homer Jones, a member of the church at New
Iberia, but a resident at Lake Piegneur, having passed a faithful
examination before the Conference regarding his Christian
experience, his religious belief, and his ability to preach, was
ordained as an Evangelist.

Bro. Jones is a warm-hearted Christian, and will make an able
and successful minister. He has served the churches faithfully
for two years or more without compensation. He owns a small farm
of eighteen acres on the shore of the beautiful Lake Piegneur.
His worthy wife was for a short time a student in Straight
University. He expresses his willingness to leave his beautiful
home, and go anywhere, even to Africa, where God may call him.


FAREWELL MEETING.

Friday morning was devoted to a “farewell prayer-meeting.” It
was a most tender and impressive scene. As one after another
spoke, “the fire burned”; every eye was wet with manly tears,
and when the entire Conference rose and joined hands, and they
sang or chanted an old refrain, peculiar to themselves, beginning
“Good-by, and shake hands,” and we entered into covenant with
God and with each other to go forth to another year of labor and
self-denial, those dear brethren, in the excess of religious
emotion, laughed and cried together. Thus was our meeting of 1878
brought to a close. The good pastor at New Iberia said: “Such a
light was never kindled here before.” The Conference adjourned to
meet in New Iberia next year, at the call of the Moderator.

Dear brethren of the North, pray for us, and remember that we are
trying to hold this distant outpost of the Church, and to extend,
in this beautiful and fruitful land, the cherished faith and
polity of our fathers.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SINGERS TO THE MISSIONARIES, GREETING.

  We give the following extracts from a letter, written by the
  Jubilee Singers, from Erfurt, Germany, to the new missionaries to
  Africa. From the fact that they are all Fisk University students,
  the greetings of the gleaners in Europe to the sowers in Africa
  is full of pathetic interest:

                                                 ERFURT, GERMANY.

To ALBERT P. MILLER, ADA ROBERTS MILLER, ANDREW E. JACKSON, and
ELLA HILDRIDGE JACKSON, Missionaries for Africa:

_Dear Brothers and Sisters_: The Jubilee Singers send greeting.
Could we give you our greeting in person, it would be more
satisfactory, as we can but feebly convey to you, in writing, how
our hearts have gone out to you in love and sympathy, and up to
God in thankfulness, since the glad tidings reached us of your
having consecrated your lives and talents to mission work among
our brethren in Africa. We have prayed and labored long for this
day, and now, thank God, our prayers are being answered.

We realize in how large a degree our success has been
attributable to the faithful prayers of you and your
fellow-students, sent up daily in our behalf from Fisk
University; and let us assure you that while you are doing battle
for the Master, by helping to lift the dark pall of barbarism and
superstition which enshrouds our kinsmen, you, in like manner,
will be sustained by the prayers of your fellow students, and
warm, earnest Christian hearts, not only in our own native land,
but in Great Britain, Holland and Germany. They will follow
your footsteps, faithfully and prayerfully, watching for the
fruits which ye shall reap, in due season, if ye faint not, and
rejoicing with you in the extension of Christ’s kingdom.

You are our first band of missionaries at the outpost of the
American Missionary Association in the land of our forefathers.
May the light of God so shine in your hearts that its reflected
rays shall be a balm to those who may come to you, to be healed
and taught of God. May He give you strength to thrust in the
“sharpened sickle” when the fields are ripe for the harvest, and
the laborers so few.

With the love and best wishes of the Jubilee Singers.

                            (Signed)

                                           GEORGIA M. GORDON,
                                                F. J. LOUDIN,
                                                B. W. THOMAS.

                                                     _Committee_.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.


       *       *       *       *       *


Arrival of the New Missionaries.

REV. FLOYD SNELSON.

I received the letters, telling of the new missionaries on
the way to our mission, with great joy. I left home late last
Thursday afternoon for this place to meet them. We came on very
well until Friday night about ten o’clock, at which time we were
caught in quite a storm, and had to anchor. As I had not been
here since our first arrival, there were many things to look
after.

Just as I was finishing up last night, the steamer came in,
bringing them. I got out to them about 8.30 P.M., and spent
nearly an hour with them. I am very favorably impressed with the
first view of my new co-workers, and hope now to be able to carry
on the work to greater success and with more ease.

Next morning they came ashore, and expressed themselves as
favorably surprised at the appearance of the place and people. On
the 26th, we hope to leave early for Good Hope.

  FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE,
      _March 25th, 1878_.

       *       *       *       *       *


First Impressions of Africa—A Sunday Service—A School
Celebration.

REV. ALBERT MILLER.

On reaching Freetown, and walking about the place and conversing
with the natives, we were very favorably disappointed. Some are
very intelligent and kind-hearted. We attended a Sunday-School
in the afternoon, and were much pleased to hear the children
read and sing. They reminded me of a small country school in the
South. A little boy played on the organ. We visited several of
the natives, and I was everywhere surprised at seeing so much
intelligence displayed. Brother Snelson had made all necessary
preparations for our coming. The mission house had been fitted
up nicely, so that we soon felt as if we were in an American
village. We remained in Freetown two days, and Brother Snelson
lost no time in showing us the many things of interest in this
African city. We visited the market, and saw many things in the
line of fruits to interest us. All were well pleased, but still
longed to reach our adopted home.

Leaving Freetown on the 25th of March, we arrived here on the
28th, early in the morning. The men rowed all night. Mrs.
Snelson, Mr. White and the children of the mission met us at
the wharf. We could not have been more kindly received by any
persons. We have been here several days now, and find the work
promising and encouraging. Brother Snelson and his helpers are
hard at work, and things, I suppose, are much more hopeful than
they have been for years.

The church was filled last Sabbath to its utmost capacity with
hearers. Brother S., I think is the right man in the right place.
The only charge I am able to bring against him is overwork.
He has the confidence of the people, which is so necessary to
success. Services were conducted by Brother Jackson and myself.

I find the people kind and obliging. They are very happy to have
us, of their own race, come and teach and labor among them. Some
seem ready to shout. We are well pleased with our new home, and
are in a good state of health. The heat is very intense. All
things seem to indicate a better day for the sable sons of Ham.
Africa is not what rumor represents it to be—at least, what I
have seen of it.

APRIL 3, 1878.—To-day has been one of great interest, both
to parents and children. The day-school, under the general
management of Brother White, turned out. An examination took
place in the forenoon, after which the schools (day and
Sabbath), with two banners waving o’er head, came marching to a
place near the mission-house, where a dinner had been prepared
for them. Brother Snelson led the schools, and the children,
full of joy, followed him. He led them through the principal
streets of this our city, the sides of the streets being filled
with lookers-on. All this seemed new to them, and I dare say it
is new to this part of Africa. We had music, but very different
from such as our American friends are accustomed to. An old tin
box served as kettle-drum. This, with other instruments, made
music sufficient for the children to march and keep pretty good
time. Returning to the tables, the little ones ate dinner, using
spoons, which is something very new to them. Each one seemed to
be happy. The patrons were called upon to contribute for the
giving of this dinner. Many responded, sending chickens, rice,
etc. Of course, the whole affair was devolved upon Brother
Snelson. He received contributions from traders and officials,
many of whom are here on the coast. These, you will remember,
are white, the friendship and kind favor of whom Brother S.
has gained. They did not attend the exercises of the day, but
came out at night, and listened to speeches from members of the
school. The pupils spoke and sang well, and reminded me very much
of my past experience in the South—so Southern-like.

All were highly pleased with the exercises of the evening. The
American flag was on one side of the house, that of England on
the other—thus bringing all in attendance between them. These
two flags during the day were unfurled to the gentle breeze with
which we were favored. Many of the leading men of Bonthe were
here, and, with those from other places, took tea with us. I gain
more interest daily for this my field of labor. I shall not wait
to become acclimated, but shall proceed to labor at once.

       *       *       *       *       *


Advantages of Colored Missionaries.

EXTRACT OF LETTER FROM A. E. WHITE.

You would like to know what I think about colored missionaries
doing good here. My firm belief is, that they can do more than
any other missionaries under the sun. These people have always
been used to colored people. Most of the white men whom they have
seen were traders, seeking their own good. They robbed the people
of their produce and children, and destroyed their confidence.
A white missionary has to be more careful than a colored one.
The natives look upon a white person as unnatural, and think
he is above them in every way, and that God made him so. They
also think it is of no use for them to try to do the things they
see the white man do. But, on the other hand, when they see a
colored man do anything, they think if he can do it they can do
it themselves. They are a great people to imitate. For a proof of
what I have said, look at the Shengay Mission. It is conducted
altogether by colored missionaries, and stands ahead of others on
the coast. Do not think I say this because I am a colored man. I
say it because I know it is true.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


School Wants and Farm Work.

W. W. WHEELER, KESHENA, WIS.

The school opened very encouragingly this term, and before the
close of the second week we had fifty-four different boarding
scholars, and were compelled to refuse admission to others, on
account of our limited accommodations. Soon the scarlet-fever
broke out, and before the close of the term twenty-three boarding
scholars, and many of our day scholars, had been sent home on
account of sickness.

The boarding scholars seem, generally, to be happy and contented
with us, and eager to return at the opening of each new term; and
their progress in their studies, and general deportment, is much
greater than with the day scholars. The general interest, also,
of the tribe in the subject of education is greatly quickened.
The boarding-school, with suitable accommodations, might be made
a great blessing to the tribe. We feel sure we could readily
obtain 100 scholars if we had the accommodations.

The tribe has asked the Department to appropriate, from their
funds in the United States Treasury, $6,000 for the erection of a
suitable building.

We see the dreadful results, in other tribes around us, of
allowing the youth to grow up, without education, in contact with
the whites, learning their vices and not their virtues, and it
makes us long to see something done to save this people from the
blight which has fallen upon so many other tribes before them.

I have spent nearly three weeks going over the Reservation since
school closed, visiting from farm to farm, encouraging the
Indians to make larger improvements; and I have been very greatly
gratified to notice so many already clearing up new lands. I have
only found three or four families who will not clear up some new
ground this spring. Some will clear as much as three or four
acres. Many are chopping and logging heavy timber without any
team to help them.

I think there will be 300 acres of new land cleared this spring.
I expect to distribute (only to those who clear at least one
acre) 1,000 bushels of potatoes, besides corn, oats, wheat, and
vegetable seeds, for many of them have not yet learned to provide
beforehand. There are, however, quite a number who not only have
enough for their own seed, but some to sell.

Could the boarding-school be kept up regularly for a few years,
we should have great hopes for the future of this tribe, but
there seems to be a strange lack of interest in this matter on
the part of the authorities at Washington. We are now anxiously
waiting for instructions to re-open this school. Meanwhile, the
day-school is in operation, with an attendance of twenty-two
scholars.

       *       *       *       *       *


An Indian Wants a Cow.

    Dr G L Mahon

    Dr Sir i thought i would write a few lines to you to asking you
    that you dint not answered me when i was asking you while you was
    here about the Cow i want you to give me one if you Can i thing
    i would use the Cow very much if you would give me one i could
    get Some Butter from her and i could make good living on Butter
    with Potatoes if you Send me one Send who have a young Calf in
    her thats the one i like to have her and you will let me know it
    By G Wheeler and another thing about Potatoes Zack Brown told me
    he hasent got enough Potatoes Seeds for in a spring and ive got
    Plenty potatoes in Net Lake and if you want any i could Sell it
    to you Some that is for Zack Brown wants it Now i send my Best
    Regards to you

                 from     ADAWWAN-NE QUA BENANS
               VERMILLION LAKE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

  PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean. D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
  Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
  F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
  H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
  Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

  DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
  Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
  Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

  SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


Fung Affoo’s Bible Class—Visalia and Petaluma.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

Remembering that the Sabbath worship at our Central Mission had
never been described, though often alluded to in the MISSIONARY,
I requested Bro. Fung Affoo to give an account of it, and
received the following communication:

  “As we have not much time to teach them the Scripture on any
  other evening, we set apart Sunday and Wednesday evenings to
  teach them to read the Bible instead of their other lessons. On
  Sunday we have the “Bible-class,” commencing at half-past eleven
  A. M., and continuing for one hour and a half. We sing about half
  an hour either in Chinese or in English, then offer a prayer, and
  then read a chapter from the Bible. Each verse they read after
  me, then I translate it into Chinese; when through interpreting,
  on each verse or paragraph I make some remarks which I have
  studied out during the week days. After we get through the
  chapter, I speak about ten minutes on a subject selected from
  that chapter beforehand, then one of our brethren offers prayer;
  we then unite in singing the Doxology, and close with the
  Lord’s Prayer. Our exercises on Wednesday evening are similar
  to those we have on Sundays. It gives me much encouragement in
  the work seeing that they like to read the Bible more than ever
  before. Formerly only about one-half of the school attended the
  Bible-class on Wednesday evenings, but now they number nearly
  as many on that evening as on any other evening of the week. It
  seems as though their hatred of Christianity becomes less. Of
  course, many come to read the Bible only for the sake of learning
  the English, but in time we hope, when they know the truth of
  God, they will change their mind and heart, as some of them have
  already done, who are now on Christ’s side, battling for the
  Lord.”

                                                    “FUNG AFFOO.”

The attendance at this Sabbath noon service averages about
fifty-five. Of course, my pastoral duties render it impossible
for me ever to be present. I do not think, however, that my
presence would add anything to the worship or the work. I assist
the helpers in their preparation, but I believe that in dealing
with their countrymen they are more skilful than I could be, even
if I could speak Chinese. It needs an experience in heathenism,
to enable one to reach the heathen in the most efficient way. God
chooses saved _sinners_ to be messengers of salvation to those
still lost. I think that the programme of this service, as Bro.
Fung Affoo gives it, illustrates this fact. It is not one of my
planning—not the one I should have chosen; but as I carefully
consider it, I ask, “What _could be_ better fitted for those for
whom the service is arranged?”

Rev. T. M. Oviatt, whose missionary labors among the Chinese
at San Leandro were attended with so rich a blessing, is now
acting pastor of the Presbyterian church at Visalia. He has
carried there his zeal for this good work; has already rented a
small room, and opened a school. We shall aid him as far as we
are able. Would that we had a hundred men like-minded with him
touching this work!

Miss Anthony is obliged to relinquish the care of the school at
Petaluma, and is succeeded by Miss Waterbury, whose Christian
spirit is not unknown at No. 56 Reade St., New York. This school
is quite small, but its members surpass those of every other
school in liberality, and I cannot consent to abandon them.
Christ, too, is becoming known to them. With increasing interest
they study God’s word. And they _sing_, somewhat at random, it
must be confessed, in the matter of time and of tune, but with
an eagerness and a gusto that betoken a beginning both of the
spirit and the understanding in their song. Miss Anthony writes:
“Wah Yene is a good Christian as far as he understands. He told
me, one evening, that he prayed ‘every morning, every dinnertime,
and every night. Some people,’ he added, ‘not much good; likee go
to church; make Mr. Hutchins [the pastor of the Congregational
church] think they good. Some people very good, and pray to God.
I likee be good—not much bad.’”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.


       *       *       *       *       *


A TEACHER’S STORY.

The following letter is from a young girl who has not gone
through the Middle Class at Hampton, but is showing much energy
and tact, and doing good work as teacher in one of the rough
places of the far South:

                                                         FLORIDA.

  I will first say, I am a colored girl; my native home is in St.
  Augustine. I was raised by kind Northern friends. I am teaching
  school on the St. John’s River, about thirty or forty miles from
  St. Augustine. In giving my descriptions, I will first describe
  my school-house. It is made entirely of logs, with the exception
  of the door and windows, which were given by Miss M. The skies
  may be seen in any part of the room. The cracks in the floor are
  large enough to put your hands through. When it rains, it leaks
  in like water dropping from the trees. There is no fire-place,
  nor was there any way for keeping warm until, the past week, a
  young man got me a little stove. But the house is so open this
  does but little towards heating it up. We have had some cold
  days, and the only way I had to keep my scholars warm was, to
  build two large fires and have the poor little children set
  around them (out of doors). I rubbed their little cold hands and
  bare feet, and oh! how it made my heart ache to see the tears
  stand in their eyes, when I asked them why they didn’t put on
  shoes and warmer clothes, and the reply would be, “I have on all
  the clothes I got, and I ain’t got no shoes.” Sometimes, when I
  have on all I can to keep warm, most of my girls have only two
  garments on, the boys nothing but pants and shirt. Some of my
  pupils have to come between two and three miles, and then cross a
  creek. I have a sewing-school for my girls once a week. I read to
  them, and teach them things to sing while they are sewing. They
  are to keep what they make. I have been teaching three-and-a-half
  months. The age of my scholars is from three-and-a-half to
  twenty-four years. I have enrolled thirty scholars, most of them
  very good, all anxious to learn. The people are very, very poor,
  and have real hard times in getting clothing, and keeping from
  starving. They live in log huts, some of which leak, and are in
  a dreadful condition. I don’t know how to describe some of them.
  There are a few white settlers here; some of them, when the folks
  work for them, won’t pay. This makes it real hard, as the work
  they get from them is mostly their entire support.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR APRIL, 1878.


       *       *       *       *       *

  MAINE, $27.24.

    Andover. S. W. Pearson                                   5.00
    Bluehill. Mrs. S. D. and Mrs. P. C. 50c. ea.             1.00
    Litchfield Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  10.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Ch. $10.21; Mrs. S. B. $1               11.24


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $417.29.

    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              2.75
    Deerfield. ESTATE of Stephen Brown, by Joseph T.
      Brown, Ex.                                           100.00
    Exeter. “Friends in Second Cong. Ch.,” _for a
      Teacher_                                              78.00
    Fitzwilliam. H. H. W. and M. W. W.                       1.20
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. AUSTIN
      H. BURR, L. M.                                        35.00
    Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           25.00
    Hudson. Mrs. B. F. Chase, bbl. of potatoes.
    Kingston. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $5; Jacob Chapman $5       10.00
    Laconia. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 6.75
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                          3.00
    Manchester. C. B. Southworth $50; Rev. C. W. Wallace
      $25                                                   75.00
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        19.00
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        34.78
    Stoddard. Rev. H. H. C.                                  1.00
    Temple. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.81
    Wilton. “Mistletoe Band,” _for Student Aid,
      Wilmington, N. C._                                    17.00


  VERMONT, $1,166.04.

    Berlin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              11.25
    Bennington. Mrs. M. B. K.                                0.50
    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            35.35
    Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                0.50
    Burlington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   165.36
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of wh. $3 from
     “Mrs. G. M. H.”) $17.40; Cong. Sab. Sch. $8.02         25.42
    Danby. Rev. L. D. M.                                     0.50
    Dorset. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 25.00
    East Barnard. Levi Belknap                               2.00
    Montpelier. Bethany Ch., to const. REV. JOHN H.
      HINCKS, L. M.                                         32.00
    North Walden. S. W. O.                                   0.50
    Peacham. ESTATE of Ezra C. Chamberlin, by Wm. R.
      Shedd, Ex. ($60 of which to const. MISS JANE E.
      CHAMBERLIN and MISS JENNIE C. WATTS, L.M’s)          500.00
    South Londonderry. “A Friend”                            5.00
    Springfield. “Springfield Mission Circle,” _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                             150.00
    Springfield. Mrs. F. P.                                  1.00
    Swanton. Harry Smith                                     5.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 14.46
    West Fairlee Centre. Cong. Sab. Sch.                    14.10
    West Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $16.10;
      Mrs. L. W. $1                                         17.10
    Westminster West. ESTATE of Almira Goodhue, by
      Homer Goodhue, Ex.                                   150.00
    Westminster West. Cong. Sab. Sch.                       11.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,959.55.

    Agawam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              21.71
    Andover. Mrs. J. B. Clough $10; C. H. G., 25c.          10.25
    Ashby. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                           10.00
    Ashfield. B. H.                                          0.54
    Ayer. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding, _for Theo. Student,
      Talladega C._                                         70.00
    Bolton. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._       20.00
    Boston. Walnut Ave. Cong. Sab. Sch. $132.16; Rev.
      Chas. Nichols $25                                    157.16
    Braintree. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           14.00
    Brocton. Joseph Hewett $5; Mrs. Baalis Sanford,
      box of C.                                              5.00
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                         69.21
    Buckland. Cong. Ch.                                      9.55
    Byfield. Mrs. Jerusha B. Root $30, to const.
      MARTIN NELSON ROOT, M.D., L.M.; Cong. Ch. and
      Soc. $5.75                                            35.75
    Cambridge. No. Ave. Cong. Ch.                           74.91
    Charlton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               14.66
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       48.22
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $20; Thomas P.
      Carlton $2                                            22.00
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        87.02
    Dorchester. Thomas D. Quincy                             2.50
    Dunstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.16
    East Charlemont. Cong. Ch. (of which $1.75
      from “Carpenter Bees,” _for Colored Girls_)           21.00
    East Longmeadow. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      1.00
    East Medway. Mrs. M. N. M. $1; E. B. D. $1               2.00
    Fall River. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 126.89
    Feeding Hills. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.17
    Framingham. Plymouth Cong. Sab. Sch. $14.40;
      Mrs. E. H. $1                                         15.40
    Groton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        36.02
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                             3.56
    Hadley. Mrs. E. Porter $5; Mrs. Eliza
      Huntington $2                                          7.00
    Holden. Cong. Sab. Sch. $15; Cong. Miss. Ass’n $6,
      _for Wilmington, N. C._                               21.00
    Holliston. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              10.00
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      14.97
    Hopkinton. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $121.87;
      Mrs. P. J. Claflin $100.                             228.87
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     41.88
    Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   13.47
    Lowell. Mrs. S. L. P.                                    0.50
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        58.72
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          50.00
    Marshfield. Rev. E. Alden, 2 packages of books.
    Medway. ESTATE of Clarissa A. Pond, by A.
      Pond, Ex.                                            135.00
    Medway. Mrs. A. D. Sanford, box of C.
    Melrose. E. N. C.                                        0.50
    Methuen. ESTATE of Joseph F. Ingalls, by
      Samuel G. Sargent and Will. C. Sleeper, Ex’s.        959.09
    Middleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 20.00
    Middlefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      OLIVER CHURCH and REV. CHAS. M. PEIRCE, L.M’s         60.71
    Middleton. ESTATE of Mrs. Catharine Merriam
      Wilkins, by Francis P. Merriam, Ex.                  100.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              17.60
    New Bedford. Miss H. M. L.                               1.00
    Newburyport. Mrs. J. B.                                  0.50
    North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                  27.68
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch.                            47.06
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc. $150.64;
      Mrs. C. F. R. $1                                     151.64
    Newtonville. Mrs. J. W. Hayes                           25.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.              50.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $21.39;
      L. W. 50c                                             21.89
    Pittsfield. James R. Jones                              15.00
    Princeton. H. N. M.                                      5.00
    Quincy. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              37.00
    Salem. Geo. Driver                                       5.00
    Shelburne. Cong. Ch.                                     9.61
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    Southfield. W. H. E.                                     0.50
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.              88.00
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  14.00
    South Hadley Falls. First Cong. Ch. $42;
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. $41                                83.00
    South Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      11.13
    South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch.                         30.00
    Spencer. Ladies’ Benev. Soc.                            20.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $38.55;
      Hope Cong. Ch. $21.55; South Cong. Ch. $12.96         73.06
    Sudbury. U.E. Ch. and Soc.                              25.50
    Sutton. R. L. 1.00
    Templeton. J. L. $1; L. M. 50c.                          1.50
    Tolland. Mrs. N. E. S.                                   0.50
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       36.50
    Warwick. Trin. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        12.00
    Webster. First Cong. Ch.                                25.00
    Westborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc., M. C. Coll.
      $26.93; Cong. Sab. Sch. $56.02; Mrs. W. F.
      Morse $5                                              87.95
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     26.75
    Westhampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.50
    West Springfield. Park St. Ch.                          15.00
    Williamsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       14.14
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                           15.39
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          41.80
    Winchester. P.S. $1; “Two Children” 86c.                 1.86
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch. M. C. Coll.                    19.10
    —— “A Friend”                                          250.00
    —— “A Friend”                                           20.00


  RHODE ISLAND, 27c.

    Providence. Rev. W. P. Doe, box of books.
    Slaterville. M. J. T.                                    0.27


  CONNECTICUT, $2,583.80.

    Ansonia. Cong. Ch.                                      26.71
    Avon. Miss L. A. A.                                      0.50
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                10.00
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch.                                   46.38
    Bolton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.00
    Bristol. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                10.00
    Broad Brook. Cong. Ch.                                  11.00
    Darien. Cong. Ch.                                       35.50
    East Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        8.24
    East Woodstock. ESTATE of George A. Paine, by
      John Paine, Ex.                                      646.15
    Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                    54.42
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                   63.52
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.44
    Guilford. “Lea.”                                        10.00
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          4.15
    Higganum. Mrs. R. Reed $1.25; Mrs. R. G. $1;
      Mrs. G. T. G. $1                                       3.25
    Huntington. N. T. and D. L. $1 ea.                       2.00
    Killingly. Miss E. F. Jencks                             5.00
    Ledyard. Cong. Ch.                                       8.75
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              7.00
    New Haven. Howard Ave. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $22;
      College St. Ch. $10; Centre Ch. (ad’l) $5;
      A. T. $1                                              38.00
    North Branford. Cong. Ch.                               22.00
    Norwich. Mrs. J. M. Huntington, _for Student Aid,
     Atlanta U._                                            5.00
    Plantsville. Mrs. E. Hotchkiss, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            5.00
    Plainville. Dea. L. H. Carter, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                           50.00
    Prospect. B. B. Brown $10: Andrew Smith $5              15.00
    Putnam. Estate of Chandler A. Spalding, by
      Emily Spalding and Calvin D. Williams, Ex’s        1,046.63
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                            118.65
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                      8.81
    Sherman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             22.75
    South Coventry. Cong. Ch.                               47.84
    Southington. Cong. Ch.                                  18.17
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                    31.94
    Westford. Cong. Ch                                       5.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                85.00
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                          1.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.00
    Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                                65.00
    Woodbury. Mrs. E. L. Curtiss                            10.50
    Woodfords. Dr. E. C.                                     0.50


  NEW YORK, $1,197,84.

    Albion. L. S.                                            1.00
    Binghamton. “A Friend” (ad’l) $12.50; Mrs. J. E.
      Bean $10                                              22.50
    Brooklyn. Plymouth Church $329.15; Central Cong.
      Ch. $182.50; Mrs. Mary E. Whiton $15; Mrs.
      William Bane, packages books and C.                  526.65
    Cleveland. Rev. W. S. T.                                 0.60
    Eagle Harbor. A. P.                                      0.48
    Geneva. Mrs. G. F. Milton (of which $5 for Student
      Aid)                                                  10.00
    Himrods. Mrs. G. S. Ayres                                5.00
    Homer. Mrs. E. B. Dean                                   5.00
    Hume. Mrs. L. H. P. and Mrs. J. H.                       1.00
    Ithaca. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.52
    Martinsburgh. Mrs. W. Arthur                             2.00
    Medina. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Presb. Ch., by Lina
      Burroughs, box of C. and books.
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle Ch. $440.93.
      —“Pilgrim Band,” Broadway Tab. Sab. Sch.
      $11.41, _for Student Aid._—“A Friend,” package
      _for Memphis, Tenn._                                 452.34
    Norwood. “A Friend,” by Rev. C. H. Rowley                4.37
    Nineveh. Reuben Lovejoy                                100.00
    Oxford. Ass’d Presb. Soc.                                9.58
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                    25.00
    Saratoga Springs. S. C.                                  0.50
    Syracuse. Mrs. C. C. Clarke                              6.80
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. S.                                      1.00
    Utica. Mrs. Cornelia Hurlburt                           10.00
    West Brook. T. S. H.                                     0.50
    West Winfield. L. Bucklen                                2.00
    Wolcott. H. M. Hamilton, box of books.


  NEW JERSEY, $101.50.

    Montclair. First Cong. Ch. (in part)                   100.00
    Phillipsburg. H. P. M.                                   0.50
    Trenton. Mrs. E. B. F.                                   1.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $15.

    Philadelphia. Mrs. S. L. Chester                         5.00
    Pittsburgh. Sam’l Boyd                                  10.00


  OHIO, $910.87.

    Akron. Cong. Ch.                                        81.70
    Andover. Cong. Ch.                                       9.71
    Bellevue. Cong. Ch.                                     23.50
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the poor in New
      Orleans_                                              78.72
    Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch.                        18.80
    Deerfield. Mrs. Wm. Penn                                10.00
    Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.50
    Huntington. First Cong. Ch.                             23.25
    Kent. First Cong. Ch.                                   15.50
    Lenox. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Mallet Creek. Dr. J. A. Bingham                          5.00
    Marysville. Ladies’ Home Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.         6.50
    Mechanicsburgh. Mrs. M. K. H.                            1.00
    New Richland. E. J.                                      1.00
    North Benton. Mrs. M. J. H.                              0.50
    North Ridgefield. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                  1.15
    Oberlin. ESTATE of Mary I. Hulburd, by Hiram
      Hulburd, Ex.                                          50.00
    Oberlin. L. F.                                           1.00
    Penfield. B. R.                                          1.00
    Plymouth. Estate of Henry Amerman, by J. H.
      Packer                                               400.00
    Richfield. S. R. Oviatt $3; Mrs. S. Townsend
      $2.50                                                  5.50
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
      JOSIAH STRONG and L. H. LEWIS, L. M’s.                60.00
    Steubenville. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch.                                                    8.50
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed                              10.00
    Wadsworth. Cong. Ch. $10; Geo. Lyman $5                 15.00
    Wauseon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.55
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                 20.29
    West Williamsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   3.20
    Youngstown. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                          20.00


  INDIANA, $21.67.

    Fort Wayne. Cong. Ch.                                   14.67
    Liber. J. R. Wells                                       5.00
    Sparta. John Hawkswell                                   2.00


  ILLINOIS, $945.82.

    Alton. “Church of the Redeemer”                         30.00
    Aurora. New Eng. Ch.                                    20.00
    Bloomingdale. S. S. Harrison                             2.00
    Champaign. Mrs. A. O. H.                                 0.60
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch.                               473.78
    Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. $25, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._—Three Subscribers $1 ea.;
      Mrs. M. J. B. $1; Bethany Cong. Ch. 50c               29.50
    Dunlap. Mrs. Elmira Jones                               10.00
    Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                              83.64
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                     143.80
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
    Kewanne. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                   25.00
    Lake Forest. Mrs. W. H. F.                               1.00
    La Harpe. Mrs. E. J. N.                                  1.00
    Morris. Miss Narcissa Sample, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                           2.00
    Morrison. Mrs. S. T. $1; Mrs. A. P. $1; A. M. S.
      $1                                                     3.00
    Oak Park. Mrs. J. Huggins, _for Student Aid_            10.00
    Peru. Cong. Bible Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                   12.50
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
    Rockford. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U_.                                              25.00
    St. Charles. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                          5.00
    Sparta. Bryce Crawford $5; Robert Stevenson $2           7.00
    Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell                                 10.00
    Tonica. Cong. Ch.                                       23.00


  MICHIGAN, $132.41.

    Detroit. Individuals, by Mrs. R. Nutting $2.75;
      C. I. W. $1                                            3.75
    East Saginaw. Cong. Ch.                                 25.00
    Grand Rapids. E. Ball and Mrs. Avery $10
     ea.; M. Wood $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._            25.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                       10.66
    Kalamo. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00
    Lansing. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk. U._                                             25.00
    Muskegon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                   25.00
    Stanton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_             10.00
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                 5.00


  WISCONSIN, $145.60.

    Big Springs. Cong. Ch.                                   1.25
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                      21.00
    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                      8.18
    Fort Howard. Mrs. C. L. A. Tank                          2.00
    La Crosse. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Fisk U._                50.00
    Milwaukee. Hanover St. Cong. Ch.                         8.00
    Stoughton. Box of C. and $1                              1.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch.                                       17.00
    West Salem. Cong. Ch.                                   27.17


  IOWA, $2,695.54.

    Burlington. Mrs. Hannah Everall                          5.00
    Cedar Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_          2.00
    Chester Centre. Cong. Sab. Sch. $16.50; Prairie
      Gleaners $13.50; Mrs. D. B. D. $1, _for a Student,
      Fisk U._                                              31.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                1.00
    Des Moines. Ladies Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                              10.00
    DeWitt. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    Dubuque. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                              25.00
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                        9.06
    Grinnell. ESTATE of Charles F. Dike, by Mrs.
      C. F. Dike, Exec’x.                                2,500.00
    Grinnell. Mrs. S. H. Bixby $4.—Hon. J. B. G.,
      50c., _for Mag._                                       4.50
    Hampton. Mrs. W. P. B.                                   1.00
    Kellogg. Mrs. Dunn                                       5.00
    Keokuk. “Signature”                                     10.00
    Maquoketa. Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                      13.53
    McGregor. Mrs. R. G. and Mrs. E. P. D                    0.50
    Muscatine. Henry Hoover, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                    5.00
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc., bal. to const. MRS.
      LUCRETIA DEERING, L. M.                                5.85
    Sheldon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_              1.10
    Waltham. ESTATE of Miss Emeline E. Williams, by
      William Mason                                         50.00
    Waterloo. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                             5.00


  MINNESOTA, $47.45.

    Minneapolis. Plym. Ch.                                  23.75
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                      3.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       11.30
    Tivoli. L. H.                                            1.00
    Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch.                                8.40


  KANSAS, $66.32.

    Blue Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                   3.35
    Eureka. Cong. Sab. Ch. Sch., _for Student Aid_           3.12
    Lawrence. Second Cong. Ch. $3; Rev. A. M. R. $1          4.00
    Leavenworth. Mrs. S. A. Cutts                            5.00
    Meriden. “A Friend of Missions”                         10.00
    Russell. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Topeka. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    Wabaunsee. “First Ch. of Christ”                        15.85


  NEBRASKA, $31.50.

    Nebraska City. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_        1.50
    Schuyler. By Rev. A. Dresser                            30.00


  CALIFORNIA, 51c.

    Madison. Mrs. N. N. T.                                   0.51


  TENNESSEE, $461.26.

    Chattanooga. Rent $300; Church Coll. $10.26            310.26
    Chattanooga. Rev. Temple Cutler, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                          13.00
    Maryville. Prof. P. M. B.                                0.25
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                 137.75


  NORTH CAROLINA, $290.40.

    Raleigh. Pub. Sch. Fund $150; Washington
      Sch. $8.20                                           158.20
    Wilmington. Normal School $121.75; Cong. Ch.
      $7.40                                                129.15
    Woodbridge. Tuition                                      3.05


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $220.55.

    Charleston. Avery Institute                            220.55


  GEORGIA. $417.61.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University                            109.00
    Atlanta. “A Friend” $58; Rev. S. S. Ashley $12,
      _for Student Aid._—Prof. T. N. Chase $25              95.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                  62.70
    Savannah. Rent $83.33; Tuition $67.58                  150.91


  ALABAMA, $388.09.

    Athens. Trinity Sch.                                    26.00
    Mobile. I. G.                                            0.50
    Montgomery. Pub. Fund                                  225.00
    Selma. Rev. Fletcher Clark, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                           6.35
    Talladega. Talledega College                           130.24


  MISSISSIPPI, $64.05.

    Jackson. Byron Lumley $10; J. Stadeker & Son $5,
      _for Barracks, Tougaloo_                              15.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                           43.05
    Tougaloo. W. P. Dulaney, M. D., _for Barracks_           5.00
    Yazoo City. Hon W. D. Gibbs _for Barracks,
      Tougaloo_                                              1.00


  LOUISIANA, $137.

    New Orleans. Straight University                       137.00


  TEXAS, 50c.

    San Antonia. G. W. W.                                    0.50

  CANADA, 50c.

    Camlachie. Rev. J. M. G.                                 0.50

  ENGLAND, $900.95.

    Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc., _for Mendi Mission_      900.95

  SCOTLAND, $200.

     Glasgow. Mrs. Ann McDowell, _for a Teacher_           200.00

  TURKEY, $10.

   Van. Dr. Geo. C. Raynolds and wife                       10.00
                                                        —————————
        Total                                           17,557.13

        Total from Oct. 1st to April 30th             $103,309.96

                                              H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                   _Ass’t Treas._

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Brewer, Me. M. Hardy                                    25.00
    Portland, Me. “A Member of State St. Ch.”               50.00
    Manchester, N. H. C. B. Southworth                      50.00
    Boston, Mass. Mrs. Nancy B. Curtis                     500.00
    East Claremont, Mass. A. P. Leavitt                     50.00
    Rockport, Mass. “A Friend”                               5.00
    Woodworth, Wis. Rev. Thomas Gillespie                   10.00
    Meriden, Kansas. A Friend of Missions                   10.00
    Chattanooga, Tenn. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                  16.00
                                                         ————————
                                                           716.00
    Previously acknowledged March receipts               8,921.72
                                                         ————————
        Total                                           $9,637.72


  RECEIVED FOR TILLOTSON C. AND N. INST., AUSTIN,
  TEXAS.

    Glastonbury, Conn. J. B. and W. S. Williams            400.00
    Englewood, N. J, “A Friend”                              2.50
                                                         ————————
                                                           402.50
        Previously acknowledged Feb. receipts              422.00
                                                         ————————
        Total                                             $824.50

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

Incorporated January 30, 1849.


       *       *       *       *       *

ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in
the practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the
funds, may become a member of the Society; and by the payment
of thirty dollars, a life member; provided, that children and
others who have not professed their faith may be constituted life
members without the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies—each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President, Vice
Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries
and agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general,
the transaction of all such business as usually appertains to
the executive committees of missionary and other benevolent
societies; the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical
jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to be subject
always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall, by a
reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference
shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all
vacancies occurring among the officers between the regular annual
meetings; to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature
for acts of incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any
is given, of all officers, agents, missionaries, or others in
the employment of the Society: to make provision, if any, for
disabled missionaries, and for the widows and children of such as
are deceased; and to call, in all parts of the country, at their
discretion, special and general conventions of the friends of
missions, with a view to the diffusion of the missionary spirit,
and the general and vigorous promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive
the known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its
employment those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing
to the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and
sustain missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so
through the agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually
agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made in this Constitution without
the concurrence of two thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee
in season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to
do, if so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the
meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._


       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy
with the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has
devoted its main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their
duties as citizens and Christians in America and as missionaries
in Africa. As closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the
caste-persecuted CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with
the Government in its humane and Christian policy towards the
INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 11;
Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas,
4. _Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.
_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn., Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La,; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta,
Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.; 11;
_Other Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS—Among the Freedmen, 209;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign lands,
10. Total, 252. STUDENTS—In Theology, 74; Law, 8; in College
Course, 79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404. Scholars
taught by former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000.
INDIANS under the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached
by _regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the
feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions,
to accomodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES,
for the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured
and pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all
clergymen who take up collections for the Association; to
Superintendents of Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to
Theological Seminaries; to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and
to every donor who does not prefer to take it as a subscriber,
and contributes in a year not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following:


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer
of the “American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be
applied under the direction of the Executive Committee of the
Association, to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A.B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A.B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is
required that the Will should be made at least two months before
the death of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       BROWN BROS. & CO.

                           BANKERS,

             59 Wall St., New York,
                 211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                               66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment,

Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries,
and in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a
ready means of identification, and the amounts for which they are
issued can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be,
in sums to meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.

They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of
Money between this Country and England, and draw Bills of
Exchange on Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Warren Ward & Co.

                    MANUFACTURERS OF ARTISTIC

                          FURNITURE,

Invite attention to a very large stock, including new =Eastlake,
Queen Anne, Japanese,= Modern and other choice styles,
exclusively of our own design and manufacture, which we fully
warrant, being made of the best seasoned material, and of
unsurpassed workmanship.

We keep on hand a large variety of =Chamber Suites= in Ash
Walnut and Mahogany, from =$30= up; =Parlor Suites= in all
varieties of covering, from =$50= up; =Enameled Suites,= a large
variety in new styles, from =$17= up; =Library Furniture= of all
kinds and styles; =Dining Room Extension Tables, Sideboards,
Chairs, &c.=, at Lowest Prices; =Hat Stands, Hall Chairs= and
=Hanging Glasses;= also, =Superior Hair Mattresses, Pillows,
Spring Beds, Curtains, Lambrequins, Window Shades, Cabinet,
Centre Tables, Easels, Pedestals= and other fancy articles for
the Parlor, &c., &c.

Designs furnished and estimates given for Furniture of all kinds
requiring to be made.

We fully guarantee all our work, and our prices are as low as any
other manufacturers’ for the same quality of goods.

75 & 77 Spring St.,

      Cor, CROSBY ST.,

One Block E. of Br’dway, bef. St. Nicholas & Metropolitan Hotels.

                                                      _New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    Established A. D. 1850.

                              THE

                           MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Co.,

                     156 Broadway, New York,

                           HAS PAID

                    $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS,

                           HAS PAID

         $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                       HAS A SURPLUS OF

                 =$1,700,000= OVER LIABILITIES,

              _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

               _It gives the Best Insurance on
                  the Best Lives at the most
                       Favorable Rates._

EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

C. Y. WEMPLE,
            _Vice-President_.

J. L. HALSEY,
            _Secretary_.

S. N. STEBBINS,
            _Actuary_.

H. Y. WEMPLE,
H. B. STOKES,
            _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       E. D. Bassford’s

               COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK CITY,

Just received from European and Domestic Manufacturers complete
new stock of fresh and beautiful goods. Every department of this
great emporium is being re-stocked with the Newest and Best
=House-Furnishing= and =Table Wares,= in =Hardware, China, Glass,
Cutlery, Silver= and =Wooden-ware=, and everything in these
lines for the complete furnishing of =House and Table—Dinner=
and =Tea Sets, Chamber-ware, Cooking Utensils, Tin-ware= and

                          BASSFORD’S

               Celebrated Nonpareil Refrigerator,

The best made. Goods promptly delivered in city, or shipped
daily. Complete Price Lists and Refrigerator Lists sent free, and
every attention paid to inquiries by mail.

                      Edward D. Bassford,

              Nos. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 17

                      _COOPER INSTITUTE_,

                         NEW YORK CITY.


                 *       *       *       *       *


$24.50                                                   $29.00
ECONOMICAL                                           ECONOMICAL
S.S. LIBRARY                                       S.S. LIBRARY
A. 50 Vols.                                         B. 60 Vols.
13,356 Pages.                                     16,462 Pages.
Price of the same books                 Price of the same books
separately, =$50.25=.                     separately, =$59.05=.

                        In Uniform style.

             The Volumes numbered and ready for use.

                 _50 Catalogues with each Set._

        Each set in a neat wooden case (grained Walnut.)

The books in the two sets are all different, and they may be used
                        together, making

             110 Vols., 30,000 Pages, for $53.50.

Works by MRS. CHARLES, GEORGE MACDONALD, NORMAN MACLEOD, EDWARD
GARRETT, DR. JOHN HALL, HESBA STRETTON, MISS PHELPS, LYMAN
ABBOTT, _and other well known writers included_.

Unequaled for high character of books, substantial and attractive
style, and cheapness, these Libraries are well worth attention of
City and Country Sunday Schools. _Circular with full Catalogues
sent on application._

DODD, MEAD & COMPANY, Publishers, 751 Broadway, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       A. S. BARNES & CO.

                     Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of
400 Text Books and Professional Manuals.

                  A. S. B. & Co., also publish

Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; the Intellect in Relation to Preaching: Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.

Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12 mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D.D._
“What a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R.S. Storrs, D.D._

Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.

Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.

Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Acts, $1.75: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D.D._”

                  PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

              111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


         _“Providence helps those who help themselves.”_


                        HAUTE NOUVEAUTE.

                          GRAND OPENING

                               OF

                   NOVEL AND BEAUTIFUL STYLES.

                          THE DEMOREST

                _Representative and Cosmopolitan_

                      EMPORIUM OF FASHIONS

        Furnishing the World’s Ideal of Artistic Beauty,
          Novelty, Utility, Variety, Accuracy, Economy,
                    and Fashionable Elegance.

Always First Premium in every competition, including the World’s
Fair, American Institute, New York; Mechanics’ Institute, Boston;
Mechanics’ Institute, Maryland; New York and other State Fairs,
and the exclusive award over all competitors at the Centennial
Exhibition.

                    PARIS, LONDON, NEW YORK,

                    And Agencies Everywhere.

                   RELIABLE PATTERNS IN SIZES,

                   Illustrated and Described.

 _Prices from 10 to 30 Cents each, or 5d. to 1s. 3d. Sterling._

     SEND FOR CATALOGUE, with directions in French, English,
             Portuguese, Dutch, German and Spanish.

                 DEMOREST’S MONTHLY MAGAZINE,

   25 cts.: 1s. Sterling; Yearly $3.00; 12s. Sterling. with a
                      Magnificent Premium.

                The Demorest Quarterly Journal,

     cents: 2½d. Sterling. Yearly 10 cents: 5d. Sterling.

                 Mme. Demorest’s What to Wear,

                   15 cts.; 7½d. Sterling.

            Mme. Demorest’s Port-Folio of Fashions,

          15 cts.; 7½d. Sterling. Either post-free.

                         NEW YORK HOUSE:

                  17 EAST FOURTEENTH STREET.

         11 Bouverle St. London. 5 Rue Scribe, Paris.

Mme. DEMOREST.                            W. JENNINGS DEMOREST.


                 *       *       *       *       *



                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          STOVES, RANGES,

                 Furnaces, Fire-Place Heaters, &c.

         THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT AND VARIETY IN THE MARKET.

                        EXCLUSIVE MAKERS OF

                 _P. P. Stewart's Famous Stoves._

We continue to make a discount of twenty-five per cent. from our prices
on these well-known Cooking and Parlor Stoves, to Clergymen and College
Professors. Orders and letters in response to this notice, addressed to
our New York house, will receive prompt attention. ☞ Special terms to
_=Clergymen=_ on all our Goods. ☜

Send for Catalogues and Circulars to

                                         FULLER, WARREN & CO.
                                               236 Water St., New York.

  TROY.                        CHICAGO.                      CLEVELAND.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON'S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                     The Laundry,

                                 The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                          CABINET ORGANS

HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD'S EXHIBITIONS. _Only American Organs
awarded such at_ ANY. _Before buying or renting, send for our_
LATEST CATALOGUES and CIRCULARS, with NEW STYLES, REDUCED PRICES
and _much information_. _Sent free._

                     MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO.,
                                    BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid _=$340=_ ORGANS for _=$100=_. _=$300=_ for _=$90=_.
_=$275=_ for _=$80=_. _=$200=_ for _=$70=_. _=$190=_ for _=$65=_;
and _=$160=_ for _=$55=_. PIANOS—_=$900=_ Piano Forte for
_=$225=_. _=$800=_ for _=$200=_. _=$750=_ for _=$185=_. _=$700=_
for _=$165=_. _=$600=_ for _=$135=_, _=cash=_, not used a year, in
perfect order. Great Bargains, Unrivaled Instruments, Unequaled
Prices. Send for Catalogues. =HORACE WATERS & SONS, _40 East 14th
Street, New York_.=

                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Young America Press Co.,

[Illustration]

35 Murray St., New York, manufacture a variety of hand,
self-inking, and rotary printing presses, ranging in price from $2
to $150, including the =Centennial=, =Young America=, =Cottage=,
=Lightning=, and other celebrated printing machines. Our new rotary
press, the =United States Jobber= for cheapness and excellence, is
unrivalled. Other presses taken in exchange. Lowest prices for type
and printing material. Circulars free. Specimen Book of Type, 10
cts. A sample package of plain and fancy cards, 10 cts.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN'S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY, N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]

                 *       *       *       *       *




                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.


                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, giving news from the
Institutions and Churches aided by the Association among the
Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the Chinese on the
Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa. Price, =Fifty
Cents a Year, in Advance=.


                        OUR NEW PAMPHLETS.

No. 1.—=History= of the Association.

No. 2.—=Africa=: Containing a History of the Mendi Mission, a
Description of the Land and the People, and a presentation of their
claims on America.

No. 3.—=The Three Despised Races in the United States=; or, The
Chinaman, the Indian, and the Freedman. An Address before the A. M.
A., by Rev. Joseph Cook, of Boston, Mass.

No. 4.—=The Educational Work.= Showing the nature and reality
of the black man's needs; the way to help him; the sentiment of
Southern men; the work of the Romish Church; the wants of the A. M.
A.

_Will be sent free to any address, on application._

                    H. W. HUBBARD, Ass't-Treas., 56 Reade St., N. Y.


                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for
which our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially
valuable. Our readers are among the best in the country, having an
established character for integrity and thrift that constitute them
valued customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed
to the "RULES" of the best Newspapers, requiring "DOUBLE RATES"
for these "LUXURIES," our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                                   J. H. DENISON, Adv'g Agent,
                                         56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  KINGSFORD'S
  OSWEGO
  PURE AND
  SILVERGLOSS STARCH
  MANUFACTURED BY
  T. KINGSFORD & SON
  TRADE MARK.
  STARCH
  Is Perfectly PURE--UNIFORM and STRONGER than any other.
  THE BEST and MOST ECONOMICAL in the WORLD.
  Ask for KINGSFORD'S, and BE SURE YOU GET IT.
]

                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation, spelling and grammar were changed only where the error
appears to be a printing error. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

— “a” changed to “and” on page 161. (English and Scotch
missionaries)

— missing “is” inserted on page 166. (The discipline of these
institutions is evidently giving)

— missing a added to change “Afric’s” to “Africa’s” on page 175.
(Africa’s sunny fountains)

— extraneous “(” removed from E.D. Bassford’s Advertisement on
page 191, just prior to “COOPER INSTITUTE”.

— “attenion” changed to “attention” on page 192. (are well worth
attention of)








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 06, JUNE, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.