VOL. XXXII.                                           No. 9.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                         SEPTEMBER, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                             257
    THE CLAIM OF SELF-INTEREST                             258
    PLEASE PERUSE, AND PONDER                              259
    THEN AND NOW                                           260
    ANNUAL REPORTS NEEDED                                  261
    A GOOD EXAMPLE—THE NEGRO IN THE UNITED STATES          262
    ITEMS FROM CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS                        265
    GENERAL NOTES                                          266


  THE FREEDMEN.

    SYSTEMATIC BENEFICENCE IN ATLANTA UNIVERSITY:
      Rev. Horace Bumstead                                 267
    CHARLESTON, S. C.—Avery Normal Institute.—Reunion
      Exercises.—Impressions made on a Visitor from a
      Neighboring State                                    270
    GEORGIA—Ogeechee: Rev. John R. McLean                  272
    ALABAMA—A Surprise Party: Mr. E. C.
      Silsby.—Anniversary of Trinity School: Rev.
      Horace J. Taylor.—A Gospel Ship: Rev. P. J.
      McIntosh                                         272–274
    MISSISSIPPI-Grenada                                    275
    KENTUCKY—Berea College Commencement.—Frankfort:
      Miss Mattie E. Anderson                         275, 276


  AFRICA.

    MENDI MISSION—In Good Health and Good Heart:
      Rev. Albert P. Miller                                276


  THE CHINESE.

    CHINA FOR CHRIST: Rev. W. C. Pond                      277


  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                      281


  RECEIPTS                                                 283


  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                             286

       *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           A. Anderson, Printer, 23 to 27 Vandewater St.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXII.     SEPTEMBER, 1878.     No. 9.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *

The thirty-second Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in Taunton, Mass., by invitation of the
Congregational Churches of that city, commencing on Tuesday,
October 29th, at three P. M.

The sermon will be preached by the Rev. S. E. Herrick, D. D.,
of Mt. Vernon Church, Boston. Other speakers and the order of
exercises will be announced hereafter.

A cordial welcome will be given to delegates, and a full
representation of the churches is earnestly desired.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 2d of July, Lord Polwarth gave a missionary conference
in the grounds of Mertown House, on the Tweed, at which Dr. O.
H. White, of America, Secretary of the Freedmen’s Aid Society,
made an address. He dwelt upon the explorations of Africa and the
emancipation of the slaves in America, and on the relation of these
two remarkable events to the evangelization of the 180,000,000 of
ignorant and idolatrous inhabitants of the hitherto almost unknown
continent. “The address was marked by intense earnestness and
pathos, and was listened to with rapt attention.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The monthly concert arranged for Rev. Mr. Winship’s Questions and
the Jubilee Songs seems to be a great success. Almost daily orders
are coming in for the Songs and Questions. Wherever they have been
used they have given the highest satisfaction. We confidently
commend them, therefore, to churches and Sabbath-schools that
desire to spend a pleasant and profitable hour in considering the
work and wants of the Association. We do not see how the same
amount of information in regard to the Association could be so
readily imparted in any other way.

Orders sent to Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Congregational House, Boston,
or to any A. M. A. office, will be filled gratuitously.

       *       *       *       *       *

The friends of Fisk University will be interested to hear of
the safe return to this country of President Cravath. With him
have also come the Jubilee Singers, who have been giving popular
concerts during the last year in Holland, Germany and Switzerland,
and have now disbanded.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CLAIM OF SELF-INTEREST.

The claim of the three despised races in the United States is
enforced by a motive of self-interest, by the relation of their
leavening to the future prosperity and even perpetuity of our
nation. Especially is this true of the freedmen, as large enough
in their numbers to have weight, and endowed with privileges which
make their numbers powerful for good or evil.

So large a mass, if it be corrupt, is also corrupting. Here are
three lepers; I can but hint at their diseases. They are full of
wounds and bruises and putrifying sores. You shrink and shudder
at the picture. But, my brother, they are at your very door. What
shall we do with them? This sickness is not unto death. Worse than
that; it is perpetuated and transmissible; but it may be cured.
The power of Christ, who touched the leper with His life-giving
hand, is still with us. But we must go in the name of Jesus of
Nazareth. We cannot bar the negro out; he has the right to sit in
our midst, even among the senators of the land; and if he be still
ignorant, and immoral, and superstitious, he will spread corruption
around him. The only way to prevent him from contaminating us is
to let virtue go forth from us to convert and cleanse him. And the
question is, is there enough in us to do it? The very _presence_ of
vice and ignorance is contaminating; it conducts all evil influence
and spreads it. The swamp malaria which fills the air, while it
chokes the hovels of the poor, can by no means be kept out of
the palaces of the rich. The foul odors of Hunter’s Point pay no
respect to the brown-stone fronts of Murray Hill. If one member
suffers, all the body is afflicted.

Do you say, “It is not our concern”? But it is every one’s concern.
Is the ignorance and vice of your own town or city not your
concern? You have to pay for it dearly. Your taxes for police, for
courts and for prisons are only a small part of what it levies
on you. It, too, pervades the air and mingles its deadly poison
with it, and you breathe it in. You are proof against it; it only
imperceptibly lessens the tone of your health and vigor. But your
neighbor is not, and perhaps your son or daughter is not; and in
the traps which line our streets your son or my son may stumble and
fall; or behind the shaded windows where the snares are laid, your
son or my son may go to ruin.

It is so in the nation. If the leaven be not more active and more
potent than the mass, it will be itself unleavened and spoiled.

But there is a greater peril to us than the mere presence of
ignorance and vice in its _power_. By the chances of war, and for
the sake of its success, 1,000,000 slaves were made citizens. They
were armed with the rifle and the ballot. With the rifle they
turned the day of strife to the day of settlement; but with the
ballot, if left slaves as to their intelligence and manliness,
they may make of peace fatal disaster. Till they can exercise this
solemn trust with wise discretion, and with conscientious fidelity,
it is a perilous trust in their hands. One million more votes added
to the vast number which are swayed by demagogues of either party,
increase by a fearful percentage the dangers of the land.

In their Christian education is our only surety for the future.
Education for their intelligence, and Christianity for their
morals, and as a foundation on which both intelligence and virtue
may rest secure.

The same danger would be swelled by the numbers of the Indians and
the Chinese if they were citizens. As it is, the Indian can only
become so by forswearing all the relations which are most sacred to
him, and which mean to him family and religion. And the Chinaman,
it has just been decided, cannot vote, at least in California,
because he is neither white enough nor black enough.

But it is the part of every wise man to see the danger, and to do
what he can to avert it. The Federal Government cannot do what
is needful. The States will not do it. Christian charity, with
far-sighted wisdom and self-denying philanthropy, can alone be
relied on for the work required—the training of these races. It
is an illustration of the truth, that all self-interests are met,
not by a narrowly planned seeking of them, but by that broader
conformity to the great law of love which, loving God first, has
love for each one in his place, and seeks the highest good of all.
In that is wrapped up, concealed sometimes, but surely there, our
own gain and good.

       *       *       *       *       *


PLEASE PERUSE, AND PONDER.

Our friends will pardon us for reminding them that the fiscal
year of the Association will close with the month of September.
What is done to swell the receipts, either for diminution of debt
or to meet current expenses, must be done quickly. Let no one
imagine, however, that we are not duly grateful to God and to His
people, for the gifts which have made possible the work on the
field, and lightened so much the drag on our treasury. Still, we
feel constrained to ask these givers for a larger giving, in order
that we may free ourselves from an incumbrance which has sadly
embarrassed us for years, and keep pace with the openings before
us. Two things we ask:

1. The debt _must_ be cleared away. Every interest of the
Association demands it. Our friends demand it—do they not? Else,
would they have reduced our indebtedness, within eighteen months,
from over $90,000 to some $40,000 at this present writing? Why
may we not believe that God has His reserves, both of men and of
money, at hand, to wipe out the remaining balance against us? We
wait to see who will step into the place of honor, and make some
great sacrifice in this behalf. This debt was incurred to aid the
poorest of the poor, as we thought, at the call of Christ himself.
May not they expect His blessing who shall now come to the rescue?
“Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto Me.”

2. We need increased supplies to meet our constant outgo. Our
friends have done well by us during this year—such a year, too, as
it has been! But they must be faithful to the end of it to ensure
us a good record on the 30th of September. They need not be afraid
of overdoing it; for if, by any good fortune of ours and good-will
of theirs, we should, after paying all our current claims, have a
small balance, it will go at once to lessen this still burdensome
debt.

Remember, too, that the work is ever increasing on our hands, save
as we have to keep it down. Millions of these freedmen must in the
next ten years, if ever, be brought under the influence of sound
learning and true religion. This generation must not pass away till
it be possible for every colored child to read the word of God.
The Chinaman and the Indian, too, make claims upon us which their
cruel treatment by our fellow-citizens only serves to emphasize.
Africa, also, as a culmination of our work, is calling for new
laborers of her own sons to come and bring back to those sitting
in darkness the light which is the life of men. But, in order to
this, our teachers and missionaries must be numbered by hundreds
and thousands, where now they are numbered by scores and hundreds.
This is the true economy and the true wisdom. If we are to realize
our ideal, there must be a new interest kindled in the work, and
a great advance in the gifts of God’s people. With the closing of
the year, therefore, we invite the intelligent and liberal men of
the land to consider _once more_ the work of this Association, in
its bearing upon this nation, and in its bearing upon the nations,
to which these races belong. We do not see how we can vindicate
ourselves as righteous men, as men who fear God and love our
neighbors, if we neglect this work brought to our doors and laid
upon us by sanctions as solemn and pressing as were ever imposed on
men. We do, then, in behalf of these races, and in the name of our
risen Lord, ask the good and the wise, everywhere, to give us their
sympathies, their prayers, and their money, in measure large enough
to put these fields under ample culture for a better and brighter
future.

       *       *       *       *       *


THEN AND NOW.

REV. J. E. ROY, D. D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

Then—in October, 1860—as the newly-appointed District Secretary
for the A. M. A., I attended its fourteenth annual meeting, in
pastor M. E. Strieby’s church at Syracuse. It was an occasion of
congratulation that the receipts for that year had come up to
$56,000—$5,000 more than for the preceding, and $2,000 more than
for any previous year. There had been sixty missionary laborers in
foreign lands, and 112 in our own country, the most of whom were
in the West, and forty of them in Illinois. The churches aided
numbered 140, to which had been added 989 members, of whom 659 came
by profession of faith. Twenty-five revivals were reported. In the
South, North Carolina had one missionary and Kentucky had four, all
of whom were engaged in caring for little churches among the white
people. In a year and a half the war came on, and our missionaries
were driven out of the South. The American Home Missionary Society
had cleared itself, the first of all the national societies, from
complicity with slaveholding, and so the missionary churches of the
A. M. A. at the North and the District Secretary were transferred
to the old society.

Now—after sixteen and a half years—I find myself, by the clearest
drift of Providence, back in the service of the Association. At
its anniversary of 1859, in Chicago, there was a discussion as
to what should come of the A. M. A. when all the societies and
churches should have reached the anti-slavery standard. Some
held that the Association was only a tug to help those noble
crafts out to sea. President Blanchard said, “Yes, a tug; but
when she has got them all over the bar we will change her into
a frigate, to course up and down all the Southern waters.” Last
fall, the Association came back to Syracuse to hold its thirtieth
anniversary, and, sure enough, the tug had come in as a frigate,
with report of engagements all over the South. And so it had been
running for the last twelve years. The Treasurer’s report ran up
to $264,709. Instead of the 112 white churches North, are shown 59
churches among the ex-slaves; also 7 chartered institutions, 14
high and normal schools, with 10,000 scholars, and with 100,000
pupils reached by their teachers. The Indian work abides; the
Chinese has come on. The scheme for evangelizing Africa, by using
the Christianized freedmen, is opening into proportions immensely
beyond the conception of its early movers.

Then—its constituents were individuals, and churches of the more
pronounced abolition sort. Now—since the National Council at
Boston—the Association has been recognized as the agency of the
Congregational churches for doing their work among “the three
despised races.” The old adherents, developed into generous giving
by the necessities of their enterprise, abide with the enthusiasm
of veterans; while now the mass of our people acknowledge
themselves under just as much obligation as they to use this
organization in its peculiar sphere of Christianization at home
and abroad. They find it by Providence marvelously developed and
fitted to its work—tested, toughened and trusted. They hear it said
from without, that our body of churches is doing more and better
work among the freedmen than any other. They find that the old
anti-slavery education in our families had prepared a multitude of
our cultured and consecrated young people to enter this work as
soon as the way was open, even at a salary little above the nominal
rate. And so they find this charge laid upon them and readily
accept the obligation, grateful for the opportunity.

In coming back to this service, I feel that I am only shifting from
the right to the left wing of the home missionary army. No man can
go beyond me in appreciation of the sublime movement represented by
the American Home Missionary Society. But in this other department
I find that most of the same arguments are to be used. Do we call
for the Christianizing of the people of our country? Here are
millions of them at the South in need of that process. Do we plead
for the saving of our country from the spiritual despotism of
Rome? The Jesuits, using hundreds of thousands of dollars yearly,
are scheming to Romanize the congenial material found in the
ex-slaves. Do we appeal in behalf of the political interests of
our country? Here are 1,000,000 black voters who cannot read. Then
by their side, only lower down in the social scale, are 1,100,000
white voters who also cannot read the ballots they are to cast;
and the conviction is now gaining ground that the most effectual,
if not the only way, to lift up that class is to put under them
the leverage of the educated negro. Do we use that grandest
argument—the salvation of our country for the sake of the salvation
of the world? Here in our own land is looming up the most potent
agency for the evangelization of Africa. That despoiled continent
may yet say to her despoilers, “Ye thought evil against me, but God
meant it unto good.”

The A. H. M. S., true to its charter as a national institution,
as soon as war had battered down the walls that were in its way,
sought, with the Philip of its evangelism, to go towards the
South. It explored the chief cities and centres of that region,
and was entering devotedly upon that part of the field. It has
kept pressing every hopeful opening. It will still be true to its
national idea and do all it may be allowed to do there. None feel
more keenly than do its chief officers the chagrin at the few
opportunities afforded and the failure in so many of them. They
have done only their duty in making the costly experiments. And now
the apostolic spirit of our Congregational churches seems to say to
the white people of the South, “Seeing ye count yourselves unworthy
of these good things, lo, we turn to the freedmen.”

If, in some distant part of the globe, a people had just been
discovered, numbering 5,000,000 souls, speaking our own language,
hungering for our ideas, our civilization and our Christianity, it
would thrill the Christian world to go in at once and possess that
land for Christ. That thing we may do in our own country, under our
own flag. And some of us who now, with our years, could not pass
muster to go and cope with a foreign language, have yet not a few
years left in which we may do an essentially foreign missionary
work in our own language, in that tongue, which, more than any
other spoken by man, is freighted with the associations and the
spirit of the Gospel of the Crucified One.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL REPORTS NEEDED.

Any of our friends who have the following back numbers of the
Annual Report of the A. M. A. that they can spare, will confer a
favor by sending them to our office as soon as convenient: Numbers
3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 14, 16, 17, 21, 22, 24. We do not ask our friends to
break a set if they are anxious to keep it, but to send any extra
numbers they may have. Without realizing it, we have exhausted our
supply of these numbers, and now wish to make up a few extra sets
to have bound for our own use. As years go by, we learn more and
more the value to us of these old reports.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GOOD EXAMPLE.

Mrs. Sally Perry died in Boston, Mass., June 17th, aged ninety-one
years. The slaves had a large place in her sympathies, when she
could do little more than offer her prayers in their behalf. But
when the war had set them free, and left her charity at liberty
to enter on practical offices of good will, she eagerly embraced
the opportunity, watching for openings. She read in the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY, for 1866, a call for funds to establish orphan asylums
for the thousands of homeless colored children in the South. She
came to our office in Boston for information in regard to it. The
result was a donation of $500, to found the Brewer Orphan Asylum in
Wilmington, N. C., in memory of her deceased daughter. And, year by
year, while the Asylum existed, she gave it the interest of $2,000,
devised in her will for its benefit.

When the Asylum was no longer needed, the city of Wilmington
undertaking to care for its poor, with the consent of Mrs. Perry,
the funds which she had invested in it were transferred to the
Brewer Normal School in Greenwood, S. C. This school so enlisted
her thoughts and sympathies, that she determined to make over to
it, two years before her death, the amount she had designed for
it at her decease. Accordingly, she paid over to the Association,
for the benefit of the school, two one-thousand-dollar U. S.
Bonds, which realized $2,416.25. The writer remembers how her
face shone after the act was done. Indeed, giving seemed to be,
to her, a supreme luxury. The whole amount which she contributed
to the Association, for its work of physical relief and Christian
education, was not far from $4,000. And the school which she has
left in her daughter’s name, the support of which is mainly from
her bequest, will go on perpetuating her influence for the years
and generations to come. Many, in the great day, will rise up and
call her blessed. Are there not other dear saints of God, friends
of the poor and the needy, who will imitate her spirit and her
example?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO IN THE UNITED STATES.

  We attempt to give, though it is difficult, a condensation of the
    address made by President BUCKHAM, of Burlington, Vt., at the
    Boston Anniversary of the A. M. A., May 29th, 1878. It has been
    published in full in the _Congregationalist_, and in pamphlet
    form already.

The negro, it must be confessed, has lost the place he once
held as an attractive object of philanthropy. Invested with the
legal rights of a man, and thus by necessity thrust forward into
comparison and competition with other men, he not only exhibits his
inferiority on a conspicuous stage, but manifests some traits which
make him repulsive and odious. The negro cause has thus sunk from
an impassioned crusade to a common-place charity.


The Negro Question.

And yet the Negro Question is still the great American Question.
Perhaps it is with questions like this as with the movements of a
battle; those at a distance see them more clearly than those in the
thick of action. The intelligent Englishman or Frenchman will tell
you in an instant that our great problem is the negro question—the
political, as dependent on the social and moral condition of the
freedmen.

With a population as large as that of the colonies at the
Revolution, with the full privileges of American citizens theirs
by constitutional right, they hold in their hands—the very hands
but recently manacled in cruel and degrading bondage—the balance
of political power in the nation. As parties are now divided,
the supremacy of one or the other depends on the negro vote; and
whether the negro vote shall be the vote _of_ the negro, or merely
the vote _by_ the negro, will depend on the degree of manhood he
reaches through his social and moral condition.


The Southern Solution.

One party in the South, not including the best elements of Southern
society, but for the present the dominant one, has already matured
and avowed its solution of the problem. “The negro,” they say,
“belongs to a race constitutionally and forever inferior—a race
foreordained to serve in some capacity the superior white race.
You have declared by law that he shall not be a chattel; we are
determined that he shall not be more than a serf. Rule over us
he shall not; rule with us he shall not; if he must vote, he
shall vote as we bid him; by all the methods usually employed for
that end wherever caste prevails, by compulsory ignorance, by
superstition, by terrorism, by fraud, when necessary by force, he
shall be compelled to stay in his place as a member of a subject,
an abject race.”

There are others—and it must not be ignored that among them are
some of the leaders of opinion at the South—whose language is less
violent, and whose measures are less threatening, but whose end is
substantially the same. They are willing, possibly I should say
desirous, to better the condition of the negro, so far as to make
him a better laborer, a more thrifty and useful factor in political
economy, a more honest man and a more devout Christian, but with
stringent limitations to his social and political ambition. They
favor education, but an education so controlled by the superior
race, and so differenced from the education given to the children
of this race, that it shall beget no dangerous and revolutionary
aspirations. These men favor religion for the blacks—but such a
religion as shall keep them occupied with emotional fervors and
boisterous bodily exercises, not such as shall encourage thoughtful
study of truth in God’s word and works.


The Christian Solution.

Now, as the policy of the party unfriendly in a greater or
less degree to the freedman, is based on the assumption of his
inferiority, so the policy of his friends and benefactors—and he
has friends at the South as well as at the North—must be based on
the counter assertion of his manhood. It is not necessary—it is
somewhat dogmatic, it is at least premature—to assert his equality
in all respects with the white man. That is an ethnological
question which it may take ages to settle, and when settled it will
be mainly a matter of scientific interest. But that the negro is
a man; that everything distinctively human belongs to him; that
he is capable of improvement; that his intellectual faculties
are expanded, and his moral nature is elevated by means of the
same truths and the same influences which invigorate and enlarge
and fructify the souls of other men, and that he is entitled to
his full share, without stint or reserve, of all the knowledge
and all the human agencies and the divine influences by which
it is ordained that our common humanity shall reach its highest
attainable perfection—this is the broad basis of principle on
which the American Missionary Association, and all true missionary
associations, found their policy in dealing with negroes, as with
all other races of men whom God has made of one blood on all the
face of the earth, and for whose common redemption and perfection
Christ died, who is the Saviour of all men.

But in one sense the freedman is something more than a man; he is
an American citizen; and he is more than an ordinary citizen; he
is a voter. He has been entrusted by the nation with the highly
important duty of giving expression to the municipal, the State,
and the national will in legislative, judicial and executive acts.
He is an integral part of the sovereignty of this nation. We may or
may not think it a national mistake to have made him so important
a functionary. But the negro is here. He is here either to corrupt
our politics, to degrade our social life, to debase our religion,
possibly to drag us into another civil war, if we continue or
repeat in some other form our injustice and tyranny to him; or, he
is here to perform some useful, perhaps some noble, part in the
work of developing a Christian civilization at home and extending
it abroad through the earth, if we are faithful to the trust
committed to us by Providence in him.


The Negro Intellectually.

The question of the negro’s intellectual capacity has almost become
obsolete as a debatable question. Strange that it should ever have
been seriously maintained, that a race which has produced its full
share of the world’s great men all along through history, a race
which has given to the world a Hannibal, an Augustine, a Toussaint,
is a race lacking intellectual capacity. Strange it is, on the
other hand, that a race, however gifted, should, though oppressed
and stupefied by ages of bondage, so frequently throw off minds of
a high order.

If it should be said that these are a few picked men, whose cases
do not indicate the intellectual capacity of the race, I reply
it is only a few picked men of any race who are capable of high
intellectual attainments, and that, because the rarest of talents
is that ambition for high attainments which will carry one through
toils and sacrifices to the far-away prize. I know no better test
of intellectual capacity than the ardent desire for knowledge, and
that desire the freedmen have in a remarkable degree. When the
freedman spelt out, by the light of his pine-torch, the words:
“Thou God seest me,” and then jumped to his feet and exclaimed:
“John Martin, you can read! John Martin, you are a man!” he
uttered a truth which too few of the boasted superior race so well
appreciate—that manhood comes from power to appropriate great
ideas. There is no doubt that the returns for money invested in
freedmen’s schools are large. No one can read the accounts sent
to us by teachers in these schools, and doubt that. The soil is
a virgin one, and yields great crops for a small outlay. Think
what the Peabody Fund is doing for the whole South! Think how
wide-reaching would be the effects of a few thousand dollars put
into the colleges at Atlanta, Berea and Nashville, where it might
be hoped that almost every single dollar would quicken some mind
which else were benighted, but which, if enlightened, might carry
light to hundreds of benighted minds.


The Negro’s Moral Capacity.

If the negro had come out of this long, cruel bondage without being
terribly degraded morally; if, as some pretend, his moral nature
had been under an elevating discipline, then had slavery not been
“the sum of all villainies.” But there is no denying that the
American negro bears the marks of his bondage, in his indolence,
his untruthfulness, his dishonesty, his animalism. But these are
all vices of the slaves, not of the men; of the condition, not of
the race. The possibilities of the negro nature are to be estimated
by its highest actual attainments in the most favored individuals.
Two of the noblest races of history have come from an ancestry less
promising than our Southern freedmen—the Israelites and our own
ancestors.

He would be a daring prophet who, in face of these examples, and of
the instances of moral greatness actually produced by this race,
should assert that something noble in character, some unique type
of spiritual excellence, some splendid order of manhood, may not
yet emerge from this now degraded and unpromising race. What the
nature, the moral capacity of the American negro is, future ages
will determine; and if we believe that God made him and gave him
his nature, with all its unrealized possibilities, it surely cannot
be hard for us to believe that there is for him a glorious future
of moral and spiritual character.


Our Hope in Schools and Churches.

To the schools and to the churches, then, of the South we look as
the hope of this race. But there are schools, and schools; there
are churches, and churches; and everything depends on the kinds of
schools and churches they have.

Depend upon it, unless we help the negroes to establish schools
which will impart the kind of education which will give them
intelligence and thrift, which will bring to them a consciousness
of their resources and ambition to use them to the utmost, and
thus raise themselves in the social and political scale, others
will see to it that schools are established which, in response to
their cry for knowledge, shall keep the word of promise to their
ear, and break it to their hope; which shall give them the kind
of education that occupies and amuses the mind without developing
it, and that will leave them fit subjects for the ecclesiastical
and political yoke which has even now been prepared for them. And,
unless we plant churches among them, which shall aim to consecrate
and employ in Christ’s service heart, soul, mind and strength—the
whole man and all his capacities—others will see to it that
churches are established which, appealing to his love of display
and big responsiveness to sensational and dramatic demonstrations,
shall keep him a child forever, submissive to his self-constituted
masters at home and abroad.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS.

WILMINGTON, N. C.—“Applications for next school-term are coming in.
The students don’t mean to be caught as they were last year. I had
to refuse so many for want of room.”

ATLANTA, GA.—There are known to be more than 142 of the present
pupils of Atlanta University engaged in teaching during their
three months’ vacation. This short term is all the present school
system of Georgia contemplates during the year. Although many are
prepared every year to take up the work, the demand is constantly
larger than the supply. A short time since, application was made
at the institution for three teachers in one day, to take schools
already organized in the country, and none could be found to go.
One graduate of the school, who has taught a school of his own in
the southern part of the State for two years past, has raised up
the present teachers of nearly every school in two counties, and a
large part of those in seven others.

BYRON, GA.—Four persons united with the church, July 7th. One
infant was baptized. Many are inquiring the way of life. A woman’s
prayer-meeting is held every week. The Sunday-school numbers
fifty-two.

WOODVILLE, GA.—Pilgrim Church has started a mission at Five-mile
Bend, which promises well. They have licensed a brother to preach
there. Mr. Sengstacke preaches there once or twice a month. Since
last March thirty-five persons have been added to the church.

GEORGIA.—The railroads diverging from Atlanta generously passed
at reduced rates the students of Atlanta University, after
Commencement, to their homes and schools in the country. This
reduction on one line, and on one trip, resulted in a saving to the
students of a hundred and thirty-two dollars, a sum sufficient to
pay the board and tuition of a student in that institution one year
and two months.

ATHENS, ALA.—At the July communion, six children were baptized in
Trinity Congregational Church. Two cases of discipline have just
been issued. Rev. Horace J. Taylor is pastor.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—Nathaniel Nurse, a student of Fisk University, has
been appointed a city missionary.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.

—The Atlanta _Republican_ says that, in proportion to their means,
the colored people of that city are paying a much heavier tax than
the whites, while their school facilities are far inferior. It also
alleges that the hostility of the mayor to the colored school is
evidenced by the removal of their best teachers, and especially of
those who have gone thither from the North.

       *       *       *       *       *

—Catlin says that the Indians preserve their health by keeping
their mouths shut. Some pale-faces might preserve their spiritual
health by observing the same rule.—_Christian at Work._

—“It is a singular _non sequitur_ to refer to the discovery
of frauds made by the Interior Department, as proofs of its
inefficiency and unsuitableness to conduct the service, when, in
fact, they are proofs of exactly the opposite.”—_Independent._

—The following resolutions, written by men who have worked in
Oregon and Washington for thirty years, and who ought to know
something about this question, were unanimously adopted by the
Oregon Congregational Association:

“_Resolved_, That the Association affirm its faith in the
redemption of the Indian from barbarism.

“_Resolved_, That we deplore the policy that tends to his
extermination.

“_Resolved_, That the provisions of the Constitution, and the acts
of Congress, and the pledges of treaties, furnish a strong motive
for effort on the part of the friends of the Indian to secure him a
homestead and citizenship as the best way to secure his rights in
law, and promote his manhood and his welfare permanently, and

“_Whereas_, There is now a proposition in Congress to consolidate
the various reservations in Oregon and Washington Territory,
without regard to the previous labor and rights of the Indians, and
without their consent, and

“_Whereas_, We believe such consolidation would be unjust to the
Indians, dangerous to the surrounding settlers, and, in the end,
of vast expense to the government, as well as a great hindrance to
the civilization of the Indians physically, mentally and morally,
therefore,

“_Resolved_, That before any consolidation takes place, we
earnestly urge upon Congress the necessity of now, by positive act,
granting to the Indians of industrious habits, on the reservations,
homestead titles to their lands in severalty.

“_Resolved_, That the recommendation of the Secretary of the
Interior, that boarding schools be established among Indians for
the better training of their children, meets our convictions of
what is needed.

“_Resolved_, That a copy of these resolutions be forwarded to the
Secretary of the Interior.”

—General Crook is reported to have said, recently, to a newspaper
man, “It is hard to be forced to kill the Indians when they are
clearly in the right.”

—The question of Indian loyalty or revolt is generally decided by
our treatment of them. If served by capable and faithful agents,
supplied according to agreement, and protected from whiskey-dealing
traders, they are peaceable and friendly. If defrauded of their
rights, starved, and driven from place to place, they become “bad
Indians,” and who wouldn’t? Witness the contrast between the Piutes
and Shoshones, of Nevada, and the Bannocks.

—The Bannock war would seem to be nearly over. An official report
announces that the Bannocks and Piutes have separated, and are
fleeing, apparently towards their reservations or former haunts.
Wheaton, and the boats on the Columbia, with Bernard and Forsythe
pressing from other points, all under the direction of General
Howard, who also operated separately with a small force of cavalry,
prevented the intended crossing of the Columbia, and an escape
into Washington Territory and the British Provinces. Settlers in
the vicinity of Camas Prairie are now in terror from the returning
Bannocks. Well they may be. The war began in connection with
an attempt of these Indians to go back from their Fort Hall
reservation, when nearly starved, to dig the camas, a nutritious
root, from which that region is named. The white inhabitants
objected, as they wanted the roots for their hogs. A difficulty
arose, a white man was killed, the military was called upon,
and, though the tribe did not justify the killing, nor shield
the murderer, yet proceeded to inflict punishment upon the whole
tribe by taking their horses and guns—largely their dependence for
subsistence.—_Advance._

       *       *       *       *       *

—The President is said to be making careful inquiries into the
facts as to the immigration of Chinamen to our Pacific Coast, and
to purpose a special message to the next Congress on the subject.
He has been reported as favoring its limitation by modification of
the Burlingame treaty.

—On the 19th of July, Judge Belden, of the District Court, rendered
a decision important to the interests of Chinese labor on the
Pacific Coast, declaring the exorbitant license tax on Chinese
laundries, of twenty dollars a month, to be void, and payments
made recoverable, on the ground that such charges were excessive,
disproportionate, and derogatory to fundamental principles of just
government.

—Twenty-five Chinese laborers sailed July 19th for Peru, to work
on a sugar estate. They are guaranteed prompt payment of sixteen
dollars a month, and good treatment. Others will probably follow
them.

—Judge Choate, of the United States District Court, ruled, July
10th, that a Chinaman cannot be naturalized under the laws of
the United States. The application was made by a Chinaman known
as Charles Miller, who has lived in New York for twenty-eight
years. Judge Choate was guided by the decision of Judge Sawyer,
of California, in the Ah Yup case, when thirteen hundred Chinamen
petitioned that schools might be provided for them, as for Indians
and negroes, and showed that in San Francisco alone they were
paying $42,000 in school taxes. Their request was not granted,
although it merely asked the carrying out of a provision of the
State Constitution which the honorable gentleman had sworn to obey.

—Colonel F. A. Bee, attorney for the Chinese six companies,
declares, upon official records, that during the past two years,
up to June 1, the emigration and death-rate of the Chinese have
exceeded the immigration by about 500; and that the entire number
of Chinese residents on the Pacific Coast, as shown on the
registers of the six companies, does not exceed 65,000.




THE FREEDMEN.


SYSTEMATIC BENEFICENCE IN ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

BY REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD.

During a portion of the past school-year a plan of systematic
beneficence has been in operation among the scholars and teachers
of Atlanta University. It was undertaken largely as an experiment,
and with many misgivings as to the results. Its success has been
so gratifying as to suggest the possibility that other schools and
churches in this missionary field might like to introduce it, if
made acquainted with its practical workings.

THE PLAN.—This is set forth in the following recommendations,
drawn up by a committee of teachers and scholars, and adopted by a
unanimous vote of the school:—

  “1. That we recognize more fully the duty and privilege of
  systematic giving.

  “2. That during the remainder of the school-year we make
  twenty-five weekly offerings of money at the Friday afternoon
  meeting, to aid in paying the debt of the A. M. A.

  “3. That all persons connected with the school be invited to hand
  in on slips of paper, to be provided, a statement of the amount
  which they will endeavor to give weekly.

  “4. That all persons handing in these statements be provided
  with envelopes in which to deposit the weekly amount; and that
  envelopes be furnished also to any who may desire to give as they
  are able, without stating beforehand a definite amount.

  “5. That any persons who prefer to devote their offerings to
  any other benevolent object than the one already suggested, be
  allowed to do so by giving timely notice of their desire.

  “6. That arrangements be made for furnishing cents in exchange
  for larger coins, so that all may be enabled to give as small
  sums as they wish.

  “7. That an account be kept with each holder of an envelope
  showing the amount given by each.

  “8. That some person be appointed by the president to superintend
  the execution of this plan.”

ITS OBJECT.—We desired not so much to raise a large sum of money
as to cultivate the habit of giving with thoughtfulness and
regularity. The value of this habit we sought to impress upon our
scholars in several prayer-meeting talks when the subject was under
consideration. If each one gave only one cent a week, the _habit_
of giving would be acquired, and this would be worth acquiring.
We wished also to encourage the idea that benevolent giving is
a fitting act of Divine worship. Our offerings were made at the
weekly school prayer-meeting on Friday afternoon, and were always
preceded by a short prayer of consecration from the president.

ITS FREEDOM.—So far as possible the word “pledge” was avoided in
presenting the matter to the school. Each person was asked to
consider carefully how much he was able and willing to give. The
handing in of a statement of his resolve to give so much per week
was designed chiefly to secure a thoughtful decision on the part of
each one. If any preferred not to do this they could still receive
an envelope and give what they liked from week to week. The keeping
of the record was not for the purpose of dunning delinquents; this
was never done. Undoubtedly, however, the mere fact that the record
was kept proved a stimulus to regularity in making the offerings,
and made it possible to tell any donor at any time how much he had
paid or had yet to pay. If any one desired to change the amount of
his offering, or to discontinue it altogether, he was met with no
remonstrance. While it was suggested that the offerings be devoted
to the debt of the A. M. A., full opportunity was given to each
one to contribute to any other object that he might select. The
scholars were especially urged not to be ashamed to give a small
sum if they could not give more. In a word, the whole management
of the plan was designed to be helpful rather than dictatorial or
inquisitive.

ITS DETAILS.—These may be skipped by those not specially
interested. One thousand strong Manilla envelopes, of the size
represented below, were bought for eighty-five cents, and five
hundred of them were printed, with the dates of the twenty-five
weekly offerings, at an expense of one dollar. A blank cash
book, with stiff covers, was bought for twenty-five cents, and a
conductor’s punch for a dollar and a quarter. Thus, the cost of the
outfit was but $3.35, and we have the book and punch for indefinite
use, and envelopes enough for another year or more.

There being no cents in general circulation in Atlanta, several
dollars’ worth were procured from the Post Office. Every Friday
morning, for half an hour before school, the “money-changer” sat at
his table in one of the school halls and gave pennies in exchange
for nickels and dimes. The sight of him, by the way, proved a very
serviceable reminder to the scholars that the day of the offering
had come.

Each person was provided with only one envelope, to be used over
and over again. In case of loss a new one was cheerfully given. On
the envelope, between the columns of printed dates, are written
his name, the number of the name in the record book, and the page
where found, and a letter indicating the school-room or department
to which he belongs. On the inside of the flap is written the
number of cents he is to give weekly, or an interrogative mark if
no definite sum has been stated. When the holder of the envelope
receives it again, he finds a little hole punched opposite the date
which his last payment has covered; this constitutes his receipt,
and the unpunched dates show how many more offerings he has to make.

[Illustration]

George Brown, for example, has made ten offerings, and has fifteen
yet to make. His name is numbered “46” on page “8” of the record
book, and he is to receive his envelope back in the Middle (“M”)
school-room, where he studies.

The envelopes as they are emptied of their contents are separated
into two piles, the first consisting of those which contain exactly
the stipulated weekly offering, and the second of those which do
not, as for example, when the donor wishes to make two or more
offerings at once. Care is taken to mark on each envelope of the
second pile, opposite the proper date, the amount which has been
found in it. Each of these piles is now assorted, so as to bring
together all the envelopes whose names occur on the same page of
the record book, for convenience in entering the amounts. Much
time is saved by having a second person read the name-numbers and
amounts to the person who enters them, reading of course, the
figures on the flaps of the first pile, and those opposite the
given date on the second. The envelopes are then properly punched,
and afterwards assorted according to the school-rooms, and given
to the respective teachers to distribute to the scholars. To
save loss, this distribution is deferred till the day before the
offering.

The record book is long and narrow, so as to get as many names as
possible on a page. The account of each donor requires but one line
running across two opposite pages, which are ruled vertically for
twenty-five entries. The amount given each week, even when more or
less than the stipulated amount, is entered under the date of that
week, thus bringing all the offerings of the same week in the same
column.

The handling of the money is facilitated by using small cotton bags
large enough to hold a hundred cents, or several dollars in nickels.

ITS RESULTS.—Envelopes were issued to two hundred and nine persons.
Only ten of these preferred not to state how much they would give
each week. Sixty-nine, or about one-third, offered to give one
cent a week; forty-three, or about one-fifth, offered two cents;
fifty-one, or about one-quarter, five cents. Only fifteen out of
the two hundred and nine offered more than five cents a week. Among
the scholars, the amounts ranged from one to ten cents; among the
teachers, from five cents to one dollar.

Out of the one hundred and ninety-nine who offered definite
amounts, sixty-three paid exactly what they had stated at the
outset; thirty-four (all scholars) paid more—in some cases double
and over; while one hundred and two (of whom a good many had left
school) paid less. Thus very nearly half paid in full or over. Many
of the others were deficient only a few cents, and these, in many
cases, unavoidably so. Little notes like this would sometimes come
in with the offerings: “This is all that I can pay; I have done the
best I could.” The record shows that many who fell behind for a
time afterwards made up the deficiency.

The offerings of the ten scholars who did not state what they
would pay weekly, averaged a little over one cent a week; of the
remaining one hundred and eighty-five scholars, a little over two
cents a week; of the fourteen teachers, a little over twenty-one
cents a week.

The scholars paid in all $102.02; the teachers, $73.00; making in
the aggregate, $175.02. _This was a little more than eighty-seven
and a half percent. of all that was offered at the start._
Excluding the teachers, all of whom paid in full, the scholars
redeemed eighty percent. of the amount they set out to pay; and
this percentage would have been larger but for the scholars who
left school before the close of the year.

Finally, the best result of all is, that we have learned something
of the happiness of Christian giving, when practised thoughtfully,
conscientiously and willingly.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHARLESTON, S. C.

Avery Normal Institute.

[_Extracts from the Charleston News and Courier, July 4th, 5th and
9th._]

The Graduation Exercises of this institution were held at the
school building in Bull street, yesterday, commencing at nine
o’clock in the morning.

The programme included singing by the school, and addresses and
essays, which reflected great credit upon the several pupils who
delivered them.

A large number of prizes, including several handsome books, were
distributed to the successful pupils in the several classes, and
diplomas were presented to the graduates.

Many features of the programme were excellently rendered, and it
is, perhaps, fair to award the palm to the salutatory and essay
by Julia D. Edwards, and to the discourse on “Class History” by
Elizabeth R. Tucker. These compositions were well conceived and
gracefully delivered. The singing, too, deserves special praise,
and there was one contralto voice in particular very noticeable for
its strength and clearness.

The institution, which is devoted to the education of the colored
youth of this city, has turned out ninety-seven graduates since
1872, all of whom do honor to their instructors.


Reunion Exercises.

The series of exercises which were arranged for three days, closed
most auspiciously, yesterday, with a reunion of the graduates. The
programme comprised vocal and instrumental music, original essays,
recitation, declamation, oration and closing address. The main
hall, where the exercises were held, was thronged with an audience
highly appreciative, as was continuously evinced.

The exercises were opened by a piano solo, a galop, which was
admirably played by Martha C. Gadsden, of the graduates of ’73.
After an address of welcome by Mrs. M. S. Lowery, an oration on
“True Greatness” was pronounced by John M. Morris, an alumnus of
the institute.

It is but justice to make special mention of the essays: “Youth the
Crisis of Character and Destiny,” by Merton B. Lawrence; “Avery
Normal Institute our Home,” by Susan B. Artson; “Woman’s Position
in Society,” by Susan A. Schmidt; “Necrology,” by Catharine A.
Wallace; “What is Life Without an Aim,” by Ada C. Turner.

Avery can well afford to risk its reputation as an educational
institution on such essays, all of which showed no ordinary degree
of culture. The vocal gem of the exercises was the soprano solo,
“Blooming Springtide,” rendered with rare sweetness and taste by
Martha C. Gadsden.


Impressions made on a Visitor from a Neighboring State.

Although daily notices were made in the _News and Courier_ of the
closing exercises of Avery Institute, as they took place from day
to day, the following account by a visitor from a neighboring State
will not be without interest:

  “Avery Institute has had four principals during its brief
  existence of thirteen years, and has been fortunate in their
  quality. Two of them, Mr. Warren and the present incumbent, Mr.
  Farnham, were fitted for their work by a course of moral training
  and considerable experience in schools of similar grade to this,
  and especially by their ardent love for their occupation.

  “Absence of weeds from the flower-beds, tidiness of walks and
  yards, cleanliness of floors and desks, and signs of neatness
  everywhere suggested the possible theory of a ‘clearing-up
  time’ for the occasion, but a quiet search for information on
  this point revealed the fact that things were not ‘fixed up
  for Sunday,’ but wore their every-day attire. If a maximum of
  stillness, with a minimum of apparent effort, is the _ultima
  thule_ of school discipline, there are no new lands for Avery
  Institute to discover.

  “The plan of ‘native helpers’ is being tried here, the faculty
  consisting of a principal and two lady teachers from the
  North, and five graduates of the school. Full attendance, good
  scholarship and excellent discipline point to a successful
  experiment.

  “July 2d at Avery was ‘Children’s Day.’ There is not room for the
  little ones at the closing exercises, and so Mr. Farnham gives
  them _their_ day. The songs, ‘A Smiling Face for Me,’ ‘If I were
  a Sunbeam,’ ‘I love the Merry Sunshine, and the recitations ‘The
  Golden Side,’ ‘The Little Philosopher,’ and ‘The Summer Time,’
  indicate the joyous nature of the programme and the spirit of
  the occasion. The teachers seem to appreciate the sentiment of
  Dickens, ‘I love these little people, and it is not a slight
  thing when they, so fresh from God, love us.’

  “July 3d was ‘Graduates’ Day.’ The class of nine girls and one
  boy furnished music sufficient for the occasion, both in quantity
  and quality. Lessons with children, one on composition and one
  on number, conducted by two of the graduates, constituted a
  novel feature in the programme, and showed something of the
  methods of teaching employed in the institute. By permutations
  and combinations almost _ad infinitum_ on the numeral frame, the
  children learned the ‘Table of Sevens,’ if they had never heard
  of it before; and the fact that ‘reproduction’ without credit to
  the author is plain stealing, was faithfully impressed upon the
  young mind. One of the graduating girls made a strong argument in
  the negative upon the question, ‘Should Young Men take a College
  Course?’ The simplicity and self-possession of the graduates were
  very pleasing. So also were their fine articulation and musical
  voices. A little more volume, however, would not have been
  offensive, and would have filled the hall better.

  “Prizes were distributed by the Rev. Mr. Patton and the Rev. Mr.
  Dunton, and diplomas were presented by Prof. Chase, of Atlanta.

  “The 4th was ‘Alumni Day,’ and, despite all the attractions at
  the Battery, the hall was well filled. The exercises consisted
  of addresses, essays, recitations and songs, all by members of
  the class. ‘Independence Day’ afforded some stimulus to the
  occasion, and called forth some of the sentiments and feelings
  of the emancipated race, but revealed no sign of bitterness or
  malice. The orderly conduct, dignified demeanor, literary merit
  and good elocution of the day, evinced that ‘Avery’s children’
  are an honor to their foster parent, the American Missionary
  Association, and to their native State and city. Two or three
  hours spent in discussing ‘viands that tickle the palate’ and
  in social converse, reviving memories of past school-day life,
  terminated the three days of closing exercises at Avery Normal
  Institute.

  “The teachers and pupils were gratified by the presence of some
  of the well-known and respectable residents of the city.”


GEORGIA.

Ogeechee—Changes for the Better—Saving Souls and Saving Money.

REV. JOHN R. MCLEAN, PASTOR.

We have a good Sunday-school. It is not so large as it might be;
but the children, and all who attend, are getting thoughts of the
Bible that they can get nowhere else around here. And it is making
a great change with the old people, as well as with the children.
The other schools hold the children by giving them cake and candy;
I hold them by giving them Bible truth. I find that it has more
power over them for good than all the cake and candy that can be
given them. The children act better on the Sabbath than they did
when I first came here. I can see a great change.

The church is doing, I think, quite well. It takes a steady, but
slow, patient and faithful work, to lead a people out who are so
far in the dark as these have been. I can see a manifest desire on
the part of the members to do better than they have been doing, and
even better than the members of other churches.

Last Sabbath was our Communion-day, and I never was in a more
lovely meeting in my life. We had no one to join (for the first
time, I think, since I have been here), though there were three or
four who had been received some time before, but were not able to
be out on that day so as to join. Some of the churches that only
had preaching once in the month, have it now every Sabbath, since
they see that we have it every Sabbath.

I know of no place in the South where the colored people get so
much money for labor as they do here. But they don’t save any money
at all; they get it, and it is gone, and they cannot see what they
got for it. I am trying to induce our members to save their money,
and buy for themselves homes; but it is hard to get them to do
this, like almost everything else that is right and for their own
good.

I know the Lord has blessed me greatly in my work, for which I am
thankful. Pray for us at this place.


ALABAMA.


A Surprise Party—A Church well Organized—Burrell School.

MR. E. C. SILSBY, SELMA.

Brother Noble mentions a surprise party in Montgomery. I can
refer to an occurrence somewhat similar here. Last fall, during
the time that we were without a pastor, Brother Callen, of the
church, filled the pulpit. His labors were faithfully performed,
and our “Ladies’ Society” determined to give him a “pound donation
party.” The “Teachers’ Home” was decided upon as the place, and
the members of the church were quite eager to bestow upon him some
slight testimonial, indicating their appreciation of his Christian
character and faithfulness. It was a complete surprise to him, and
the articles contributed were opportune, although “pounded” at him.

One of the most encouraging features of our church is the “Ladies’
Society,” which holds a prayer-meeting every Sabbath afternoon,
and a sewing society every fortnight. At these prayer-meetings the
girls and young ladies of the church are frequently put forward
to lead, and thus are educated to Christian work. The older and
younger ladies are also brought more nearly together, and made to
realize more fully a common interest in the cause of Christ. An
account of this meeting has been given in the MISSIONARY, and, by
this means, a very pleasant correspondence has grown up between the
society here and one at Dedham, Mass. The ladies at Dedham sent
their greetings and sympathy, and encouraged and helped us with
their prayers. It has been a blessing to both societies. Hearing of
the efforts of our ladies to purchase matting for the aisles of our
church, they generously rendered assistance, and the matting has
been laid.

One interesting and instructive feature of our work is that of the
Committee on Missionary Intelligence. This committee was organized
during the pastorate of Brother Pope. Its work is to present at
times reports of missions in this and other lands. On the occasion
of this presentation the attention is certain to be fixed, and the
matter of the papers is discussed for sometime afterwards.

Four new members have been received on profession; two heads of
families and two young people. One has been received by letter.
One of those uniting on profession—a man—had long been the subject
of prayer by a wife, mother, sister, son and other friends, but at
last the stubborn heart has yielded, and he is free.

The “Ministerial Association,” formed last year, and consisting
of the ministers from the various colored churches, has been
holding its meetings this year. The association meets at the study
or residence of each pastor, in turn. The time of the meeting is
occupied in discussing doctrines, presenting plans of sermons,
and deciding upon practical subjects to present to their various
congregations.

The Sabbath-school still continues in interest, and is growing in
strength. I well remember that, a few years ago, when the Northern
teachers who were laboring in the Sabbath-school went home for
their vacation, we with difficulty secured a few to take their
places; but now, superintendent, organist and teachers could be
secured from resident members of the school.

The church is now in charge of Brother A. J. Headen, a student from
the Theological Department of Talladega College.

I will add that the interest in Burrell School is not diminishing.
The school was never so far advanced in studies before, and for
the coming year the prospect is good for having quite a number
of advanced pupils. We seem to be keeping a hold upon our older
pupils. I have a class of them in one study this summer. Some are
becoming very proficient in vocal music, singing by note.

       *       *       *       *       *


Anniversary of Trinity School—A Grateful People.

REV. HORACE J. TAYLOR, ATHENS.

The thirteenth anniversary of the commencement of Trinity School
occurred on the 28th of last May. On the Sabbath previous the
anniversary sermon was preached by the pastor. The scholars had
prepared themselves for the exercises of Tuesday evening. At the
appointed hour the church was full of a bright-faced throng of old
and young. A class of little girls, dressed in white, stood on each
side of the broad central aisle; and as Miss Wells (who begun the
school May 28th, 1865) advanced, they spread flowers in her way.
She was conducted to her seat, which was covered with flowers. The
exercises consisted of speeches, compositions, and music. One old
man—Uncle Dennis Collier—said he was very grateful to Miss Wells
for what she had done for him. He was blind, and couldn’t learn to
read, but his “wife was the grandmother of sixty-six children,” and
he doubtless felt that he had through them received a full share
of the benefits of the school. She had done him favors, he said,
“and if you want to know what kind of favors, here’s one of ’em,”
as he vigorously shook his coat. Then the offerings of flowers were
brought forward, and it seemed as if Miss Wells would be buried in
the mass of roses, lilies, magnolias, etc.

These anniversaries do the people good, and enable them to look
back and compare their condition in May, 1865, with their present
condition, and to learn more forcibly what it is that is lifting
them up.

School closed on the 28th of June. The examinations were on the
afternoons of the 25th, 26th, and 27th. The schoolrooms were
crowded with people from the neighborhood; they were of every
shade from black to white, but all “colored.” All the classes were
examined, from the little “tots” to those in grammar, analysis, and
algebra. The examinations showed patient drill on the part of the
teachers, and generally work on that of the scholars.

Friday afternoon and evening—the 28th—occurred the exhibition.
Compositions, declamations, orations and music instructed and
amused the audience till well along to midnight. All were pleased
and edified. The colored people remember that, before the war,
they sometimes went to anniversaries and exhibitions of the white
people, but now they can attend those of their own.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Gospel Ship.

REV. PETER. J. MCINTOSH, PASTOR, ANNISTON.

The church building stood unoccupied about one year after the
students of Talladega Theological Class, under the direction of
Rev. H. E. Brown, had ceased to work upon it. Mr. Albert Brown and
J. R. McLean, students at Talladega, labored to organize a church
here, but the denominational prejudice was so great that they both
were compelled to give up in despair.

I came to this place in April, 1875. My first sermon was preached
to a benevolent society, which assembled in the church building.
The society numbered about 100 members. You can imagine how
earnestly I plead with my heavenly Father that He might give me a
place in the hearts of these people. I preached from 1 Cor. xiii,
13, dwelling largely upon charity, interpreted love. I see before
me to-day those faces which were indexes to so many prejudiced
minds, as they commenced to show approval of my discourse. At
the close of the services, I asked the people if they would meet
me here in this house and take part in carrying on a series of
meetings, two weeks from that time. They said they would.

On my arrival at the church at the appointed time for the meetings
to begin, I found the church crowded to its utmost capacity. We
held meetings for one week, which resulted in the conversion of
six persons, and the willingness of three others to join with
me in the formation of a church. Rev. H. E. Brown came up from
Talladega, and, on the 23rd of May, 1875, assisted by the Methodist
minister of the white church of this place, organized the First
Congregational Church of Anniston. With these nine members (all
heads of families) I took charge of the church, being elected by
them as pastoral supply. I preached here once in every two weeks,
and pursued my studies at Talladega.

During my absence, Brother A. J. Logan took charge of the church
services, and conducted them as faithfully as any one could have
done under the same circumstances. (He was one of the converts).
With these means, we set sail on the ocean of God’s eternal power.
We drifted on until we reached October, 1875, at which time we took
on board nine more passengers for glory. We again set sail with the
eighteen passengers on board. By October, 1876, finding that we
numbered forty-two, we deemed it expedient to stop over, and thank
God for bringing us so far on our journey towards the heavenly
Jerusalem.

It would have inspired every reader of this article to have heard
the words of thanksgiving and rejoicing, and to have seen the
sympathizing tears, as they stole silently down the cheeks of those
who had previously opposed the work here on account of its name and
obscure history to the colored people. Permit me to say just here
that many of the aristocratic whites of our village took part in
the above-stated exercises.

We anchored here for some time, making repairs and casting
overboard all who were diseased with intemperance and other
maladies, which are so common to those who are not willing to
resist the devil.

We rejoiced that the great Physician of souls had so wonderfully
preserved all of our number except six. One had taken the ship of
time, and sailed into eternity on the 26th of November, 1876—“Peace
be to his ashes”; three took leave for other churches; thus leaving
us thirty-two passengers for the next tour.

After repairing all things needful, we set sail again, with a full
supply of _love_, _truth_ and _mercy_. We landed in the midst of
a glorious revival, in September, 1877. Here we took on board
nineteen passengers more, and one on the 7th day of July, 1878.

A few days ago the church committee took account of stock, and
found that we have on board the gospel ship fifty-two _soldiers of
the Cross_, varying in age from thirteen to sixty, all of whom are
ready for the next tour, upon which we expect to start out on the
second Sabbath in September, 1878.

We have in our community some of the finest colored people in the
State of Alabama, most of whom are absolute strangers to Christ. We
most humbly solicit a petition in the prayers of each one who reads
this article.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

Grenada.

[_Extracts from, the Grenada Sentinel of June 29th._]

A representative of the _Sentinel_ witnessed the closing exercises
on Friday night, the 21st inst., of one of our colored schools,
under the management of Miss Anna Harwood and Miss Carrie Segur,
which was an exhibition most creditable to both teachers and
pupils, receiving praises from all who attended. The audience was
very large, among whom we noticed quite a number of prominent
white citizens, both ladies and gentlemen. The call for order,
accompanied with the request for good behavior, and that there
should be no talking or stamping of feet, was, considering the
immense throng which filled the church, well observed, and we
doubt not that all went away pleased and highly gratified with the
exhibition. The exercises were commenced with an opening chorus,
entitled, “Hold the Fort,” which was followed with prayer, by Elder
J. D. Williams. The declamations, dialogues, songs, etc., were all
very fairly rendered, and, in several instances, worthy of special
mention.

That the teachers deserve not only the congratulations of the
patrons of the school, but the encouragement and kindest regards
of every lover and promoter of education in our community, we
think all who were present, at least, will agree. That the colored
people are progressing, and that rapidly, too, in an educational
point of view, is a fact beyond any doubt, we will venture to say,
in the minds of those who have given the subject even a casual
investigation. We are impressed with the idea that our people in
general have not yet given to this system of free education that
reflection to which it is so richly entitled. But we are also
impressed with its growing favor, and the importance that will be
attached to the institution at no distant day. It is not only our
duty, but we should endeavor to make it our pleasure to encourage,
improve and build up our free schools.

       *       *       *       *       *


KENTUCKY.


Berea College Commencement.

In one respect, Commencement at Berea, Ky., is unlike all other
colleges. It exhibits, in the centre of a Southern State, the
complete solution of the vexed negro question. In the large
tabernacle, on the 3d inst., was an audience of _two thousand_
people, rich and poor, white and colored, ex-masters and ex-slaves,
sitting where they could find seats, without distinction, and with
the kindest feelings. On the large platform sat in the rear the
more advanced students, about half white and half colored; in front
of them a choir of twenty singers, selected, evidently, with no
thought of complexion; at the right a brass band of various shades;
in front of all a score of professional men, with their wives,
among whom were several colored preachers; outside was a mixed
crowd of five hundred or more.

To this crowd twenty orations and essays were delivered by sixteen
young men and four young ladies, of whom fourteen were white and
six colored; and the only manifest thought of color was seen in
the fact that one side of the audience was of a darker shade than
the other. There was not the least sign of disturbance, nor any
indication of dissatisfaction with this order of things, though
more than two thousand of the audience must have come from regions
outside of Berea, which is a village of five hundred inhabitants. A
prominent Southern lawyer remarked that he never witnessed so good
order in so large a crowd.

This state of things has been brought about without constraint, in
the most natural way imaginable. It was originally a white school,
but thoroughly anti slavery. A few months after emancipation, a
couple of colored youths were admitted. Half the white students
left immediately. But the vacancy was soon filled with colored
students; and eventually the white students returned, and the
trouble was over. The whole question seems to turn on the learning
of one simple lesson—that contiguity with a free man is no more
disagreeable than contiguity with a slave. The colors are mixed
in all Southern society. A little change in the mixture has here
occurred, and that is all.

The college campus, in which are all the college buildings except
the Ladies’ Hall, consists of forty-five acres covered with
native forest trees. Under the shade of these trees, during the
intermission, two or three hundred groups spread and consumed their
basket-dinners. And, in the more retired parts, a thousand horses
were sheltered from the burning sun.

The afternoon exercises consisted of a rousing address by Prof.
Dunn of Hillsdale College, Mich., on the conflicts of civilization,
and a statement from President Fairchild to the effect that the
annual number of students is about 275—males, 145; females, 128.
Thirty-one are in the college department, and over a hundred are
qualified to teach a common-school. Probably sixty or more will
teach during the long summer vacation.

It has often been predicted that this school would either become
all white or all colored; but there seems to be no such tendency.
The idea of color seems almost to have passed away. Intellectual
culture and moral worth determine each man’s position in society.
It will be many years before this state of society becomes general;
but cheering progress in this direction is very manifest, and not
so tardy as many suppose.—_Kentucky, in the Congregationalist._

       *       *       *       *       *


Frankfort.

MISS MATTIE E. ANDERSON, TEACHER.

The public examination of this school occurred June 13th, and was
one of great pleasure and interest. Each teacher conducted the
examinations of her own classes. Parents and friends were highly
gratified with the very flattering manner in which the young
ladies acquitted themselves. During the year the building has been
enlarged, and many improvements have been made. The new room was
opened about the first of March.

The closing exercises took place at Major Hall, June 19th, and
consisted of vocal and instrumental music, essays, declamations,
tableaux, dialogues and concert exercises.

Upon the stage were seated Rev. Mr. Evans, pastor of the A. M. E.
Church; Rev. Mr. Parris, of the Independent Baptist Church. Prayer
was offered by Rev. Mr. Evans. The children then sang “Away over
Mountain,” after which Miss Virgin Gatewood came forward and read
the Salutatory. The exercises were of more than usual interest,
and held the audience spell-bound from eight P.M. until twelve M.
The Valedictory was read by Miss Mittie Streets, after which “The
Star-Spangled Banner” was sung by the children, during which they
waved fifty flags in the most patriotic manner. Benediction was
then said by Rev. Mr. Martin, pastor of the First Baptist Church.
The hall was crowded with people, who seemed perfectly delighted
with all they saw and heard. We have received numerous compliments
from the citizens for giving such an interesting entertainment.
Four of our pupils are now teaching in different localities.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

MENDI MISSION, GOOD HOPE STATION.

In Good Health and Good Heart.

REV. ALBERT P. MILLER


After arriving on the African shores, and reaching our destination
(Good Hope), we soon decided to proceed at once to work. We had a
little hesitation in so doing, because we knew that we had been
instructed otherwise by the Executive Committee. Having been
assigned to our different posts of duty, we have been pushing
forward the work, with but little loss of time from sickness, ever
since. Brother Jackson had an attack of fever, which scared him
a little, but he soon rallied, and is now again in the field,
fighting valiantly. I was sick last week, but the trouble soon
passed away, and I am now walking about, feeling as well as any
African in this our fatherland. It may be of interest to you, and
to our many friends in America, to know that our wives have enjoyed
thus far an unusually good degree of health.

We know not what the future has in store for us; still do we feel
thankful to that kind Providence which we have enjoyed since our
departure from “dear old Fisk” and the American shores.

A great deal of the mist that gathered around our vision, in regard
to Africa and her people, while preparing to leave America, and
as the steamer bore us away and her land faded until lost in the
distance, has since been removed.

The Americans have a very vague idea of the land of “Ham” and her
dusky sons and daughters, who are now depending on the institutions
in the South for the story of the Cross.

If Africa is to be evangelized, as I believe it will be, it must be
done through the children of the summer and sunny clime, educated
and Christianized in the South. You in America can’t see this as
plainly as one who mingles with this people, and has all chances
to investigate in regard to this matter. If I could speak to every
institution in the South, I would ask each one of them to be true
to God and this common cause of humanity, which I would to God
would seize all Christendom, so that the many who have for ages sat
in darkness, might be brought into the light.

The work here still moves on prosperously in both church and
school. Ten or eleven were received at our last Communion into
the church, among whom were some of our scholars. We hope to see
these develop into strong Christian manhood and womanhood. We have
a great many very promising boys and girls in our school here,
who are able to read and speak English very well. In these is our
hope for a missionary work in Africa, which may expand until the
interior shall receive of its influence.

We have the material on which to work, and we ask our kind
heavenly Father to help us to shape these young hearts for fields
of usefulness, which they will have no difficulty in finding if
influenced by right motives. They sing well. The old plantation
songs are not without interest here in Africa; I have introduced
them into my school.

May God help you in America in every effort put forth for the
advancement of His kingdom.

May He provide for the wants of the eleemosynary institutions
planted in the South for the good of that people and the millions
of Africa.

May these institutions foster such young men and women as shall be
willing to work for the Master anywhere He may want them. Pray for
us!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas O. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.


China for Christ.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

A venerable Presbyterian minister of New York, to whom we are
indebted for a generous gift to our mission, writes as follows: “I
firmly believe that God in his providence is sending the heathen to
our doors, _in order that they may carry back the blessed news of
the gospel to their own land_; and if we turn them selfishly away,
He will surely require their blood at our hands.”

The truth thus expressed is a chief source of our enthusiasm in our
Chinese mission work. “CHINA FOR CHRIST” is our motto. I wish to
lay before the readers of the MISSIONARY some of the facts in view
of which we believe that we do reach China, though we are working
here 10,000 miles away.

There is nothing improbable in the idea. Indeed, it scarcely could
be otherwise. Hardly a steamer sails for China that does not carry
one or more of our pupils back to his native land. Most of these
are heathen still; but they are heathen with their eyes at least
half-opened. These, even, cannot be exactly what they were. But
many of them are Christians, as we confidently hope. Will these go
there to be silent? When neighbors and friends gather about them,
to hear the accounts they have to give of things in the Sunrise
Land, will they forget to tell of the Saviour they have found? I
do not believe it would be possible. The message to which they
have listened will be as a fire in their bones, and they will
feel that they must bear it on. Letters, too, are passing back
continually; and these are not empty of gospel. A missionary at
Canton writes me that the mother of one of our brethren lives near
his mission-house. “She enjoys the money he remits, but is not
pleased with his urging her to be a Christian.” I hear incidentally
that the parents of another of our brethren have been visiting all
the shrines near them, and, with wailings and prayers, have placed
their votive offerings where they thought they would do good,
hoping that thus he would be won back from Christian heresy to
their ancestral orthodoxy. What passes here in this regard is not
unknown at the old Chinese homesteads; and what is known is felt.

But we ought not to be content with these spontaneous and sporadic
operations. We do not rise to the height of our great opportunity
while we leave this thing to work itself. It ought to _be worked_
energetically, systematically. Never was battery better placed
for storming a stronghold than we are here, for pouring shot, hot
with the love of Christ, into that empire-fortress of selfishness
and superstition across the sea; but we need heavier guns, more
ammunition, and a truer aim.

About four years ago, Wong Min died at Canton. He was spoken of
after his death as “the distinguished native pastor of the Baptist
Church in Canton.” It was said that, in the absence of American
missionaries, he had carried the pastoral care of three Baptist
churches, and all were flourishing. Wong Min was converted at
Sacramento, in this State. Returning to his native land, he began
to tell in the streets and elsewhere the good news of redeeming
love. His work attracted the attention of Baptist missionaries,
and they took him into regular mission work. He had been at it
more than twenty years when the Master called him higher. But he
has left a son walking in his father’s steps—a preacher of great
promise. Why have we not by this time sent back to China a hundred
Wong Mins? It might have been done; it ought to have been done. How
large the blessing if it had been done! We are verily guilty in
this matter.

You will think me extravagant. “One hundred,” you say, “is a large
number; it would be a large proportion of the whole number reported
as converted in California from the beginning of missionary effort
to the present time.” I know it; but I do not flinch. It could have
been done, and the doing of it would have reacted on the work here,
and helped us to larger harvesting.

1. I observe that our Christian Chinese have a strong desire to
do this work. One of them once wrote me as follows: “In China,
those who live in the villages don’t know Jesus and never heard
of Him. I am sorry I cannot go home. If I could fly I would go
home immediately, and tell how good and how kind Jesus is. Then
I think they would all learn to love Him also. I want all our
people in China to be Christian, and our mothers and sisters and
friends to get the key, so they will go to heaven when they die.”
I shall never forget the joy that shone in the face of our Jee
Gam when he told me, a few months since, that a mission had been
established near his home. Soon after, I found him writing for
other eyes than mine—“Oh, how glad I feel whenever I think of this
mission-house in my own beloved district. How much I am indebted to
the ever-living and merciful Father for sending these missionaries
there!” In expressions like these, these brethren represent the
almost universal feeling among our Chinese believers—not from San
Francisco and Oakland alone, but from San Leandro, from Petaluma,
from Santa Barbara, from Stockton. As conversions are reported,
there comes again and again the suggestion that such or such a one
wants to learn how to preach the Gospel in his native land.

2. They are doing this thing now. The missionary sent to Jee
Gam’s district was converted in California. The story is full of
interest, and I give it in Jee Gam’s own words. It illustrates well
the truth I wish to state on more sides than one: “Six years ago,
a Chinese fortune-teller, while in California, heard a Chinese
missionary speaking to a crowd of his countrymen on the subject
of superstition. His heart was deeply touched. Not long after he
went home, and at once commenced to build a house for his family,
without going to an appointer of days to ask him to select a lucky
day to begin upon. And so his friends and relatives told him that
he must have a day selected before he put a single man to work,
or his house could never be built to stand, or somebody would be
killed by evil spirits before the house was completed. He told his
friends that he had done with that superstition, and that he would
keep on building. Finding they could not persuade him, they left,
saying they would have no more to do with him, for he had become
a foreigner. Then he was not only despised by these friends, but
by every one who lived in that village. They said the evil spirits
would soon take his life, or some great trouble would surely
visit his family. Finally, his house was completed. He moved in
and lived in perfect safety. People then began to wonder why the
evil spirits did not visit this house. Some said they were busy
elsewhere; but others said they must have gone away, and, on their
return, they would cause this home and this obstinate family to be
desolated. So they waited, but in vain; for this man prospered,
and in due time, in that very house, a son was born to him. When,
now, the people saw the joy of this household, they said one to
another, ‘He must have worshipped the foreign God, and so the
spirits dare not touch him.’ He came back to California and went
to fortune-telling again. This time he determined to learn more
of Christ, and every opportunity he could find he attended the
Chinese meeting, and searched for truth by reading the Bible. He
was finally converted, gave up his profession, and was baptized by
Rev. Mr. Loomis. He then went home the second time, and studied
at Rev. Dr. Happer’s mission in Canton, where he was fitted to be
a very able missionary, for he had a very good Chinese education
before he became a Christian. When he got through his studies,
he was sent to a large city, not far from his own home. There he
labored successfully for about two years, and he had been the means
of converting a number of his countrymen, among whom was one of
his villagers, a professor of Confucius. He was on his way to a
county examination; he visited the chapel where this missionary
was preaching, not that he might learn about Jesus, but merely for
curiosity. But the Lord’s design was otherwise. He sent him there
to be converted by the Holy Spirit, and fitted for the great work
which He intended to assign him.

“After his conversion, this missionary and a delegate were sent to
visit Chuck Hum, a city about six miles from my home. When they
reached there, great was their surprise to learn that a man named
Quan Lang, who lived close by, had been Christianized in Australia,
and had been preaching there, in the open air, for the last three
months. They searched and found him earnest in the faith, glad and
anxious to join himself with these missionaries. They consulted
together about opening a chapel there. Then they wrote Dr. Happer
about it. He consented, and they began. But oh, what a hard time
they met! Opposition came upon them from every side. Even the whole
city firmly united against them. After violent persecution, the
governor was consulted. He sent proclamations to the head man of
the city and the judge of the district, commanding protection to
his person and property. Then this missionary could have as many
police officers to protect him as he pleased. They even became
burdensome to him, and he had to dismiss them. When the chapel was
dedicated, it was crowded to its utmost capacity.” This brings
the story down to the present time. The work in that district, it
will be perceived, was begun by an Australian convert, and is now
carried on by one from California.

Two of our Oakland brethren, Joe Jet and Lee Sam, have recently
returned to China, and intend to commence at once their studies at
a mission-school, in order to preach the Gospel. One of our San
Leandro brethren, Jee Wee, started for China last October, and
has just returned. On the westward voyage he fell in with some
missionary families and a Chinese evangelist. The result was that
at once, on reaching Canton, he began evangelistic work, opening a
room for the distribution of Bibles, and preaching. He encountered
opposition and persecution at first, but, on application at
headquarters, was protected in the same manner with those of whom
Jee Gam writes above. The crowds that listened sometimes numbered
300 or 400. More than twenty were hopefully converted, his own
father and mother being among them. Another Lee Sam, who returned
to China about three years ago, and who, though a Christian, had
not at the time he left us been baptized, in his first letter
to his brethren here, told of the conversion of his brother, an
educated man and a sort of college professor, to whom he had been
speaking of the way of life.

We have lost sight of this Lee Sam, of Lui Chung, also, a most
hopeful convert and Christian worker, whom I ought to have retained
in California, and many others likewise. It is not strange that
this should be. Indeed, it could not be otherwise. We, 10,000 miles
distant, could not possibly follow them, save with our prayers. But
they ought to be followed, and nurtured and edified. And not only
that, but set at work, as light-givers and soul-savers, where-ever
they go.

It is easy to see that a Chinese, returning to his native land
from California, would be likely to have special advantages for
doing missionary work. In the first place, by a process of natural
selection, they are picked men. It is not the dullards or the
drones that undertake to cross the Pacific, and make their way
to fortune in a land so strange to them as this. And by the same
process it is, again, among those who come, the picked men that
enter our schools. The great mass do not care enough about learning
to follow up each hard day’s work with two hours of evening study.
Those that come do care, and care so much that they brave bitter
reproaches in coming, from those whom they leave behind.

Then, besides the limited education which they are able to get in
our schools, there is an unconscious education, which they _must_
be, all the while, unconsciously receiving, as they breathe the
air of a free and Christian land. Their views are broadened; the
old crusted conservatism is broken; and they can speak out, with a
force and an authority which, it seems to me, no Chinese who had
never left his native district could possibly use.

Then, there cannot but be an interest gathering about them, as
having been in “the land of the golden mountains.” They have the
story of this to begin with where-ever they go; they gather a crowd
by means of it; they gain attention; and the gospel of Christ
will come in after it as easily as if it belonged—as, indeed, it
does—to the very theme.

Now, what have I to propose? It is this: We ought to have a mission
at Hong Kong. It ought to be in close, vital relationship with our
California Mission. It ought to be at Hong Kong, because there our
steamers land their passengers, and from that point our brethren
scatter. Most of them do not enter Canton at all. We ought to have,
then, at least one American missionary—not necessarily a great
man, but a man of earnest piety and business capacity, and sound
common sense—a man who would give to his mission the atmosphere,
which, I am sure, our brethren recognize in the mission here, of
Christian kindliness and brotherly love—not that of a condescending
benevolence, but that of a hearty Christian brotherhood.

He ought to meet every converted Chinese—at least, from our own
mission (others, if they are willing)—and take him home to his
mission-house; find out his destination, and arrange to keep track
of him, and make use of him as an errand-bearer for Christ. And we,
on our part, ought to be raising up and sending men who, educated
either here or in China, may give themselves, under direction of
this missionary, to district gospel work.

So far forth, I am confident. It is no new thought with me, and, in
proposing it, I feel that I am walking on solid ground. I feel that
I speak in God’s name when I say this ought, forthwith, to be done.
Whether the proposed mission should be sustained by the A. M. A.,
or by the American Board; whether more than one efficient American
missionary will ever be needed; what sort of mission work he should
go about in Hong Kong itself—concerning these and other matters of
detail, any suggestion I could make would be crude, and, likely
enough, mistaken. But the proposal itself, as to its essentials, I
stand in no doubt about, and I ask the prayers and co-operation of
all who love Christ and souls, that it may be speedily fulfilled.

Let me add, as if by postscript, that a Chinese brother, Wun Ching
Ki, a member of one of the London Missionary Society’s churches at
Canton, who is in business at Hong Kong, has been doing something
in the line above marked out; has kindly welcomed and aided our
brethren on their arrival; has suggested that, in that English city
of Hong Kong, mission work among the Chinese could be conducted
most successfully, upon the very plan which we use here; and is
very desirous himself to send native preachers into the neglected
interior districts, asking whether our Chinese brethren here could
not help him so to do. The emphatic testimony which these bear
to his good judgment and general efficiency, as well as to his
Christian character, makes both the work he has done, and the work
he wants to do, confirm my confidence in the suggestion I have made.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.


  We make the following extracts from letters of Mr. A. E. White,
    one of our missionaries to Africa, to his former teachers at
    Hampton Institute:

I have just returned from the Shangay Mission, where I have been
for near two weeks (this mission is carried on by the United
Brethren of Ohio.) The brother there sent for me to come and spend
some time with him, and to give him some advice in regard to his
work while I was there. This mission is on the mainland, and one
can see more of the habits of the people than he can here. When
their children have gotten up to be two or three years old they
send them to the bush, called the Purroo and Bundoo. The Purroo is
the place where they send the boys, and the Bundoo where they send
the girls. They keep them there for a good many years, and cut on
their backs the shape of a hamper-basket, and teach them the use
of the country medicines and the way of worshipping the heathen’s
gods, and all the heathen’s habits. If a man wants to marry, he
can go to the Bundoo Bush and pay eight pieces of cloth, of two
yards each, and take any girl he wants. After these boys have spent
all the time which the chief says they must spend in the bush,
they come out and go to whatever trade they have learned. Some are
doctors, others teachers, and some are farmers. The doctors go
around with their medicine, and sell it at a very high price; and
when they attend the sick they carry a board about one foot long
and nine inches wide, with a bottle of ink and brush. On this board
they write, and then wash the ink off and give it to the sick to
drink. Then they have various things to sell to keep away sickness
and to give good luck. These children are taught all kinds of vice,
and they think it is right—such things as lying and stealing. They
are very easy to teach, and they put a great deal of faith in the
person who teaches them, and whatever they are taught they believe.
So one can see that the hope of this country lies in the children.
It is a hard thing to get a heathen to turn from his god; and I
believe you can only do this by prayer. The missionaries who want
to do anything must use the weapon of prayer. The chief of Shangay
is an educated man; he spent eight years in the high school of
England. When you find one of the heathen educated, he is ten times
worse than an uneducated one. This man was taken up and sent to
England and educated there. If he had been trained under some good
missionary, he might have been of use to the country.

I have given the school to Mr. Miller, one of the new comers, and
I have taken other work. We had an examination, and all the people
seemed to be pleased. We had, also, pieces recited on the stage,
and a dinner for the children and the friends of the school. The
people said that they never saw anything of the kind in Africa
before. I think now we have about 140 pupils that are coming. We
don’t have that many any one day, but they are in attendance. I
have some fine boys in school, and one whom I want to send to
Hampton next fall, if I can find a place there for him, and some
one to help me pay for his board. Please ask the General if he can
have a place there? He is the boy who has been with me since I have
been here, and I have taken him and want to do all I can to educate
him.

Last Sunday was the happiest day I have seen for many. We had
thirteen new members to unite with the church—twelve on profession;
and one who once was a member, and was shut out when the church was
closed, came back and united the second time. And of this number,
six were members of my Bible-class—four were my best boys, as I
call them, and two I own as the fruits of my own labor. The young
man whom I have already written you about was one. He has been
trying ever since his brother became a Christian on the ship, and
at last has made up his mind to follow Christ. You can imagine how
I felt to see all these—my boys—standing up acknowledging Christ to
be their Saviour. There was another of my class to unite with us,
but he was sick and could not. I hope he will be able by the next
Communion-day.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JULY, 1878.


       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $153.75.

    Cumberland Centre. O. S. T. 50c.; E. J. B. 25c.            0.75
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    20.00
    Newfield. Mrs. N. C. A.                                    1.00
    North Yarmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         4.00
    South Berwick. J. B. Neally $5; Hugh and
      Philip Lewis $5                                         10.00
    Windham. Rev. Luther Wiswall                               5.00
    Winthrop. ESTATE of Mrs. Mary Carr                       100.00
    Winthrop. Stephen Sewall 18,000 pages
      Anti-Tobacco Tracts.
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                 13.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $460.88.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.75
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.35
    Concord. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         45.82
    East Jaffrey. Eliza A. Parker                             20.00
    Exeter. Friends in Second Cong. Ch., _for a
      Teacher, Wilmington, N. C._                             40.00
    Gilmanton Iron Works. Luther E. Page                       5.00
    Hebron. J. B. C.                                           1.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $11.30; Dea. G.
      W. 50c.                                                 11.80
    Keene. A Friend                                           50.00
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                        25.66
    Manchester. Mrs. Kinsley (proceeds sale of
      pictures)                                                3.00
    Mason. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 13.00
    Meredith Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.45
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                        50.01
    Nashua. W. P. Clark                                       20.42
    New Market. T. H. Wiswall $10; Cong. Ch. and
      Soc. $9.36                                              19.36
    North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.35
    Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, bal. to
      const. MISS EMILY L. GRIGGS L. M.                       10.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.53
    South New Market. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       4.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    West Lebanon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             15.00
    Westmoreland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          31.13
    Wentworth. Ephraim Cook                                    5.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.25
    Wolfborough. Rev. S. Clark and Wife                       10.00


  VERMONT, $201.70.

    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. CHAS.
      M. WINSLOW L. M.                                        30.00
    Danville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00
    Greensborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $5.75; Rev.
      Moses Patton and Wife $17                               22.75
    Lyndon. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          12.00
    Lyndonville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           11.00
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            39.56
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.05
    North Craftsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      23.81
    Sheldon. Cong. Ch.                                         8.73
    South Hadley. First Ch. and Soc.                           8.00
    Townshend. Mrs. Nancy B. Batchelder                        2.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                            17.80
    West Randolph. Mrs. S. W.                                  1.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,582.51.

    Amherst. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         60.25
    Andover. Chapel Church and Soc.                          134.00
    Arlington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.50
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. BENJ. F.
      LARNED L. M.                                            30.29
    Beverly. Dane St. Ch. and Soc.                            35.60
    Boston. Mrs. E. P. Eayrs $10; “A Friend” $10              20.00
    Boston Highlands. Eliot Ch. $106.40; Emanuel
      Ch. $50; “Friends” $1.25                               157.65
    Boxborough. Mrs. J. Stone                                 10.00
    Bradford. Mrs. S. Boyd, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Sab. Sch.                        15.00
    Brookfield. Evan. Cong. Ch.                               18.00
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                           62.50
    Canton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          24.74
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         45.91
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Curtisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           15.25
    Easthampton. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $25; “A
      Friend” $10                                             35.00
    Fitchburgh. Wm. L. Bullock                                 5.00
    Framingham. E. K. S.                                       0.50
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         26.50
    Hopedale. W. W. Dutcher, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             52.25
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       27.49
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Church                            141.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           12.69
    Lynn. Central Ch. and Soc.                                14.36
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          55.31
    Marlborough. Union Cong. Sab. Sch.                        10.00
    Medway. ESTATE of Clarissa A. Pond, by A.
      Pond, Ex.                                              145.00
    Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      31.42
    Methuen. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.34
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            37.68
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    Milford. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  24.22
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $57.88; M.
      D. Garfield $5.—First Cong. Soc., bbl. of
      C., _for Atlanta, Ga._                                  62.88
    Needham. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             4.65
    New Bedford. North Cong. Ch. and Soc. $100.01;
      First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $30                           130.01
    Newburyport. Henry Lunt                                    5.00
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         137.66
    Newton Centre. “Friends,” by Mrs. Furber, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    27.90
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               100.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. ($30 of which from E.
      B. Wheaton, to const. ELIZA R. BEANE L. M.)             38.00
    Orange. Mrs. E. W. M.                                      1.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          23.48
    Plymouth. Church of the Pilgrimage                        44.16
    Quincy. Even. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          54.00
    Reading. Bethesda Ch. and Soc.                            45.00
    Salem. South Cong. Ch. and Soc. $65.77; “A
      Friend” $10                                             75.77
    Sandwich. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.00
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.00
    South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch.                            8.11
    Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      J. W. BOWERS, CHAS. H. JOHNSON and WM. G.
      MUZZY L. M.’s                                          115.21
    Templeton. Trin. Ch. and Soc.                             20.39
    Upton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $30, to const. LYMAN
      L. LELAND L. M.; Cong. Sab. Sch. $4.60; Mrs.
      E. F. S. $1                                             35.60
    West Barnstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MYRON W. SHERMAN L. M.                                  32.56
    Wellesley. Cong. Sab. Sch. $25; College Miss.
      Soc. $2                                                 27.00
    West Medway. Cyrus Adams                                  10.00
    West Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          73.63
    Williamsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         21.68
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             15.12
    Wilmington. Mrs. Noyes, box of C. and $2.70,
      _for freight, for Wilmington, N.C._;
      “Friend” $1                                              3.70
    Winchendon. “A Friend”                                     5.00
    Woburn. J. P. M.                                           0.50
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $49.05, and
      bbl. of C.                                              49.05


  RHODE ISLAND, $879.87.

    Pawtucket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             45.00
    Providence. Union Cong. Ch.                              734.87
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.                         100.00


  CONNECTICUT, $3,145.27.

    Bennington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                   9.00
    Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         20.22
    Bristol. O. C.                                             1.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                                       9.00
    Fairfield. ——                                              5.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     56.79
    Gilead. Mr. and Mrs. Thos. L. Brown                        5.00
    Goshen. Sarah Beach, to const. JOHN BEACH and
      JOSEPH BEACH L. M’s.                                    60.00
    Greenfield. Cong. Ch.                                      9.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     37.75
    Guilford. Mrs. Lucy E. Tuttle $50; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc. $24                                        74.00
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford $50; Jos. W.
      Hungerford $50; Cong. Sab. Sch. $20.40                 120.40
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch. $92; South
      Cong. Ch. $50                                          142.00
    Hebron. Mrs. Jasper Porter, _for Woman’s Work
      among Women_                                            25.00
    Kent. First Cong. Soc.                                    19.53
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch.                               15.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch.                                  34.08
    Middletown. First Ch.                                     19.75
    Morris. K. Goodwin                                        10.00
    New Haven. Church of the Redeemer $164; O. A.
      Dorman $100; Dwight Place Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $83; “A Friend in a Time of Need” $50;
      Taylor Ch. $6.50                                       403.50
    North Guilford. S. R. Fowler $6; “A Friend” $2             8.00
    North Madison. Cong. Ch.                                   9.00
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch., in part                     200.00
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                   10.09
    Orange. Mrs. E. E. Rogers                                 10.00
    Portland. Miss Maria White                                 2.00
    Prospect. ESTATE of David W. Hotchkiss, by
      Hervey D. Hotchkiss, Ex.                             1,000.00
    Rocky Hill. Cong. Ch.                                     17.10
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      35.30
    Terryville. Elizur Fenn and Mrs. Elizur Fenn
      $5 ea.                                                  10.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      72.76
    Torrington. ESTATE of Henry Colt, by H. G.
      Colt, Ex.                                              500.00
    Union. Rev. Samuel I. Curtiss                             10.00
    Washington. Mrs. Rebecca Hine (of which $30 to
      const. LIZZIE J. POND L. M.)                            45.00
    Watertown. Truman Percy, to const. MISS HATTIE
      E. PERCY L. M.                                          30.00
    West Killingly. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.              75.00
    Winsted. Mrs. M. A. Mitchell                              10.00


  NEW YORK, $876.49.

    Brooklyn. A. Merwin $10; Church of the
      Covenant, M. C. Coll. $4.00; Mrs. T. C. F. $1           15.00
    Camillus. Isaiah Wilcox                                   30.00
    Dryden. H. B. W.                                           0.50
    East Wilson. Rev. H. Halsey $30; C. M. Clark $3           33.00
    Evans. Mrs. R. P. R. C.                                    1.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Soc. $269.92 (of which $50
      from Mrs. U. M. Place, _for the debt_), to
      const. MRS. SETH C. BURTON, ASHLEY D. L.
      BAKER, JOHN L. GETMAN and CYRUS STEWART L.
      M’s.                                                   219.92
    Lenox. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. $19.18; Amos S.
      Johnson $5                                              24.18
    Leyden. ESTATE of Mrs. Amanda K. Merwin, by
      Hon. M. H. Merwin, Ex.                                 200.00
    Livonia. ESTATE of Mrs. Susan Fowler, by Rev.
      S. M. Day                                              124.62
    Lysander. N. Hart                                          5.00
    Marion. “A Few Friends,” by M. M. Heslor, bal.
      to const. MRS. HATTIE A. DEWOLF L. M.                    5.00
    Newburgh. Miss E. I. P.                                    0.50
    New York. Mrs. J. A. V. A.                                 0.75
    Owasco. Mrs. A. S.                                         0.50
    Parishville. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.73
    Poughkeepsie. Cong. Ch.                                   15.22
    Rensselaer Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      15.00
    Richville. E. J. S.                                        1.00
    Riverhead. First Cong. Ch.                                 6.00
    Rochester. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             90.50
    Sherburne. “A Friend”                                     20.00
    Syracuse. “A friend in Plymouth Ch.” $4; A. B.
      $1, _for Mag._                                           5.00
    Walton. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                         31.60
    Warsaw. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   15.47
    West Groton. Cong. Ch.                                    10.00
    West Yaphank. H. M. O.                                     1.00


  NEW JERSEY, $64.70.

    Englewood. C. T.                                           0.50
    Montclair. First Cong. Ch.                                53.00
    Newark. “Jonah”                                            1.20
    Raritan. Miss S. Provost                                  10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $160.

    Hermitage. W. F. Stewart $5; E. P. $1                      6.00
    Philadelphia. James Smith                                100.00
    Prentissvale. Mrs. C. B. Lovejoy                           5.00
    Sharpsburgh. Joseph Turner ($5 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                             10.00
    Washington. Dr. F. J. LeMoyne, _for LeMoyne
      Inst., Memphis, Tenn._                                   9.00
    West Alexander. Dr. R. Davidson $20; Thomas
      McCleery $10                                            30.00


  OHIO, $943.53.

    Andover. O. B. Case $10; Mrs. O. B. Case $10              20.00
    Ashland. John Thompson                                     2.28
    Bellevue. “A Little Band of Cheerful Givers in
      First Cong. Soc.,” by Mrs. H. L. Berry                  11.30
    Brownhelm. ESTATE of John Locke, by Cyrus L.
      Whittlesey, Ex.                                        300.00
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the Poor in New
      Orleans_, $101.17; “A Friend” $5                       106.17
    Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch.                          21.50
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  9.12
    Hudson. Hiram Thompson                                    20.00
    Lodi. Cong. Ch. $6.29; Woman’s Miss. Soc. $1.95            8.24
    Mesopotamia. Mrs. S. O. Lyman, bal. to const.
      REV. A. M. PIPES L. M.                                  15.00
    Oberlin. T. W. W.                                          0.50
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch. (of which $4.40
      from Mrs. A. Morley, _for Straight U._)                 50.21
    Plymouth. ESTATE of Henry Amerman, by A. L.
      Grimes                                                 359.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      7.21
    Wadsworth. George Lyman                                    5.00
    Wakeman. Franklin Hale                                     7.00
    Willoughby. Mrs. N. L.                                     1.00


  INDIANA, $130.40.

    Bremen. Cong. Ch.                                          2.00
    Fort Wayne. Cong. Ch. $7.35, and Sab. Sch.
      $5.65                                                   13.00
    Indianapolis. Mayflower Cong. Ch.                          5.25
    Michigan City. Cong. Ch.                                 110.15


  ILLINOIS, $625.32.

    Amboy. Cong. Ch.                                          26.85
    Canton. Cong. Ch.                                         50.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
    Chicago. Leavitt St. Cong. Ch. $38.13; First
      Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll. $13.58; Rev. E. H. $1             52.71
    Clifton. Cong. Ch.                                         6.70
    Cobden. E. W. Towne                                       10.00
    Fawn Ridge. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid_                  5.00
    Galesburg. ESTATE of Warren C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard, Ex.                                 9.55
    Hutsonville. C. V. Newton                                  2.00
    Lamoille. Cong. Ch.                                        8.35
    Lawn Ridge. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               13.00
    Malden. Cong. S. S.                                        1.00
    Millburn. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Moline. Cong. Ch. (in part)                               61.27
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch. (in part)                             64.75
    Odell. Mrs. H. E. Dana                                    10.00
    Peoria. Rev. A. A. Stevens                                10.00
    Peru. First Cong. Ch.                                     13.22
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                     31.00
    Providence. Cong. Ch.                                     20.26
    Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch. $28.75; R.
      McComb $2                                               30.75
    Rochelle. W. H. Holcombe                                  10.00
    Rockford. Thomas D. Robertson                             50.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch. $6.25; Rev. A. L.
      Pennoyer and Wife $5                                    11.25
    Shirland. Mrs. J. G. L.                                    1.00
    Sycamore. Cong. Ch.                                       85.66
    Wayne Station. Cong. Ch.                                   5.60
    Wyanett. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  12.40


  MICHIGAN, $176.53.

    Adrian. Stephen Allen                                     10.00
    Alpena. B. C. Hardwick, _for Emerson Inst._               71.10
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           9.00
    Churches Corners. A. W. D. and others                      1.00
    Concord. Henry Mann                                        2.00
    Jackson. “A Friend”                                       30.00
    Lamont. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Memphis. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._                                          3.00
    Michigan Centre. Centre Cong. Ch.                          3.10
    Oxford. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for a Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._                                          5.25
    Portland. Cong. Ch.                                        7.50
    Richland. J. B.                                            1.00
    Romeo. “Mrs. E. F. F.” $1.50; Mrs. Dr. A. $1:
      Mrs. D. M. 50c., _for a Missionary, Memphis,
      Tenn._—M. A. J. 50c                                      3.50
    Union City. Cong. Ch. (in part)                           22.08
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   5.00


  WISCONSIN, $320.13.

    Beloit. First Cong. Ch.                                  130.00
    Black Earth. Cong. Ch.                                     1.15
    Geneva Lake. Presb. Ch.                                   15.00
    Green Bay. First Presb. Ch.                               61.35
    Oak Grove. Cong. Sab. Sch. $5; Dea. D. Richard
      $2; Rev. W. E. S. $1                                     8.00
    Milwaukee. Mrs. E. F. Rice                                10.00
    Portage City. John Jones No. 4                             2.50
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                      17.35
    Waukesha. First Cong. Ch.                                 22.00
    Wautoma. Cong. Ch.                                         4.28
    Wawatosa. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                48.50


  IOWA, $205.82.

    Alden. Cong. Ch.                                           7.75
    Burlington. Mrs. Hannah Everall $5; M. L. $1               6.00
    Chester Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 32.00
    College Springs. Cong. Ch.                                 8.60
    Farragut. Cong. Ch. $6; C. W. H. $1                        7.00
    Green Mountain. First Cong. Ch.                           31.00
    Keokuk. Orthodox Cong. Ch.                                55.55
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                                      26.35
    New Hampton. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                            5.50
    Newton. First Cong. Ch.                                   12.27
    Osage. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                                  4.80
    Rockford. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                               2.00
    Rockford. Mrs. A. E. G. 50c.; Mrs. C. A. C.
      50c.                                                     1.00
    Shenandoah. Rev. W. P.                                     0.50
    Sloan. Mrs. R. W. F. S.                                    0.50
    Toledo. Ladies’ Aid Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00


  MINNESOTA, $141.33.

    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      41.58
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 20.55
    Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                               49.95
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch., quar. coll. $13.25;
      Rev. C. W. M. $1                                        14.25
    Walcott. Mrs. Mary Adams                                  15.00


  KANSAS, $30.

    Osawatomie. Rev. S. L. Adair, to const. H. H.
      WILLIAMS L. M.                                          30.00


  CALIFORNIA, $100.

    Oakland. S. Richards                                     100.00


  OREGON, $54.55.

    Albany. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                 50.55


  NORTH CAROLINA, $241.16.

    McLeansville. Pub. Fund $42; Miss E. W.
      Douglass $30                                            72.00
    Raleigh. Pub. Fund $150; Washington Sch.
      $17.83.—Cong. Ch. $1.33, _for Indian M._               169.16


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $188.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  188.00


  GEORGIA, $258.61.

    Atlanta. Rent $104; Atlanta University $83; T.
      N. Chase $50                                           237.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    12.40
    Medway. Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._                          8.00
    Savannah. First Cong. Ch.                                  0.71
    Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. S. 25c. _for Indian
      M._ and 25c. _for Mendi M._                              0.50


  ALABAMA, $29.50.

    Anniston. Rev. P. J. McEntosh                              0.50
    Athens. Trinity Sch.                                      29.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $26.20.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                             26.20


  MISSOURI, $7.

    Amity. Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
    St. Louis. Mrs. M. P. Chapman                              4.00


  INCOME FUND, $101.50.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi Mission_                          101.50


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $1,000.

    Sandwich Islands. “A Friend”                           1,000.00


  ENGLAND, $253.

    London. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc., by Dr.
      O. H. White £50                                        243.00
    —— Miss S. L. Ropes                                       10.00


  TURKEY, $5.

    Van. Rev. H. S. Barnum                                     5.00
                                                          —————————
    Total                                                 13,362.75
    Total from Oct. 1st to July 31st                     $142,670.50

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, _Ass’t Treas_.


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Springfield, Vt. A. Woolson                              100.00
    East Hampton, Conn. E. C. Barton                          20.00
    West Haven, Conn. Mrs. Huldah Coe                          6.00
    Gilbertsville Academy, N. Y. Rev. A. Wood                  5.00
    Gloversville, N. Y. Mrs. U. M. Place                      50.00
    Malone, N. Y. Mrs. S. C. Wead                            100.00
    New Jersey. “Hearts Content”                              25.00
    Clark, Pa. Mrs. Elizabeth Dickson and Miss
      Eliza Dickson $5 ea.                                    10.00
    Hyde Park, Pa. Thomas Eynon                               50.00
    Scranton, Pa. F. E. Nettleton                             10.00
    Fredericktown, Ohio. “A. H. R.”                          500.00
    Atlanta, Ga. Students and Teachers in Atlanta
      U.                                                     175.00
    Woodville, Ga. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke                    0.75
                                                          —————————
    1,051.75
    Previously acknowledged in June Receipt               12,163.72
                                                          —————————
    Total                                                $13,215.47




_The American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 11;
Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 4.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.
_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.; 11; _Other
Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS—Among the Freedmen, 209;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign lands, 10.
Total, 252. STUDENTS—In Theology, 74; Law, 8; in College Course,
79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404. Scholars taught by
former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. Indians under
the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accomodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  New York      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  Boston        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  Chicago       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
“American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be applied
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish

Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. S. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Luke, $1.50: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.”—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._

                 *       *       *       *       *

                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

                             BANKERS,

               59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                               66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment,

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.

                 *       *       *       *       *

They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

                ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN
           SABBATH SCHOOL, OR SOCIAL OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo. Cloth, 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent postpaid on receipt of price.

TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                             758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    The most extensive stock of

                    Theological and S. S. Books

                  In the Country, Good and Cheap.

We publish books upon the “Clark” plan. In the regular way, DR.
ARNOLD’S 84 Rugby Lectures are $3.50—on the “Clark” plan, =$1.20=,
postpaid.

Besides our general stock of Sunday-school Books, we have one
Library of shop-worn and second-hand Books, $50 retail, for
=$12.50=, and 10 Libraries of New Books of the best quality, and
cheaper than any offered.

Also, Books sold by Agents only. Just ready, =The Old and New Bible
Looking-Glass=, with =280= Beautiful Emblem Engravings. The work is
written by Drs. CROSBY, GILLET, CHEEVER, PUNSHON of England, and
others. It has received, from the ablest Divines and the religious
press, the best indorsements of any book we have had.

                       SEND FOR PARTICULARS.

             N. TIBBALS & SONS, 37 Park Row, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       _Case’s Bible Atlas._

Quarto Size. Accurate and _up to the times_. 16 Full Page Maps,
with Explanatory Notes and Index. Designed to aid Sunday-school
Teachers and Scholars. Every family needs it. Price $1.00. In
Cloth, $1.50. Sent by mail on receipt of price.

=AGENTS WANTED= in every Township. _Liberal terms given._ Address
=O. D. CASE & CO., Hartford, Ct.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation._

                 _It gives the Best Insurance on
                    the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

           C. Y. WEMPLE,
                    _Vice-President_.

           J. L. HALSEY,
                    _Secretary_.

           S. N. STEBBINS,
                    _Actuary_.

           H. Y. WEMPLE,
           H. B. STOKES,
                    _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE SINGER

                         LEADS THE WORLD!

[Illustration: Works of the Singer Manufacturing Co., Elizabeth, N.
J.]

Notwithstanding the great depression of business, THE SINGER
MANUFACTURING COMPANY made and sold

282,812 Machines in 1877—BEING 20,496 =MORE= THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS
YEAR.

_PRICES REDUCED_ =$30= _ON EACH STYLE OF MACHINE_. _Send for
Circular._

☞ The public are warned against a counterfeit machine, made after
_an old abandoned model_ of our Machine. To get a genuine “SINGER
SEWING MACHINE,” buy only of our authorized Agents, and see that
each Machine has our Trade-Mark stamped on the arm.

THE SINGER M’F’G CO., Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

               HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP
               CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS, YARD
                  HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

                          [Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

                         Founded in 1832.

                        Branch Warehouses:

                    85 & 87 John St., NEW YORK,

                                AND

                     197 Lake Street, CHICAGO.

                 FOR SALE BY ALL REGULAR DEALERS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         E. D. Bassford’s

                 COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK CITY,

Just received from European and Domestic Manufacturers complete
new stock of fresh and beautiful goods. Every department of this
great emporium is being re-stocked with the Newest and Best
=House-Furnishing= and =Table Wares=, in =Hardware=, =China=,
=Glass=, =Cutlery=, =Silver= and =Wooden-ware=, and everything in
these lines for the complete furnishing of =House and Table—Dinner=
and =Tea Sets=, =Chamber-ware=, =Cooking Utensils=, =Tin-ware= and

                            BASSFORD’S

                            CELEBRATED

                      Nonpareil Refrigerator,

The best made. Goods promptly delivered in city, or shipped daily.
Complete Price Lists and Refrigerator Lists sent free, and every
attention paid to inquiries by mail.

                        Edward D. Bassford,

               Nos. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 17

                        _COOPER INSTITUTE_,

                          NEW YORK CITY.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   Boynton’s Gas-Tight Furnaces

                  HAVE A RENOWNED REPUTATION FOR

  Great Heating Capacity, Freedom from Gases, being Durable, and
                        Economical in Fuel.

                        Over 40,000 in Use.

                          [Illustration]

Especially adapted for =Churches=, =Dwellings=, =Schools=,
etc. Fitted with _anti-Clinker Grates_, Bronze Door-Pins,
_Sifting-Grates_ for Ashes, _Ash-Pans_, etc., etc. Special
_inducements_ made to =Clergymen= and =Churches=. Estimates for
Heating made on application. Send for Circulars and Descriptions.

            =RICHARDSON, BOYNTON & CO.=, Manufacturers,

  _84 Lake St., Chicago.       232 and 234 Water St., New York._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                       The Laundry,

                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              CABINET
                              ORGANS

HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXHIBITIONS. _Only American Organs
awarded such at_ ANY. _Before buying or renting, send for our_
LATEST CATALOGUES and CIRCULARS, with NEW STYLES, REDUCED PRICES
and _much information_. _Sent free._

                     MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO.,
                                   BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid _=$340=_ ORGANS for _=$100=_. _=$300=_ for _=$90=_.
_=$275=_ for _=$80=_. _=$200=_ for _=$70=_. _=$190=_ for _=$65=_;
and _=$160=_ for _=$55=_. PIANOS—_=$900=_ Piano Forte for _=$225=_.
_=$800=_ for _=$200=_. _=$750=_ for _=$185=_. _=$700=_ for
_=$165=_. _=$600=_ for _=$135=_, _=cash=_, not used a year, in
perfect order. Great Bargains, Unrivaled Instruments, Unequaled
Prices. Send for Catalogues. =HORACE WATERS & SONS=, _40 East 14th
Street, New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Young America Press Co.,

                          [Illustration]

                     35 Murray St., New York,

manufacture a variety of hand, self-inking, and rotary printing
presses, ranging in price from $2 to $150, including the
=Centennial=, =Young America=, =Cottage=, =Lightning=, and other
celebrated printing machines. Our new rotary press, the =United
States Jobber=, for cheapness and excellence, is unrivalled. Other
presses taken in exchange. Lowest prices for type and printing
material. Circulars free. Specimen Book of Type. 10 cts. A sample
package of plain and fancy cards, 10 cents.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER    PLATFORM    WAGON &    TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N.Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, giving news from the
Institutions and Churches aided by the Association among the
Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the Chinese on the
Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa. Price, =Fifty
Cents a Year, in Advance=.

                        OUR NEW PAMPHLETS.

No. 1.—=History= of the Association.

No. 2.—=Africa=: Containing a History of the Mendi Mission, a
Description of the Land and the People, and a presentation of their
claims on America.

No. 3.—=The Three Despised Races in the United States=; or, The
Chinaman, the Indian, and the Freedman. An Address before the A. M.
A., by Rev. Joseph Cook, of Boston, Mass.

No. 4.—=The Educational Work.= Showing the nature and reality
of the black man’s needs; the way to help him; the sentiment of
Southern men; the work of the Romish Church; the wants of the A. M.
A.

       _Will be sent, free to any address, on application._

                    H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t-Treas., 56 Reade St., N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for
which our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially
valuable. Our readers are among the best in the country, having an
established character for integrity and thrift that constitute them
valued customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                                  J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                          56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            KINGSFORD’S

                              OSWEGO

             For PUDDINGS, CUSTARDS, BLANC MANGE, Etc.

                            The BEST is

      [Illustration: Original KINGSFORD’S OSWEGO CORN STARCH.
                          PERFECTLY PURE]

 UNEQUALED FOR DELICACY, VARIETY OF USE AND HEALTHFULNESS. ADAPTED
  ALIKE TO THE TASTE OF THE EPICURE AND THE WANTS OF THE INVALID.

                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation and spelling were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. Inconsistent hyphenation was retained
as there are numerous authors. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

“Theoogical” changed to “Theological” on page 273 (a student from
the Theological Department).

“brethern” changed to “brethren” on page 281 (whether our Chinese
brethren).

Extra “(” removed from before COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK CITY on
page 288.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 09, SEPTEMBER, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.