VOL. XXXII.                                           No. 11.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          NOVEMBER, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    THE ANNUAL MEETING                                           321
    PARAGRAPHS                                              321, 322
    MR. STANLEY’S INTEREST IN CHRISTIAN MISSIONS                 322
    THE INDIAN AGENTS WE NEED                                    325
    “HAMPTON TRACTS.”—CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH             327
    SUNDRIES.—GENERAL NOTES                                      328


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ALABAMA—Florence: Rev. L. C. Anderson.—A
    Memphis Letter.—A New Orleans Letter.—Scholarship
      Letters                                                331–334


  AFRICA.

    THE MENDI MISSION: Rev. A. P. Miller                         334


  THE INDIANS.

    FORT BERTHOLD, D. T.: Rev. C. L. HALL                        337
    LAKE SUPERIOR AGENCY: I. L. Mahan                            339
    RED LAKE AGENCY, MINN: C. P. Allen, M. D.                    341


  THE CHINESE.

    CHINAPHOBIA: Dr. M. C. Briggs                                342


  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                            343


  RECEIPTS                                                       344

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           A. Anderson, Printer, 23 to 27 Vandewater St.




                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. G. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXII.      NOVEMBER, 1878.      No. 11.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ANNUAL MEETING.

We take this last opportunity to invite our friends to meet us
in Taunton, Mass., October 29–31. We shall hope to see a goodly
number of the old teachers and early friends of the work. Wednesday
evening will be mainly in their hands. Among the speakers will be
Revs. George R. Merrill, Martin L. Williston, C. M. Southgate,
Svlvanus Haywood, W. S. Alexander, and O. W. Demick, Esq.

The speakers for the closing meeting on Thursday evening will be
Rev. J. L. Withrow, D. D., Rev. C. D. Hartranft, D. D., and others.

Among those who will read papers on Wednesday will be Rev. M. E.
Strieby, D. D., Rev. George Leon Walker, D. D., Rev. Ebenezer
Cutler, D. D.

As we go to press, everything promises well for a meeting of
unusual interest and power. The people of Taunton are large
hearted, and will be glad to have their hospitality taxed to the
utmost.

       *       *       *       *       *

—The new Chinese Ambassadors are men from whose intelligence,
experience and wisdom we have much to hope. Chin Lan Pin, first
ambassador, is a man of deep learning, being a graduate of the Han
Lin College, of the highest class, and a man of extensive travel
and observation as well. In 1872, he visited this country as Chief
Commissioner in charge of the Chinese students sent to be educated
in the Connecticut colleges, and he subsequently visited England
and Spain on similar missions. In 1874, he was one of the three
Commissioners who were sent by the Chinese Government to Cuba, to
investigate the condition of the Chinese laborers there. After
locating the several consulates appointed for the United States, he
will visit Spain and procure the recognition of a Consul for Cuba,
and thence proceed to Peru for a similar purpose. He will then
return to Washington and take up his abode as resident Minister.

The Vice-Minister, Yung Wing, is even better known in this country.
He was graduated at Yale College with high scholastic and literary
honor, receiving the degree of LL.D. He subsequently devoted
himself to awakening his countrymen to the needs of reform in
education, and his efforts gained official recognition. He has been
Commissioner of Education and in charge of the Chinese Educational
Mission in Hartford, Conn., and of the 112 Chinese students
connected with it.

We have been glad to read a very clear report published in the
Inverness _Courier_ of an address made by Prof. Spence, of Fisk
University in that city, in Scotland. The many friends of the
University and of Prof. and Mrs. Spence will be interested to know
of the work they are doing in Great Britain, and that they are
so fully recognized in the Scottish press. We learn from private
advices, that they have been very warmly received and cordially
heard, and from the places in which they have presented their
cause, have reaped fair, if not large, results. What effect the
recent failure of the Bank of Glasgow may have upon their future
success we cannot tell, but we fear it may dry up many of the
streams from which they had hoped to draw.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. STANLEY’S INTEREST IN CHRISTIAN MISSIONS.

It was a remark of Dr. Livingstone’s, that “the end of the
geographical feat is the beginning of the missionary endeavor.”
And, although all African explorers are not animated with the
missionary idea, yet it is easy to believe that an over-ruling
Providence uses their efforts for missionary ends.

Mr. Stanley asserts, that the object of his desperate journey was,
“To flash a torch of light across the western half of the Dark
Continent.” “If the natives allow us a peaceful passage, so much
the better; if not, our duty says, go on.” “We are always under
the eye of God.” “The one God has written that this year the river
[Lualaba] shall be known throughout its length. ‘Think,’ he says,
to Frank Pocock, ‘what a benefit our journey will be to Africa.’”

From these different quotations, taken from Mr. Stanley’s recent
book, we have a right to infer, that the interests of missions were
prominent in his mind throughout his journey. Indeed, his book
indicates that he was not only governed by a desire to complete
the explorations commenced by Dr. Livingstone, but also to further
the missionary endeavors of that godly man. This was evidenced
first on his arrival at Uganda on the shores of the Victoria
Nyanza, where he wrote the following: “A barbarous man is a pure
materialist, he is full of cravings for possessing something that
he cannot describe. My experience and study of the pagan, prove
to me, that if a missionary can show the poor materialist that
religion is allied with substantial benefits and improvement of
his degraded condition, the task will be rendered comparatively
easy. The African, once brought in contact with the European,
becomes docile and imbued with a vague hope that he may also rise
in time to the level of this superior being who has challenged his
admiration. He comes to him with a desire to be taught, and, seized
with an ambition to aspire to a higher life, becomes docile and
tractable.” “I find them,” he says, elsewhere, “capable of great
love and affection, and possessed of gratitude and other traits of
human nature. I know, too, that they can be made good, obedient,
industrious, enterprising, true and moral—that they are in short,
equal to any other race or color on the face of the globe in all
the attributes of manhood.”

King Mtesa, the despotic ruler over 2,000,000 of people, appeared
to Mr. Stanley the most desirable object for his first efforts.
“Mtesa has impressed me,” he says, “as being an intelligent and
distinguished prince, who, if aided by philanthropists, will do
more for Central Africa than fifty years of gospel teaching,
unaided by such authority, can do. I think I see in him the light
that shall lighten the darkness of this benighted region. In this
man I see the possible fruition of Livingstone’s hopes, for with
his aid the civilization of equatorial Africa becomes feasible.”
Mr. Stanley further informs us how he followed up his convictions:
“Since the 5th of April, I had enjoyed ten interviews with Mtesa,
and during all, I had taken occasion to introduce topics which
would lead up to the subject of Christianity. Nothing occurred in
my presence, but I contrived to turn it towards effecting that
which had become an object to me, viz., his conversion. There was
no attempt made to confuse him with the details of any particular
doctrine. I simply drew for him the image of the Son of God
humbling himself for the good of all mankind, white and black,
and told him how, while He was in man’s disguise, He was seized
and crucified by wicked people who scorned his divinity, and yet,
out of His great love for them, while yet suffering on the cross,
He asked His great Father to forgive them. I had also begun to
translate to him the Ten Commandments, and Idi, the Emperor’s
writer, transcribed in Kiganda the words of the Law, as given to
him in choice Swahili by Robert Feruzi, one of my boat’s crew, and
a pupil of the Universities’ Mission at Zanzibar.”

“The religious conversations which I had begun with Mtesa, were
maintained in the presence of M. Linant de Bellefonds, who,
fortunately for the cause I had in view, was a Protestant. For,
when questioned by Mtesa, about the facts which I had uttered,
and which had been faithfully transcribed, M. Linant, to Mtesa’s
astonishment, employed nearly the same words, and delivered the
same responses. The remarkable fact that two white men, who had
never met before, one having arrived from the south-east, the other
having emerged from the north, should nevertheless both know the
same things, and respond in the same words, charmed the popular
mind without the burzah as a wonder, and was treasured in Mtesa’s
memory as being miraculous. As the result of these conversations,
Mtesa, who can read Arabic, caused the Ten Commandments of Moses
to be written on a board for his daily perusal, as well as the
Lord’s Prayer and the command of the Saviour, ‘Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.’”

The encouragement given to Mr. Stanley by his success with
Mtesa, caused him to send forth his famous appeal, resulting in
the establishment of a mission station at Uganda by the Church
Missionary Society of London. He seems, also, to have pursued his
work during his stay of several months with Mtesa. Meanwhile, an
opportunity was afforded him of testing the genuineness of Mtesa’s
conversion. The Wavuma were waging fearful warfare upon Mtesa,
during which, his scouts succeeded in capturing one of their
principal chiefs. Mtesa was in high glee, and caused to be gathered
a large quantity of fagots with which to burn his prisoner. “Now,
Stamlee,” he said, “you shall see how a chief of Uvuma dies. He
is about to be burnt. The Wavuma will tremble when they hear the
manner of his death.” “Ah! Mtesa,” I said, “have you forgotten the
words of the good Book, which I have read to you so often—If thy
brother offend thee, thou shalt forgive him many times,—Love thy
enemies,—Do good to them that hate you?” “Shall this man not die,
Stamlee? Shall I not have blood for him, Stamlee?”—“No, Mtesa, no
more blood; you must stop this pagan way of thinking. It is not
Mtesa the good. It is not Mtesa the Christian. It is the savage;
I know you now.” “Stamlee, Stamlee, wait a short time and you
shall see.” “An hour afterward, I was summoned by a page to his
presence, and Mtesa said: ‘Stamlee will not say Mtesa is bad now,
for he has forgiven the Mvuma Chief, and will not hurt him.’”

Mr. Stanley, however, though he had translated for Mtesa the Gospel
of St. Luke entire, prepared for him an abridged Bible, selected a
site for a church, and detailed the boy Dallington—a pupil of the
Universities’ Mission at Zanzibar—to remain at Uganda and serve as
a missionary, did not feel that he had provided sufficiently for
the spiritual wants of his convert. “A few months’ talk,” he says,
“about Christ and His blessed work on earth, though sufficiently
attractive to Mtesa, is not enough to eradicate the evils which
thirty-five years of brutal, sensuous indulgence have stamped on
the mind. This, only the unflagging zeal, the untiring devotion to
duty, and the paternal watchfulness of a sincerely pious pastor,
can effect. And it is because I am conscious of the insufficiency
of my work, and his strong evil propensities, that I have not
hesitated to describe the real character of my ‘convert.’ The grand
redeeming feature of Mtesa, though founded only on self-interest,
is his admiration for white men. By his remarks, he proved he had
a very retentive memory, and was tolerably well posted in his
articles of belief. At night I left him, with an earnest adjuration
to hold fast to the new faith, and to have recourse to prayer to
God, to give him strength to withstand all temptations that should
tend to violate the Commandments written in the Bible.”

Mr. Stanley’s long intercourse with the tribes of the interior
enabled him to discover many traits of character that indicate
the aptitude of the negro to receive religious truth. On one
occasion, he had dwelt a long while in giving account of great
works of art and science, commerce, agriculture, and material
wealth; when he turned to the discussion of the grand themes of
Scripture and Divinity, the interest in the latter subject was so
intense that Mr. Stanley determined to devote himself, with renewed
energy, to the promulgation of the doctrines of the Christian
faith, discovering—what others had learned before—that the negro
has a remarkable appreciation of the things of religion. He gives
an incident, which occurred at Mowa Falls, on the Livingstone
River, that displayed a quality of heart very suggestive to those
interested in the salvation of the pagan.

Uledi, the faithful coxswain who had dared every danger, and
proved dutiful and faithful for years and months, having robbed
the Expedition of a quantity of beads, a council of chiefs was
called, and the question was submitted as to what his punishment
should be. One of the most reliable and steady men replied, “Well,
master, it is a hard question. Uledi is like our elder brother,
and to give our voice for punishing him, would be like asking you
to punish ourselves; yet, master, for our sakes beat him only just
a little.” Mr. Stanley then inquired of Shumari, who was Uledi’s
brother, what punishment he should meet to the thief. “Ah, dear
master,” Shumari said, “it is true Uledi has stolen, and I have
scolded him often for it. I have never stolen. I am but a boy.
Uledi is my elder. But please, master, as the chiefs say he must be
flogged, give me half of it, and, knowing it is for Uledi’s sake,
I shall not feel it.” “Now, Saywa, you are his cousin. What do
you say?” Young Saywa advanced and said, “The master is wise. All
things that happen he writes in a book. Perhaps, if the master will
look in his book, he may see something in it about Uledi—how he
has saved many men, whose names I cannot remember, from the river;
how he worked harder on the canoes than any three men; how he has
been the first to listen to your voice always. Uledi is my cousin.
If, as the chiefs say, Uledi should be punished, Shumari says he
will take half of the punishment; then, give Saywa the other half,
and set Uledi free. Saywa has spoken.” It would seem that persons
with such instincts as these indicated above, would readily come to
appreciate and accept the sacrifice of Him by whose stripes we are
healed.

A thorough perusal of Mr. Stanley’s “Through the Dark Continent”
can hardly fail to arouse in the hearts of those yearning to heal
“that open sore of the world,” sympathy and fellowship with him.
He had his imperfections, and met with obstacles which brought
them sharply into view; but the good he accomplished will be the
longest remembered. His noble self-denial, after reaching the West
Coast, as seen in his fidelity to his pagan followers, indicates
characteristics worthy of profound admiration. Instead of leaving
their conduct round the Cape of Good Hope to Zanzibar to the charge
of others, and rushing on himself, to receive the plaudits of the
proudest courts of the civilized world, he quietly and patiently
cared for all their wants, for weary months, returning them to
their homes and friends, and rewarding them with the liberality
of a father’s affection, which will be lovingly remembered among
the tribes from whence his servants came, long after his rich and
costly gifts of material things have perished.

All this will be worth something yet to the cause of missions.
“When we were gliding,” he says, “through the broad portals [of the
Congo] into the ocean, turning to take a farewell glance at the
mighty river, I felt my heart suffused with the purest gratitude to
Him whose hand had protected us, and who had enabled us to pierce
the Dark Continent from east to west, and to trace its mightiest
river to its ocean bourn.” That gratitude, we believe, is shared by
a mighty host of the followers of Him who shall have dominion from
sea to sea—who are already echoing the last words of Mr. Stanley’s
book—_Laus Deo, Laus Deo_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN AGENTS WE NEED.

The vacancy in the Indian Agency, referred to in the last number of
the MISSIONARY, has been filled; but, as other vacancies are likely
to occur from time to time, applications, with proper credentials,
may be forwarded to this office.

As to the qualifications necessary, we can state nothing more
clearly than we find it given in an article, which we republish
below, from the Springfield _Republican_, written by a gentleman
who seems thoroughly familiar with Indian affairs. We will
only repeat that an Indian Agency is no sinecure, and should
be undertaken by no man who is not thoroughly competent and
self-sacrificing:

  A residence of two years at an agency in Dakota gave the writer
  unusual opportunities for observation of the requirements of this
  service. The popular impression seems to be that this office is
  a sinecure, affording retirement for decayed politicians and
  inefficient goodies, whereas the service is, when faithfully
  performed, an arduous one, requiring exceptional and diversified
  ability.

  The agent must have executive capacity, together with that rare
  selective faculty that recognizes at sight a competent man for a
  given place. The character of the agency force of employés, and
  the quality of their work, reflects the personality of the agent.
  The progress of the Indians in the schools, and in learning to
  work for their own support, is in proportion to the efficiency of
  the agent as an executive. A vigorous, capable man infuses his
  spirit into his subordinates, and, in a more limited degree, into
  the natives.

  The agent needs judicial knowledge. No laws are in force on
  Indian reservations, with a few exceptions, but the treaties with
  the Government. The administration of justice and the punishment
  of crime are left to the agent, with such coöperation as he
  can secure from the Indian chiefs. He settles family quarrels,
  neighborhood disputes, complaints against Indians by neighboring
  whites, questions of the boundary of lands and the ownership
  of property. He receives acknowledgments of deeds, executes
  contracts, administers estates and takes depositions. Crimes of
  all degrees, from petty theft to murder or arson, come under his
  jurisdiction, and he is often compelled to administer punishment
  almost as arbitrarily as the captain of a man-of-war. He is even
  called upon sometimes to prepare a code of laws for a tribe in an
  advanced state of civilization.

  Business ability and experience are indispensable qualifications.
  The agent has to purchase miscellaneous supplies amounting to
  from $5,000 to $50,000 annually, on contract or in open market.
  The opening of bids and awarding contracts on sample requires
  actual acquaintance with the market, and experience in judging of
  the quality of goods of every variety. He needs the experience
  and judgment of a first-class country merchant. If the agent is
  an incompetent buyer, contractors and merchants are quick to
  discover the fact and profit by it. A knowledge of accounts is
  essential. Accurate returns of every item of cash and property
  received and expended, are required by law, and are subjected to
  most rigid scrutiny. Absolute correctness, in both matter and
  form, is required, and ignorance of methods is not admitted as an
  excuse for errors.

  The diplomatic qualifications of the position are by no means
  inconsiderable. A copious official correspondence is required
  with the Indian office at Washington, and must be conducted
  with due formality and dignity. All matters of importance are
  submitted to the Indian Office for action, and it often requires
  skilful presentation of a subject to make a clerk at Washington
  take a view that seems self-evident to the agent on the frontier.
  Great tact and patience are requisite in dealing with the various
  outside influences that embarrass the agent, and often bring him
  to grief. Frontier settlers are continually having difficulties
  with the Indians that require attention. Liquor-sellers,
  claim-agents and swindlers lie in wait for the Indian, who
  must be protected. Scheming half-breeds and “squaw-men” create
  dissension among the natives. Then there are the contractor
  and sub-contractor; the man who failed to get the contract he
  wanted, and the man who is planning to get the next contract.
  There is the ex-agent, who corresponds with the employés and
  Indians, and criticises his successor, and the man who wants to
  be agent, and watches for a lever to oust the incumbent. (There
  are always twenty of them!) There is the dissatisfied employé,
  who corresponds with outsiders about agency affairs, and the
  meddlesome clerk at Washington, who gives him private assistance.
  The agents are few who meet all these difficulties without
  serious trouble.

  Especially, high moral character is a prime requisite, not only
  on account of the agent’s influence upon a people just rising
  from barbarism, but to enable a man to maintain his integrity
  under the extraordinary temptations that surround the place. Said
  an ex-agent of unimpeachable integrity: “I know of no service
  that tries a man’s principles so severely as the Indian service.”
  In spite of all precautions, opportunities for peculation, direct
  and indirect, are frequent, and present themselves in the most
  seducing forms possible.

  Having shown the requirements of the position, we may consider
  some of the obstacles in the way of securing agents who are
  thoroughly competent for the work. First comes hard work. No
  branch of our civil service draws more heavily on a man’s time
  and strength. The agent is involved in a constant round of
  wearisome details, varied only by frequent hard journeys by wagon
  or stage, or worse, by frontier railroads.

  The responsibilities of the place are onerous. The agent is held
  accountable, under a heavy bond, for all funds and property that
  come into his hands, as well as for all the acts and failures of
  his subordinates. He may be ordered away for months at a time, on
  public business, and in the meantime he must depend entirely upon
  the fidelity of the agency clerk, who is not a bonded officer, to
  discharge his duties and care for agency property. Release from
  bonded accountability can only be had after complying with all
  the forms of law and going through a long and tedious process
  of examination of accounts. Two years after closing his term of
  service, an agent was required to account for one iron wagon-bolt
  (purchased by a subordinate, three years before), in order to
  secure release from his bond, and five hundred dollars arrears of
  salary. The agent’s family must endure practical exile, separated
  from society, schools and churches.

  Every agent, honest or dishonest, suffers in reputation. If a
  man is thoroughly honest, dishonest contractors and jobbers
  invariably slander him, to get rid of him. This consideration
  keeps many competent men out of the service. The salary paid is
  entirely inadequate. It is that of a country postmaster, an army
  lieutenant, a school-teacher or a traveling salesman. Here is the
  root of the whole difficulty. Even in the present state of the
  labor market, it is impossible to get a $2,500 man for $1,500.
  The expenses of the position are high. The agent keeps open house
  for all strangers, newspaper correspondents, army officers,
  Indian inspectors, and others. His family supplies are brought
  from a distant market, at a heavy expense. This matter has been
  presented to Congress by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, each
  year for several years, but without effect.

  In spite of these disadvantages, the service is much better
  manned than might be supposed. Indian-Inspector E. C. Watkins
  said to the writer: “I have visited a large number of agencies,
  and, in view of the meagre salary paid, and the difficult service
  required, I have been surprised at the capacity and fidelity
  displayed. As a class, the agents nominated by the religious
  societies perform their duties with ability and success.” When
  a thoroughly competent agent is found in the service, one of
  three things will almost invariably be true: Either he enters
  the service with the idea of supplementing his salary (honestly
  or dishonestly); or he is in search of novel experience or a
  change of climate for himself or family; or (as is often true)
  he has the spirit of a missionary, and seeks the advancement of
  the Indian race. If we wish to escape the burden of providing for
  idle Indians, we shall have to employ competent agents, at fair
  wages, to train them to habits of industry.

       *       *       *       *       *


“HAMPTON TRACTS.”

Among the excellent devices which have proceeded from the fertile
brains and earnest hearts of our fellow-workers for the freedmen,
none has for a long time commended itself to our hearty approbation
more than the one indicated in the above heading. It appears that
an English Sanitary Association has for twenty years been engaged
in publishing and distributing simple sanitary tracts and leaflets,
intended for use in schools and families. Following this excellent
example, an editing committee, consisting of General Armstrong, his
sister-in-law, Mrs. M. F. Armstrong, Miss Ludlow and Dr. Stephen
Smith, of New York, propose, and have already begun, the same good
work. They say—

“These publications will provide as simply and in as attractive
a manner as possible, carefully prepared information upon all
points directly connected with physical life, as, cleanliness of
the person and house, ventilation, drainage, care of children and
invalids preparation of food, etc., and, as in the case of their
English forerunners, they are to be sold for a sum just sufficient
to defray the cost of publication and to permit a certain amount of
gratuitous distribution. They will be issued in a series, printed
at the office of the Normal School Press, Hampton, Va., and will be
known as ‘Hampton Tracts.’”

The need and use of such information among the homes and families
of the Southern negroes is most apparent, though by no means
confined to them. It is in their midst, doubtless, that they will
first be distributed.

The American Social Science Association, convened in Cleveland
this year, having examined the first three numbers of the proposed
series of tracts in manuscript, by a unanimous vote passed the
following Resolution—

  “_Resolved_, That the American Social Science Association learns
  with pleasure of the work undertaken at Hampton, in Virginia,
  to spread among the people of Virginia, and of the South in
  general, a knowledge of Sanitary Science popularly set forth;
  and that from an examination of the three Sanitary Tracts of the
  proposed series, viz.: _The Health Laws of Moses_, _The Duty of
  Teachers_, and _Preventable Diseases_, the Executive Committee
  of this Association is persuaded that the important task, thus
  undertaken, will be well performed. We would, therefore, commend
  these Tracts to all readers, at the North as well as at the
  South, and would recommend their wide distribution in the way
  best suited to promote the circulation of them.”

Again, we desire to express our cordial commendation of the plan,
and doubt not it will be carried out in all its details with wisdom
and energy.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.

That God holds the denomination which stands as the constituency
of the American Missionary Association to a large measure of duty
in this line, is evident from the fact that by His providence He
had been preparing this instrumentality against the day of freedom,
and that He has given it now so wide and effectual a door of
entrance. At first it entered with physical relief; then with the
very first school that was opened among the “contrabands”; then
with its system of Normal schools and colleges and professional
departments and church organizations. All this was the drift and
drive of Providence. To have halted anywhere up to this point
would have been to disobey marching orders. And now can anything
but the spirit of desertion fail to hear the command ringing on:
Go; go, preach; go, disciple the people; go, organize them into
the life and fellowship of the churches of Christ? Having started
them in the way of Christian education, shall we deny them that
school of Christian nurture, the self-governing church? Having
given them the elements of the Puritan system, shall we fail to
give them its full fruitage? The founding of such churches is but
the natural out-growth of this scheme for the elevation of the
emancipated race. As in the Interior and in all the West, these
ideas and institutions have been a leavening force, so will they
be at the South, interpenetrating and uplifting. They will be an
example, a stimulus. They will help other communions. Already,
our institutions have put not a few educated preachers into
the pulpits of the Methodist and Baptist colored churches; and
we are glad thus to help in their work. “Expository preaching,
with warm application,” says Col. Preston, “should be the
preacher’s mode.” Our church members there are gaining the title
of “Bible-Christians.” Let churches of such material have a
chance.—_Dr. Roy, in the Congregationalist._

       *       *       *       *       *


SUNDRIES.

Iowa Lands, Louisiana Churches, Theological Books.

Of the 6,040 acres given to the American Missionary Association by
the Rev. Charles Avery, 1,500 yet remain to be sold. Any person who
would like to make a good investment in land, can do so by applying
to Secretary Strieby at New York. I found that the railway company
were pushing their track along from Algona to Shelby on the Sioux
City & St. Paul Railroad. So the branch from Huntington on the same
road has been built to Sioux Falls in Dakota.

Since the meeting of the Louisiana Conference in April, Rev.
Daniel Clay, and his people at Terrebonne, have enjoyed a revival
of religion which has added thirty-four to the membership. This
sable brother has been the instrumentality in bringing several
of the other pastors of that region into the ministry. Rev. W.
S. Alexander, pastor of the Central Church in New Orleans, and
President of the Straight University, somehow finds time once a
year to visit these brethren and these churches which he broods,
in the Louisiana Conference. He says they are Congregationalists,
_ex-animo_. This Christian worker, who was turned back from his
mission to the nominally Christian lands in South Europe, finds an
admirable substitute in the extreme South of our country.

Those young men who in our Southern institutions are coming on to
be Congregational divines, ought to have access to the theological
literature of the fathers. The common text-book used by their
instructors is Pond’s Theology, issued by our Congregational
Publishing Society. They ought to have in their libraries, as
reference books, the works of Robinson, and Edwards, and Hopkins,
and Bellamy, and Park on the Atonement. Now, these books are
on the shelves of the C. P. Society, and can be had cheap. The
Society has not in hand the means to make the appropriation, but
are there not some of the stanch friends of the old Congregational
Board and its stanch theology, who will be glad to put those works
within the reach of these young theologians of the South? That
would be a handsome thing to do, and grand results may follow
in solidifying the views of those coming preachers. There are
five of these institutions which are teaching theology, and as
many libraries that await such an accession of the wisdom of the
fathers.—_Pilgrim, in Congregationalist._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.

The Peabody Educational Fund.

  The Board of Trustees of the Peabody Educational Fund—George
  Peabody’s gift of $2,100,000 in aid of education in the
  South—held its annual meeting October 2d, in New York City. The
  Treasurer reported receipts of $80,000, and disbursements of
  $77,000. The principal statements of Dr. Sears’s annual report
  were the following:

The year just brought to a close has been one of unusual pecuniary
embarrassment to all the schools of the South. While every
branch of the department of education has been affected by it,
that relating to the employment of teachers has suffered most.
Notwithstanding these discouraging circumstances, the schools
in most of the States, instead of deteriorating, have advanced
in almost every respect. The attendance was never so great;
the interest of the people never so general. An approximation,
near or remote, in the great mass of teachers, to the standard
of those professionally educated, has been effected, sometimes
by county organizations, under State supervision; sometimes by
bringing together teachers from all the counties of a Congressional
district; and, in one instance, by assembling the teachers of a
whole State to receive instruction for a period of six weeks. This
is a new feature in the school operations of the Southern States,
and is now more rapidly revolutionizing modes of instruction than
any other measure that has been tried. No part of the funds at
our disposal has produced greater or better results than that
contributed to this object. The scholarships established last
year have had an excellent effect. Those given to the New Orleans
Normal School, in amounts of $150 each, were used for the benefit
of pupils from the country parishes. They were ten in number. Those
of the Nashville Normal College, of $200 each, were for pupils from
beyond the limits of Tennessee.

The number of white children in Virginia, December 1, 1877, between
five and twenty-one years of age, was 280,149; that of colored
children, 202,640, making in all, 482,789. Of these, 139,931 white
children and 65,043 colored were enrolled in the public schools,
amounting to 204,974, or somewhat less than one-half. The average
daily attendance was only 117,843. The current expenses for the
public schools and school officers were $949,721; and for permanent
improvements in real estate, houses and furniture, $100,625.
Although the current expenses were reduced $36,000, the school work
was increased, and the number of pupils was 5,000 greater than the
year before. It is well known that the State is largely in debt;
and the courts have decided that the school fund may be used for
the benefit of the creditors.

In North Carolina the provisions for education are altogether
inadequate. There is a great lack of funds, and also of proper
organs to execute the law. So long as a meagre State tax is the
sole reliance for the support of schools, they will inevitably
languish. Double the amount of money now raised would be a scanty
supply. The organization of boards of education, and of the other
branches of school administration, is radically defective.

The report of the new Superintendent of South Carolina for 1877
shows that 2,483 schools, with an attendance of 102,396 children,
out of 228,128, were in operation for a period averaging three
months. The State had appropriated $100,000 for their support.

In Georgia, English branches only are taught in the public schools.
The total enrolment in 1877 was 191,000. Of this number, 64,000
were colored children. The school funds amounted to $434,000,
including $143,000 which was raised by towns and cities. There is
a prospect that, under the new Constitution, there will be a large
increase of funds.

A letter from Florida reports that in 1877 there were 30,406
pupils in the public schools—about 4,000 over the number reported
the previous year. There is an improvement also in the quality
of teachers, in the average length of school terms, and in the
interest taken by the people.

Few well-graded and well-taught schools are to be found in Alabama.
The number of children of school age, in 1877, was 369,447; the
number enrolled in the public schools, 141,230, about three-fifths
of whom were white. The school expenditures for teachers and
superintendents were $384,993.

In Mississippi, the Superintendent regards the situation as hopeful
and encouraging. The statistics are very imperfect, as only
sixty-five of the seventy-five counties made any report. These
give 160,528 as the number of children in school, and $481,251 as
the amount of money expended. The enumeration of persons of school
age, giving the number of 324,989, is said to “fall far short of
the actual number.”

In Louisiana there has been a period of careful re-organization
of the public school system, rather than of marked success in
achieving decided results in the educational work of the State.
The loss of the interest on the trust fund for the year, by an
unconstitutional act of the Legislature, and the failure to collect
much over half of the $500,000 appropriated by the State, proved
very prejudicial to the country districts, where the number of
colored children required a much larger number of schools. In the
parishes reported, the aggregate attendance of white children was
16,042, and of colored children, 17,511. There are about 20,000
more colored than white children in the State.

The Secretary of the Board of Education of Texas, writing July 30,
after saying that the reports giving the statistics of the schools
the present year have not yet been received, adds: “Under our
present law, our schools have prospered as they never have before.”

Arkansas has provided for 237 Normal beneficiaries, who are
entitled to four years’ free tuition. There were last year twenty
Normal students in the collegiate course, and thirty-one in the
preparatory school. At Pine Bluff there is a branch Normal college
for colored teachers, arranged on nearly the same plan, and
entitled to the same number of beneficiaries.

The school population of Tennessee, in 1877, was 442,458; 111,523
being colored. The enrolment was 227,643—43,043 being colored; an
increase of 33,463 over the enrolment of the previous year. The
schools have improved as much in the quality of the instruction
given as in the attendance. The amount of school money during the
year was $718,423, which is $120,311 less than that of the year
preceding. Notwithstanding this diminution of funds, the number of
schools was increased by 807, and that of teachers by 791.

West Virginia is one of the least fluctuating of the Southern
States in regard to education, and its history is that of a slow
but steady growth. The number of persons of school age, or from
six to twenty-one years, for the year 1877, was 192,606, being
an increase over the previous year of 7,810. Of these, 125,332
actually attended school, being a numerical increase of attendance
of 1,828 over the preceding year, and an increase in the average
daily attendance of 11,191. There was an increase, also, of 161 in
the number of teachers employed. The total value of school property
in the State is $1,714,600, being an increase on the preceding year
of $54,132. The total expenditure for the year was $921,307, being
a decrease of $65,270, caused mainly by a reduction in the rate of
teachers’ salaries, and in the number of school-houses built during
the year.

During the past year, the income of the fund was distributed as
follows: Virginia, $15,350; North Carolina, $4,500; South Carolina,
$3,600; Georgia, $6,000; Florida, $3,900; Alabama, $1,100; Texas,
$8,550; Mississippi, $600; Louisiana, $8,000; Arkansas, $6,000;
Tennessee, $14,600; West Virginia, $5,050.

       *       *       *       *       *

—A general press dispatch from Washington reports that Mr. Keating,
editor of the Memphis _Appeal_, having had his attention called
to a statement by Dr. Ramsey, of Washington, that white women in
Memphis have had to take colored men for nurses, or go without,
and that the latter have abused their opportunities, pronounces
the story utterly untrue. He says that white women have not been
put to the necessity of taking colored men for nurses; the other
part of the statement is a libel upon the negroes of Memphis. He
says: “All honor to them. They have done their duty. They have
acted by us nobly as policemen and as soldiers, as well as nurses;
they have responded to every call made upon them, in proportion
to their number, quite as promptly as the whites. A few of them
threatened trouble at one time about food, but they were at the
moment suppressed by a company of soldiers of their own color. The
colored people of Memphis as a body deserve well of their white
fellow-citizens. We appreciate and are proud of them.”—_Tribune._

—There is an Episcopal “Theological Seminary and High School” in
Virginia. Several colored young men applied for education for the
ministry, and were turned away, rather than allow them to receive
education with white people.—_Independent._

—A General Missionary Conference will be held in London, Oct.
21st–27th. Among the topics to be discussed are the following,
which bear especially upon the work of the A. M. A.: “Results of
Emancipation, Social and Religious: Probable Influence on Africa,”
by E. B. Underhill, LL.D.; “Discovery in Africa as bearing on the
new Mission Schemes in Central Africa,” by Sir Fowell Buxton. Rev.
Dr. O. H. White, Secretary of the Freedmen’s Aid Society of Great
Britain, will represent the Association in the Conference.

—A company for developing commerce with Africa has been organized,
under the title of the American and African Commercial Company.
Articles of Incorporation have been filed by Congressman Cain, and
Messrs. Watts and Porter, well-known colored men. The Capital Stock
is 500,000.

—The French Roman Catholic Mission here [Zanzibar] has lately
established a station fifteen or twenty miles from Kidudwe, in
the Nguru Country, and now a party of ten Jesuit missionaries are
leaving Bagamoyo to establish a mission at Ujiji.

—The Methodist Mission at Boporo, Africa, east of Liberia, has met
with unexpected repulses. The people wanted trade, and in their
disappointment became hostile to the missionaries. They can obtain
no site for a mission building. The people were forbidden to give
or sell them anything, even to eat, and this interdict had to be
bought off. But the missionaries do not despair.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLORENCE, ALABAMA.

A Good Work Well Finished.

REV. L. C. ANDERSON.

I closed up my work at Florence on the first Sabbath of September.
Rev. William H. Ash was present, to take charge, in good time. The
Lord blessed the end more than the beginning of my labor at F. We
were permitted to work in a revival, beginning about the middle
of August and lasting up to September 1st. This brought out great
numbers of the people, and gave opportunity to reach many. The
Spirit was manifested from the beginning, in converting power.
About twenty were converted, fifteen of whom joined our branch of
God’s Church. So you see that we had great cause to be thankful,
when, on the 1st inst., we came together at the Lord’s Table, to
re-dedicate ourselves to Him who first loved us and gave Himself
for us, to make to Himself a people zealous of good works.

Nothing is more potent than the Spirit of God to break down
opposition and remove prejudice. The outpouring from on high turned
away the stream of opposition, and so melted the hearts of the
people that we could say with David, “Behold, how good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!”

The first part of my labor at F. was a work of sowing, and stirring
up the hearts of Christians, so that, in God’s time, we should
be prepared to enter and gather sheaves for the Master. During my
labor, twenty-one were added to the church, nineteen on profession
of faith. Seven children were christened, and two unworthy members
were cut off. In these seventeen months, the little church of
twenty members became thirty-nine.

Brother Ash enters upon the work with good promise of success, and
has a live church to work with.

       *       *       *       *       *


A MEMPHIS LETTER.

The following letter, from Rev. Mr. Mallory, will explain itself.
It was written immediately after his recovery from the yellow fever:

                                    MEMPHIS, September 27, 1878.

REV. M. E. STRIEBY: _Dear Brother_.—Your kind favor, dated
September 2d, has to-day come to hand, with the $50 all right.
I have not been able to go so far as the post-office before
this, and it lay in the registry office. Thank you for your warm
sympathy. May God reward your kindness. I was quite sick; suffered
considerably from want of proper care, but none from lack of means;
was among the first in our neighborhood to have the fever, and the
people were afraid. With two or three exceptions, every member of
the church remaining in the city had an attack of the fever. A. J.
Barker—one of the oldest, and, as it seemed to me, the man whose
life was most important to the future of the church—has died, and
one other. The loss seems an irreparable one; but the Lord has done
it, and we try to say, “Let Him do to me as seemeth good unto Him.”

In this vicinity, and I think throughout the city proper, the
sickness has greatly abated, but is spreading and increasing
fearfully in the outskirts and adjacent country.

The supplies in the hands of the Howards and Relief Committee are
ample, but there is such a routine imposed upon the poor colored
people that many of them get out of heart before they reach the end.

I will not appropriate any of the $50, but use it among the people.
Had already bought a barrel of meal and side of meat, and begun
work; and now that I can write, will let you hear oftener.

                          Yours, in hope,
                                                  W. W. MALLORY.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW ORLEANS LETTER.

The following letter is one of several received by us in
acknowledgment of moneys sent by and through the Association,
to the sufferers by the yellow fever in the South. It is most
gratifying to know that it has been expended with such care, that a
return of names and amounts given has been made to us:

                                NEW ORLEANS, September 30, 1878.

_My Dear Sir_: Allow me, on behalf of several of our sufferers
from yellow fever, in this city, to thank the American Missionary
Association, through you, for great relief—a draft of $50, sent
them in this time of dire need.

None but they who are here can fully know the terrible suffering to
which our people are reduced; and I beg to assure the Association
that this act of charity will never be forgotten by them.

I sign myself, on their behalf, as well as my own,

                      Yours, very gratefully,
                                                        C. HUNT.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOLARSHIP LETTERS.

Extracts from Students’ Letters to their Benefactors.

                                            STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

_Dear Benefactor_,—I am happy to say that I am at school, striving
to accomplish all I can before the ending of this session. I have
been wonderfully blessed of the Lord these few years that I have
been serving Him; and I cannot stop serving God, he is so kind to
me. O, I love to work for Jesus; He is always willing to help the
poor. Last October I was thinking how I could manage to continue at
school this session, having only $21.50 to commence. I thought that
I would continue trusting the Lord and ask Him to help me. Then I
went to school, and found the teachers ready to receive me. I told
them that I would begin school Nov. 1st. Thus the Lord has blessed
me to commence, and I think He will help me to the end. I wish
again to thank you for the aid you have furnished me toward getting
an education. During the holidays last Christmas I built a house
12×24 for an old gentleman who was very anxious to help me get my
schooling, and he paid me; then I was able to buy an overcoat. If
the Lord is willing, I will continue in school two years longer.
Pray for me that I may be able to help my people.

                                                        C. H. C.


                                              TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

_Dear Sir_,—I am glad to have the opportunity of writing you
this my third letter. You know that this is my third year in the
seminary, and that I was to finish my course of study at the close
of it. Among all my benefactors there are none to whom I feel so
grateful for my education as to you. By the assistance, which I
have received from your charitable hand, I shall be enabled to
complete my studies and enter upon a field of labor at our next
Commencement. It would be impossible for me to repay you for what
you have done for me during these last years of my course, though
I had bags of “fine gold.” I know that my getting an education was
not the ultimate motive that actuated you to give your money; but
that I might be prepared thereby for the Master’s service, and to
go into His vineyard and help build up His kingdom. This is the
fruit which, I perceive, you expect to find growing upon the vines
which you have planted and watered; and, by the help of my Master,
this shall be the labor of my life. I feel that I have a work here
in the South among my people, which God would have me do, that no
other man can do. When I look abroad and see what is to be done
to raise this people out of chaos, and the almost overwhelming
responsibility that is resting on us who are being prepared for the
work, it almost discourages me; but I have made up my mind to die
in the work.

The most encouraging thing among us is the fact that most all
of the schools and colleges which have been founded here for
the education of the colored people are conducted and taught by
Christians. The colored people, though the majority of them are
unlettered men, seek for Christian teachers—even in our common
public schools—as a general thing.

The mission work carried on by the theological students is still
full of interest, and promises a bright future for the many
thousands who are being brought to a knowledge of the truth. The
students of the college go out into all parts of the State and
teach day and Sunday-schools, and by so doing exert a Christian
influence over their pupils.

I trust that the good Master, who sees the doings of all His
children, will increase your store, that you may continue to
help lift up those who are bound to ignorance and degradation.
Remember especially the American Missionary Association, which has
been instrumental in doing so much for the Christian elevation
of this people. It has pressing need of funds to carry its work
successfully.

If I never have the opportunity of writing you again, or of hearing
from you at any time, I trust we shall meet each other in the
kingdom above, where we shall remain together forever, and give God
all majesty and praise.

From your ever grateful servant,

                                                        J. D. S.


                                              HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

_Dear Sir_,—It becomes my delightful as well as grateful task to
drop you a line in recognition of your kindness. The opportunities
for us who were lately transformed from chattels into citizens to
enjoy the advantages of a collegiate or theological training are
a rarity. Schools, seminaries, universities are many; they abound
in every quarter; but we are either barred out of them by poverty
on the one hand or proscription on the other. Therefore, when the
philanthropic hearts of our friends at home and abroad are moved
to institute places of learning for our benefit, and aid us in
securing the wherewithal to attend them, we experience a joy, an
inward pleasure, a sense of gratitude, I may say, unspeakable.

Our University, I am glad to say, is in a prosperous condition; no
opposition daunts it in its upward march, and I am warranted by
every circumstance in heralding the fact that “we are rising.” I
entered the Theological Department here last autumn and am pursuing
a regular course. If at the completion of my studies I shall go
into the world and shall there prove faithful to my trust, fulfil
the office of the ministry, reflect honor upon this institution and
credit upon myself, then I shall feel that your kind benefaction
was not bestowed in vain. Accept my sincere thanks for the interest
thus manifested in our welfare.

                                                        W. A. S.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MENDI MISSION.

Annual Meeting of the Missionaries—The Board of Counsel and Advice.

The missionaries of the Mendi Mission are, in accordance with the
instructions of the Executive Committee, organized into a Board of
Counsel and Advice. In this capacity they met at Good Hope Station,
August 7th, 1878: Rev. Floyd Snelson, President; Rev. A. P. Miller,
Secretary. After devotional exercises, with which each session
opened and closed, committees were appointed on church work, school
work, agricultural work, extension of mission work, reception of
scholars, buildings, &c.

We give the reports of these committees in whole or in part, as
presenting a clear view of the work in hand, and its wants. We
submit the question also with confidence, whether this band of
colored men does not, by this careful and business-like survey
of its work, approve itself as well qualified to carry on the
important mission which has been assigned its members in their
far-off fatherland.


The Report of Committee on Buildings.

We, your committee on buildings, beg leave to submit the following
report. On entering the field we found all the buildings at Good
Hope in a dilapidated condition, three in number, namely, the
mission-house, chapel and school-house. The latter was a mere
wreck, having been covered with bamboo, which was completely
rotten. This allowed the rain to pass through, which hastened its
ruin. As we desired to open school and at once proceed to work, we
were compelled to repair it. As one of our first duties, the whole
building was made anew, and also enlarged at a cost of about £100.

The chapel, too, was in a similar state, although it was covered
with boards and tin. The school was held in this during the time
of repairing the school-building. As soon as this was completed we
proceeded to the repairing of the chapel. From this we went to the
mission-house, which we found to need more repairs than we could
possibly make before the rains fully set in.

The first work was to begin the covering of this, that the
building, with its contents, might be protected during the rains,
though we were interrupted frequently, being called to the
repairing of the floor, which was fast decaying. We could not cover
the whole of the building before the rains had fully set in. The
remainder of the roof was patched so that it might serve through
this season.

Since the rains commenced some internal repairs have been made. We
recommend that the remainder of this building be covered as soon as
the weather will permit, and that all or a greater part of it be
painted.

We have also been trying to enclose the premises, but under much
difficulty. This is very much needed, that cattle roaming about may
be kept out.

At Avery we found three buildings, namely, the mission-house,
chapel, freight-house; in addition to these a mill-shed, the three
former in good condition. Adjacent to the house is an ell built for
a kitchen, bath-house and store. Under the chapel is a room for a
school; adjacent to this is another room, used both for school and
sewing-room. Also, at the freight-house is a shed-extension used as
a lumber wharf. The mill is in a decaying condition, the greater
part of it being covered with bamboo, which was rotten, and allowed
the rains to pass through, greatly to the injury of the frame-work
and the mill apparatus generally. Repairs have been made on this
roof more or less ever since our coming on the field. Still, we
regret to say that this work is not as yet completed. Repairs
have also been made on the under part of the shed, a water-trunk,
saw-lever, etc., have been replaced, yet much more is needed to put
this structure in good condition, which we deem best to have done
during the next dry season. Again, there are other things that must
be supplied as early as possible—rubber-belts, etc. The belts, we
are informed, have already been ordered by the Executive Committee.
As it is so difficult to pass up the ascent from the front wharf to
the house, we recommend the construction of an elevated stairway,
which would put the whole place in a good condition.

At Debia, we found also one building in a dilapidated condition,
namely, the teachers’ home—a structure enclosed with rough
boards—three rooms and a bamboo roof. This roof, like most others
on the field, was almost worthless. It has been re-covered, and
is used at present for school purposes. Previous to our coming on
the field, a country building had been erected for a chapel and
school, which for want of attention had gone to decay. If this work
is to be continued, it is quite necessary that a better building
be erected for the same purposes, so that the persons teaching and
carrying on the religious work there, may have the use of the house
and reside upon the field. Each of the above stations has one or
more country buildings erected for different purposes.

We submit all to your consideration.


The Report of Committee on Agricultural Work.

Your committee on agricultural work beg leave to say that at Good
Hope, according to records left at this station, there are four
hundred acres of land under the control of the Mendi Mission, some
of which we think might be very profitably put under cultivation.
But we regret to say that we have no means other than hoes and
cutlasses to begin such a work.

It was our purpose on entering the field to do something in this
direction. Therefore we began to clear the land, turning over
some with hoes; but as the premises were not enclosed, and cattle
were roaming over them, it was impossible for us to plant to
any advantage. Therefore the first part of our work had to be
abandoned, and we are giving our attention to the fencing of the
premises, with a view to doing something in the agricultural work
at the opening of the next season.

The records show that a hundred and sixty acres of land are under
control of our mission, at Avery. About eight of these are cleared
off, including yard. Three hundred and six coffee-trees are growing
on said land. The trees are not in a very promising condition, and
we are unable to say as yet what the result will be. The land is
very hilly, yet a small portion of it might be utilized to some
profit, but must first be cleared. All such work will necessitate
an additional expense, the returns of which we need not expect to
realize very soon, yet will tend to advance civilization.


Report of Committee on Church Work.

Your committee on church work beg leave to submit to you the
following report. We regret to say that on entering the work at
Good Hope Station, we found the church abandoned, the doors having
been closed for months, since the death of the Rev. Barnabas Root.
Many of the members had united with the Church Mission Society.

We re-organized with as much of the old element as willingly
returned, and set to persuading others who knew not Christ to come
into the fold, and we rejoice to say that our efforts have been
blessed. Twenty-two new converts have been added, mostly from among
the pupils of the mission, and some who serve as laborers; nearly
all from the native element, whose eyes have been opened to the
truth as it is in Christ Jesus, and have learned to love Him.

Now our number of regular members is forty-four. In addition to
these we have baptized ten children. Our church is in a healthy
condition, and attended mostly by a native element, preached to
through an interpreter. The attendance is good, and at times our
accommodations are not sufficient. We hope soon to see many others
coming into the kingdom.

We have also organized a Literary Society, which adds greatly to
the interest of our work. This meets the first and second Fridays
in each month, in our chapel. But like all other departments of
our work, this is greatly retarded by continued rains. We hope to
redeem the time when the dry season sets in again.

Our hours of conducting services at Good Hope Station are,
on the Sabbath, preaching at 11 A. M., Sunday-school at 3 P. M.,
and prayer-meeting or preaching at 7 P. M. We have also a
prayer-meeting Wednesday evening, and one every morning, very
early, for the benefit of laborers and natives generally.


At Mannah Bargroo Station, or Avery,

we have a new chapel, which has been opened since our coming to the
field. Meetings were conducted in the first part of the year by
Bro’s James and White. The people became more and more interested
in these meetings. Since the arrival of the new missionaries, Rev.
A. E. Jackson has been put in charge of that work, and regular
preaching services, together with prayer-meetings, have been kept
up.

A number of the old members from Good Hope Church, and those who
have been converted, have been brought together, their names
enrolled, and other preparations made, looking forward to an
early organization, which, we hope, will take place as soon as
the weather will allow. Seven adults have been baptized and four
children. The whole number enrolled is thirty. There is great
interest manifested among others whom we hope soon to see converted.

We have preaching services at eleven A. M., Sunday-school at two
P. M., prayer-meeting at seven P. M. Also a Thursday evening
prayer-meeting. There is a preaching station outside the mission.


Report of Committee on School Work.

Your committee on school work beg leave to report to the members
of the Board of Counsel and Advice, the progressive state of
the schools both at Good Hope and Avery, under the existing
circumstances. The progress of the schools is wonderful when
compared with the chances of the scholars. The advantages have been
poor, as we have been trying to fight without arms for the last
nine months. We have been, and are now, almost altogether without
books, which not only discourages teachers and pupils, but is also
a great loss to the scholars and the general work. [Provision was
made for a supply of books from England, but a misunderstanding led
to delay; the books have since been sent from this country.—ED.]
As time with missionaries is something in Africa, where so much
darkness prevails, we lay before you the real needs of our schools.

Many of our scholars attend school with only a handkerchief as a
garment, tied around their necks, hanging somewhat cloak-fashion.

School is taught at Debia. The prospect does not seem very hopeful,
yet more so than at any time previous. The people are very poor,
and are not able to supply the wants of their children. A larger
number could be brought in if we were to aid them a little. This,
we hope, we shall be able to do, to some extent, in future, as we
trust we shall be so advised by the committee at New York.

The Sunday-schools, no small factor in our work, are in a
flourishing condition. We stand in great need of Sunday-school
books, papers, mottoes, etc., which, we hope, will soon be supplied
us.

Our aim is to train up young men and young women, who may go forth
into this broad continent, and carry the light to those benighted
ones whom we are unable to reach. Therefore, we recommend to this
body the importance of establishing, at whatever station in their
judgment seems best, a High School for the purpose of training up
persons to be missionaries to the dying millions in the interior,
with hope of the approval of the Executive Committee at New York.


On Reception of Scholars at the Stations.

The Board resolved itself into a Committee of the whole to discuss
this question, after which the following resolution was unanimously
adopted:

_Resolved_: That experience has convinced us that it is absolutely
necessary to keep a Boarding Department, to some extent, at each of
the stations, viz., Good Hope, Avery and Debia.

(1) Because the people are unable to continue their scholars in
school as necessity demands, to fit them for missionary work as
suggested by the Executive Committee.

(2) The people on the whole are not sufficiently acquainted with
the benefits of an education to compel the attendance of their
children, even if they were able.

(3) We can never train up persons to serve as assistants in
missionary work without taking them from under the unwholesome
influence of their parents, and placing them under Christian
influence.

(4) Therefore, seeing the difficulties which exist from having to
receive the material upon which we are to work sent us at the will
of the parents, we recommend to the Committee at New York that
each station be allowed to retain as many scholars as can be well
provided for. We submit this to your weighty consideration.


Extension of Mission-Work

was discussed by the Board. This is a question of great importance,
and to carry our views into effect, will necessarily require a
large sum of money. We regret to say that from the outset we
have been greatly embarrassed, in attempting to extend our work,
because of the want of means with which to do it. And we are no
more encouraged now, from the fact that we are continually being
instructed by the Committee that the means are short, and we must
curtail expenses. At present we have not a dollar to do this, and
we are unable to tell when we shall have. In our view, there are
many places which could be opened and worked up with great success.
But our present situation forbids any attempt. We hope the change
may be such soon that we shall be able to do something in this
direction, as we consider this to be one of the purposes for which
we were sent out.

                                         REV. A. P. MILLER, Sec.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


FORT BERTHOLD, D. T.

REV. C. L. HALL, MISS’Y OF THE A. B. C. F. M.


Yeast.

So Kingsley entitles one of his books; and we may give the name to
all those influences which help in preparing the bread of life for
this people, or in preparing them to receive it.

First comes the article itself; we have been furnishing them with
it to make wholesome bread. Their Indian way of preparing flour,
is to fry soggy dough in a panful of grease over a fire made of
sticks in the centre of the lodge. Any one who goes back with
longing memories to the old days of open fireplace cookery, may
enjoy it to his heart’s content without the least contamination
with modern conveniences in, a Ree or Gros Ventres or Mandan
earth-covered lodge in this place, a journey of only two or three
days by railroad and steamboat from Minneapolis. The Indians,
however, take kindly to cooking-stoves when our “Uncle” furnishes
them; and we are trying, as the first requisite of household
health, to teach them to make good bread. Our first step was
to create a desire for it, by giving them good bread. But the
preference for “white man’s bread” has been created, and the cry
for yeast to make it has been daily heard at our door this summer.
Lately, we have said, “no more yeast,” but “go and pick hops, and
we will teach you how to make yeast”; and specimens of gathered
hops are exhibited. It is a great gain to have the people eating
wholesome food, for the want of which, in their changed condition
of life, and the absence of the former abundance of game, they are
dying off. It is greater gain to have them beginning in any way
to make home more comfortable, attractive, decent; to have the
women improving in cooking, and tidiness of home management; the
men drawn to an interest in building better houses; the family to
have an ambition for doors and windows and bedsteads, and cups and
saucers and tables, and cupboards made of old boxes with calico
curtains. But chiefly is it gain to get through such work the
confidence and the hearts of the people, that we may lead them to
Christ; and if yeast will set the leaven at work by which we may
leaven the whole lump, we say, _Amen_!


Flowers.

We have not limited ourselves to yeast. On Friday afternoons we
have given the children who attended regularly, a good meal at a
table, with all the accessories of a Christian board, including
grace. Other little means of attracting the people to higher things
have been beautiful clusters of scarlet blossoms, blooming all the
season on the fence, and handsome dahlias and zinnias and four
o’clocks, by the house. Groups of little Indians stand open-mouthed
before them, or some old woman, with her willow-basket full of
corn or squashes on her back, is attracted and cheered by these
beauties—gifts of God’s love. That they do notice the flowers at
all is a hopeful sign. Early in the spring, I picked a bluebell,
and spoke of its beauty to an Indian man who was helping me set
fence posts. He said, with a scornful expression at my ignorance:
“That isn’t anything, it isn’t good to eat.”


Farming.

Then they study our garden, with its variety of different
vegetables and roots, and its young trees. They are doing well at
agriculture—better than most Indians in the territory of Dakota.
This year their crops of corn, potatoes, squashes and beans are
large and fine; but they raise nothing else; and they have not
learned to care for stock, to milk, to make butter, and grow feed
for cattle. They do not put up hay for their ponies, but let them
grow poor during the winter, on such dried grass, and corn-stalks,
and cotton-wood bark as they can pick up on the prairie or the
bottoms by the Missouri. They are not of much value in harness, but
are one with their rider, and endure fatigue and hunger with him
marvellously. They think I ought to keep a horse. I tell them my
cow gives milk and butter, and their horses don’t. So they look on
at our methods of life, and see their superiority; and gradually
want to copy them.


Death.

We have striven to open the way for the Gospel by sympathy with,
and help for, the sick and dying. One young man among the Mandans
died last year as I stood beside him. Before he grew unconscious,
he had said to his friend that the white people were coming for
him, and he was going. Perhaps some revelation of heaven and God’s
love came to him in that shape. There was a woman once who touched
only the hem of a garment. There is One who does not quench the
smoking flax. Another poor consumptive died this spring, telling
her people not to believe what bad Indians said about our malign
influences; that we were good; that if she got well she would come
to church; that father and mother must not grieve for her, but, if
they felt sad, go to us to be comforted. God has been teaching us
how to comfort bereaved parents and friends by taking away our own
baby, Harry, to the home over there. An atmosphere of sorrow is
about all our Dakota mission-stations. Mrs. Thomas Riggs has been
suddenly taken from a useful, active life, near Fort Sully, D. T.,
and lies buried on her field of work; and Mrs. Renville is taken
from the Flandreau people, and Miss Williamson from the Yankton
people. But “sorrow is the atmosphere that ripens hearts for
heaven,” and, ripe for heaven, they are best for earthly usefulness
also.


Conversions.

The white employés and white men living among the Indians were all
interested this spring, and we hope there were several conversions
and much good influence at work. One young man, born of missionary
parents in the South Seas, who had wandered here from England and
from the Lord, we trust has gone back home to live a better life.
One man, with a half-breed family, said: “The white people have
been teaching the Indians better ways of living; then you have had
school, a good school, and now we are going to have church and
religion, and do better.” God grant it, but we have to sow and
wait, and wait. Our seasons are short, our spiritual zone northern.
Yet God will conquer!

From Devil’s Lake three or four days’ hard travel across the
prairies to the north-east, there came a word of cheer in the early
summer. Some, especially one man who had been under missionary
influence in the Southern part of our Territory, but apparently
cared for none of these things, came to see us, and to sympathize
with us in our loss (he had lost children), and to get what help he
could from us in understanding his Bible, and teaching his friends
to read. He went away with the urgent request that we come to
Devil’s Lake and preach to them.

Devil’s Lake is a Roman Catholic agency, and they do not preach to
them in their own tongue. One thing is certain: if the sons are
to talk English to us, we must preach in the Indian tongue to the
fathers.

       *       *       *       *       *


LAKE SUPERIOR AGENCY.

I. L. MAHAN, AGENT, BAYFIELD, WIS.


A Merciful Man, etc.

I am glad to report the following, as one of quite a number of
instances that have come within my own knowledge. Last fall, in
obedience to the request of twelve of my Indians, I estimated for
twelve cows and calves, but received only eight. In consequence
of this failure, four of my people were disappointed, after
having harvested, at their own expense, a sufficient amount of
food to supply the cattle during the winter (by no means an easy
undertaking for an Indian). The disappointed ones, however,
took the ill luck philosophically, and made the best of the
disappointment. They earnestly besought me to try again, and, if
possible, get the cows and calves. I did try, and secured each of
the four a good cow and calf, for which they each worked upon their
own 80s in clearing, etc., under the direction of the Government
farmer, thirty-eight days, and received each a cow and calf, and
drove them to their houses. A few weeks after, a report came to me
that Henry Buffalo was sadly neglecting his cow and calf; that he
had secured each to a stake, driven in the ground for the purpose,
and had taken his family on a visit to an adjoining settlement, a
few miles away, leaving the cow and calf without food to eat or
water to drink for days at a time. This, to me, seemed terrible
treatment, and I set myself about an investigation, and found
that, upon the occasion above referred to, the Indians in the
vicinity had all gone to attend church service some miles distant,
they having word of the coming of a favorite priest. Friends had
advised the stake arrangement—the fences not being considered
strong—and made preparations for Henry, in order to induce him to
go. He started, but looking back, took pity upon the dumb brute,
and returned and remained at home all day, feeding and watering his
cow and calf, and using an evergreen brush to keep the flies off.
The report was founded upon the fact that his house was locked up.
Such care and sympathy is worthy of reward.


An Industrious Builder.

The other day an Indian applied to me for lumber and nails to
finish his barn, that he might have a floor to thresh his grain
upon. The lumber and nails were furnished him, and, on inquiry, I
learned that he had stripped a sufficient number of cedar trees
of bark to cover his barn; and not having horses or cattle, had
transported it in a small boat, upon the lake, to the nearest point
toward his house, and then packed it upon his back one and a half
miles. Do you say such zealous and fatiguing labor does not deserve
its reward?


Smart Surveying.

The Lac Courte D’Oreille reservation is located in the north-west
corner of Chippewa county, near the intersection of Ashland and
Burnett counties. It was selected, undoubtedly, for the timber,
although some very fine farming-land has been found. The Indians
made choice of this region of country on account of the very fine
groves of sugar-maple and the large number of inland lakes; but
the white man, who defines the boundaries, took occasion to so run
the lines that the most of the maple-groves and many of the lakes
are left out, and the Indians have a reservation running from
south-west to north-west about thirty miles, and from north-west
to south-east but about three or four miles. Upon this reservation
we have made 160 allotments of eighty acres to individuals, and
many good farms have been opened without very much encouragement
from the Department, as the Indians long for their patents, as in
the case of Red Cliff and Bad River. In passing up the Lac Courte
D’Oreille River, I found five new log-houses, and, in one case,
about ten acres cleared, and all planted. There are perhaps twenty
or twenty-five other houses, that have been built by Indians
without any individual aid from Government. They have improved the
roads across the reservation. They have some stock, but are sadly
in need of more.


No Civilizing Measures.

Belonging to the Lac du Flambeau reserve are 542 Indians, who live
almost entirely by trapping, hunting and fishing. They are rovers
in every sense of the word, having no houses or permanent homes,
save the starry-decked heavens. They are visited each year by the
Agent; and such goods and supplies as the Department furnishes are
distributed to them as presents. The appropriations are not large
enough to supply employés; therefore, no civilizing measures have
been introduced here. Five thousand dollars a year, judiciously
expended for labor, in building houses, clearing land, and
supplying cattle to these Indians, would, in a very short period,
place them beyond want; while the present policy—of leaving them
to their own inclinations—will make a class of miserable paupers,
without knowledge or disposition to be anything else; and the State
will sooner or later be called upon to step in between the Indians
and the general Government, and exercise some of its Christian
charities. These Indians must be aided, or they are lost beyond
redemption.


A Farmer on a Rock.

The Bois Forte bands, numbering 797 Indians, have a reservation of
107,509 acres, lying in unsurveyed territory, about forty miles
north-west of Vermillion Lake, in Minnesota. They have mingled with
the whites but little; therefore have but few of their vices. They
roam, fish, hunt and trap for a livelihood. They dress in civilized
costumes, and a few of them sow and plant and harvest, live in
houses, and have some of the ordinary home comforts; but they are
few indeed. They have been banished to perhaps the most wretched of
all lands, or rock, in North Minnesota. Their treaty stipulates
that a farmer shall be provided. A farmer! Think of it—on such
a rock! The explorers report not a spot upon which to plant a
potato. There is not a road within forty miles of the reservation.
The treaty is rapidly passing away—half gone; soon they will have
nothing left. We would most earnestly renew our recommendation of
last year, that about 1,000 acres of land on the south side of
Vermillion Lake, be set aside for agricultural and educational
purposes, and that the Bois Forte Indians be induced to select
homes and settle thereon; that the boundary be defined, and that
the employés be permanently located.


Schools.

Our schools have been well attended. Books for more advanced
scholarship have been a constant demand, and the statistics from
teachers and farmers show a gradual improvement. The free-lunch
system at Red Cliff and Bad River has been continued all year, and
is, without doubt, the most successful medium through which to
reach poor and hungry children.


The Wisconsin Scare,

as it is called, might have reached immense proportions had not
the officers of the Indian Bureau taken a firm stand against
the possibility of such a thing as an Indian outbreak among the
Chippewas. The Chippewas have grievances that would make white men
tear their hair and howl from one end of the country to the other;
but they prefer to submit quietly and peaceably to the powers that
be, praying without ceasing, hoping continually that the good men
of the Great Father’s household will yet hear and answer their
petitions by the necessary legislations.

       *       *       *       *       *


RED LAKE AGENCY, MINNESOTA.

School, Church, Farm, Mill, etc.

C. P. ALLEN, M. D.

This reservation embraces about 3,200,000 acres of land, of which
one-third is supposed to be tillable; two-thirds wooded, grazing
and worthless.

Perhaps the most gratifying feature of the work here is the
successful opening of a fully equipped boarding-school in November
last. Ten boys and as many girls were taken, clothed and fed; the
girls were taught to wash, mend, knit, cook, keep house; and the
boys were taught to cut and prepare fuel, to plow, plant, grub, do
fence and farm work. In addition to the twenty boarding pupils,
there were some twenty day-scholars, so that the present capacity
of the school is filled. The results are very gratifying.

The missionary work has been under the auspices of the Protestant
Episcopal Mission, who sent last year two native clergymen to labor
here; one died in September, 1877. This year, three others have
been sent to labor here and across the Lake, where no missionary
work has been done, and where the Indians oppose any work of the
kind. A church edifice is in process of building, to be completed
by December 1st.

Progress is seen in the extent of land in cultivation, in largely
increased crops, in fencing made, better dwellings, more stoves,
tables, chairs, crockery, better clothing, greater cleanliness,
more wash-boards and wash-tubs in use, more comfortable homes; more
stock each year; a growing desire to have their children educated;
more knitting and sewing done than formerly. Owing to a general
lack of snow and water, less has been accomplished this season than
usual in the way of building houses, as we had little lumber to
build with, although logs were cut, preparatory to driving to mill,
to the amount of over 100,000 feet.

Arrangements are about completed for putting in here a substantial
little flour-mill this fall, to convert their wheat into nice
flour. This will prove a great incentive to increased labor
in clearing up land and raising more wheat. This again, will
conduce to improved health, as much of their sickness arises from
insufficient food, and that of poor quality.

During the last year a new source of revenue has been developed,
which is _Senega root_. Of this, they have dug nearly $4,000
worth, and the supply is not exhausted.

This tribe is not decreasing in number, the births fully equaling
the deaths. What we need is to cultivate _individuality_; to treat
the Indians as men and women, not as parts of a tribe; to allot
lands in severalty, giving them titles to their homes.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas O. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Wiley, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *

In place of our usual communication from Superintendent Pond, which
he has not been able to send us, on account of special pressure in
his work, we reprint from a California paper the following article
by Rev. Dr. M. C. Briggs, one of the leading men in the Methodist
Episcopal denomination in California. It embodies very important
truth in a most sprightly and incisive style.—[ED’S AM. MISS.]


CHINAPHOBIA.

“Bring me to the test, and I the matter will re-word that madness
gambols at.” This sentence from Shakspeare (I hope it is correctly
quoted) is the sole partition between our Assemblymen and a charge
of confirmed monomania. All roads lead to Paris, and all subjects
of discussion lead these astute Solons to John Chinaman. To assert
your philanthropy, curse the Chinese. To prove your patriotism,
denounce the Chinese. To abate land monopoly, abuse the Chinese.
To eradicate the social evil, grow furious over the Chinese. To
regulate finances, tax the Chinese. To quell incendiary mobs,
displace the Chinese, and put ruffians in their stead. To pass
the Bland bill, expel the Chinese. To effect resumption, crucify
the Chinese. To ensure commercial prosperity, exclude forever the
Chinese. To show your faith in the Declaration of Independence,
levy a high tariff on the bones of the Chinese. To reclaim our
swamp lands, howl at the Chinese. To encourage citizens to furnish
free meals for white tramps, who refuse to work at any price, drive
out from our kitchens the Chinese, who to-day receive higher wages
than white men and women are getting in any State east of the Rocky
Mountains. To show yourself a hero, hurl brickbats at the Chinese.
From whatever point of the political or moral compass these broad
and eloquent men set out, they are sure to end with a stereotyped
spasm on the stereotyped topic—the infernal Chinese. Such untiring
repetitiousness grows stale, and one almost wishes that the
“nigger” or the Hottentot, or any human being without a vote, would
appear on the political tapis, to offer leather-lunged demagogueism
a chance for variety, and the weary ears of the people a rest.
Nasby’s patent question, “If the nigger is set free, whom will the
Democrats find to look down on?” has been answered to the glory and
delectation of both the old parties, and, pre-eminently, of the new
party, which has nothing American about it save whisky and brag.

The republic is sick. It has gastric fever, gout, goitre, gangrene,
scrofula, sciatica, croup, consumption, ophthalmia, vertigo,
small-pox, and cholera. It has eaten too much, drank too much,
danced too much, flirted too much, smoked too much, gambled too
much, run riot in frivolity, gone mad in greed, flaunted its
pageantry of pride, coveted, lusted, blasphemed, forsaken God,
despised religion, loved leasing, and hated honest toil, with its
health-giving frugality and slow but solid gains. Poor patient!
It needs skilful treatment; and what will these queer doctors do?
Why, they propose to force emetics and drastics down the throats
of ever so many Chinamen. If the case were not so serious, it
would be infinitely funny. The patient has brain fever. Kick the
Chinaman. It has palpitation. Cuff the Chinaman. It is shaking with
chills from Maine to Mexico. Pull the pigtails of the Chinaman.
Banks are breaking in New York. Set the dogs on the Chinamen.
Mercantile houses are tumbling into ruins in Massachusetts. Arrest
the Chinaman on suspicion. Finances are deranged, and Congress is
quarreling over resumption. Shoot the Chinamen. The South needs
pacification. Cut the throats of the Chinamen. Industry flags
everywhere. Get up processions, and raid on the wash-houses of the
Chinamen. Wages are six bits a day, without board, in the Eastern
States. Banish the Chinamen from California forever and forever.
Hurrah!!

There was once a doctor who was “death on burns.” These gentlemen
are not a whit behind him, only their specialty, into which they
resolve all wounds and diseases, is the Chinese pest, _alias_
the Asiatic nuisance, _alias_ the Cooly invasion, _alias_ the
cheap-labor plague of the Pacific Coast.

What repose it gives a State to have wise and just men at the
helm of affairs! This epidemic rage—as unstatesmanlike as it is
unphilanthropic—so prevalent in the halls of legislation just
now, merits the sarcasm of a Lord Brougham. Yet I accord to our
Representatives a fair measure of good intentions. The Chinese have
no votes, and are not patrons of the press; therefore, it is safe
to denounce them. Besides, just now it promises to be a paying as
well as a perilless pastime. The rioters have ballots in their
hands. “Pathric” counts one (sometimes two or ten) at the polls;
and who will defend John? “Pathric” does not care to remember that
he was threatened with expulsion on similar grounds, and with
equally cogent reasons, in the bygone. It will be well for him to
recall the fact; for when once the principle of discrimination is
incorporated into the policy of the nation, the bolt that hits John
to-day may chance to strike some one else to-morrow. When caste and
caprice usurp the place of justice and humanity, every man will
thenceforth hold life, liberty and property by sufferance of the
mob. It is natural to the weak side of public men, to court the
voters’ favor. Not many politicians are tall enough to look over
the heads of stump orators and bannered agitators. Has the good God
no taller men to send us for these agitated times?

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN OLD-TIME PRAYER MEETING.

Among the many things which I have observed is the singular form of
worship which the colored people practice here. While at Hampton
last term, I read Livingstone’s book about Africa. Some of the
religious customs related in that volume have certainly been
brought over by our forefathers, and are in this enlightened land
found mingled with the true religion. The great belief which our
people have in conjuration, (or “throwing for each other,” as they
call it) signs, and the returning of departed spirits, confirm the
above opinion. Not long ago I went to one of their meetings. It was
held in a little church about twenty-two or twenty-three feet long,
and twelve feet wide, with three windows, which have shutters of
plank, through which, when shut, little or no air can pass. In the
middle of the floor sits a large stove in which a very hot fire was
kept during the meeting. The preacher was to have come that night,
but for some reason he disappointed them. His absence, however, did
not prevent their having an “Old-time prayer-meeting,” as they call
it. So, after waiting for some time for their pastor to arrive,
they commenced the meeting by singing a hymn, given out by one
called “the leader of the band.” Prayer and a short exhortation
came next. Indeed, these two parts of the opening exercises were
well performed by a young man. But, in the scene which followed
his excellent prayer and advice, he (though somewhat intelligent)
was one of the chief actors. One or two more hymns were sung from
the hymn-book. I heard some of the women say: “If those men don’t
stop singing those dry tunes we’ll take our bonnets and go home.”
By the women ceasing to sing, the men discovered that there was
something going wrong. The “leader of the band” seems to have seen
at a moment’s glance what caused the commotion, and immediately
struck up the well-known “I, John, Saw.” The women now joined in;
and the woods and hills rang with the resounding melodies of that
music which has never known a teacher, but yet is wonderful and
almost sublime. While this “shout” was being sung the men and women
gathered around the stove, the men on one side and the women on
the other. The church by this time had become full of people. One
could not kneel down without leaning on some one else. All three
of the windows were shut, and the shutters closed. A fire was in
the stove. Soon a sickening feeling came over me, caused by the
impure air which pervaded the place. I asked one who was standing
near the window to please open it. “You want us to freeze, don’t
you?” said he. I looked up, and, to my great satisfaction, found
that the roof was full of holes, and I knew that hot air rises, so
I said no more to the man about the window. The “leader” had now
become too warm it seemed, for while we were at prayers he took
off his coat and rolled up his sleeves, exclaiming at the same
time, “Get ready, children, we are going to drive out the devil
to-night!” The others, as soon as they saw him without a coat,
immediately disrobed themselves of theirs. Had I expected to see
such heathenism I am sure I would not have gone to the meeting.
After this there came a tumult and excitement—women jumping among
the men, men holding each other; some of the young girls uttering
screams which really could have been heard a mile; and some tearing
their clothes off without regard to womanly modesty. But what
discouraged me most was to find among this seething mass some of
my school-children. After the meeting was over, and all on our way
home, a shameful fight came off between two of the leading shouters
(females), about something which had been said during the meeting.

What shall I say, having seen such degrading things with my own
eyes, (and I have not told the worst). All I can say is this: Let
us work on with our might, and hope for better things. “For if God
be for us, who can be against us?”

—_Student’s letter in the Southern Workman._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR SEPTEMBER, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $161.98.

    Bangor. Hammond St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   100.00
    Brewer. M. Hardy                                          20.00
    Bridgton. “Dean,” First Cong. Ch.                          5.00
    Castine. Rev. A. E. Ives                                   2.00
    East Madison. Eliza Bicknell                               5.00
    Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch.                             17.15
    Portland. Williston Cong. Ch.                             10.83
    St. Albans. Rev. Wm. S. Sewall                             2.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $493.07.

    Amherst. “Friends” ($5 of which _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._)                                      14.75
    Alstead. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          3.24
    Atkinson Depot. Gyles Merrill $50; Mrs. Gyles
      Merrill $25; Mrs. Betsey Bartlett $50                  125.00
    Campton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.35
    Colebrook. Mrs. Benj. Gilman                               1.50
    Derry. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          13.81
    Fitzwilliam. Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Hill                      5.00
    Gilmanton Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       8.50
    Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.85
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $141.73; Second
      Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. $2.53                          144.26
    Mason. Mason Division of the N. H. Memorial
      Union, _for Wilmington, N. C._                           7.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      76.56
    Merrimac. “Ladies.”                                        9.00
    Nashua. Sab. Sch. Class by Mrs. Saunders, _for
      Wilmington, N. C._                                       2.00
    Piermont. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 26.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.00
    Tamworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.00
    Wolfborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     20.25


  VERMONT, $565.25.

    Coventry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.35
    Craftsbury. Dea. J. W.                                     1.00
    Bethel. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.60
    Brattleborough. Centre Ch.                                37.86
    Derby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 10.00
    Essex Junction. E. T. M.                                   1.00
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.00
    Plainfield. ESTATE of Catharine Shepard, by
      Willard S. Martin, Adm’r.                              350.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                      22.28
    St. Johnsbury. East Cong. Ch., Rev. J. P.
      Humphrey and wife                                       20.00
    Shelburn. “A Friend.”                                     25.00
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    West Derby. Col. by Rev. S. S. Nickerson                   3.33
    West Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             6.15
    West Westminster. “A Friend.”                              5.00
    Williamsville. Emory Dunklee                               3.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             9.68


  MASSACHUSETTS, $1,988.39.

    Amesbury. Mrs. A. L. Bayley                               20.00
    Andover. South Cong. Ch. and Soc. $300; West
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. $29.75                              329.75
    Bernardston. Cong. Ch.                                     8.00
    Bradford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        62.45
    Brocton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc. $31.42;
      Mrs. Mary E. Perkins $5                                 36.42
    Boston. Central Ch.                                        5.00
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              50.00
    Charlemont. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         48.33
    Coleraine. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
    Conway. D. L.                                              1.00
    Dedham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               180.33
    Dorchester Village. Cong. Ch. $20.01, and Sab.
      Sch. $17.20                                             37.21
    East Hampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    84.57
    East Longmeadow. Mrs. G. W. C.                             1.00
    East Taunton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.19
    Enfield. ESTATE of J. B. Woods, by W. B.
      Kimball, Ex.                                           100.00
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. $29.64; “A Friend”
      $2                                                      31.64
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch. $63.31; First
      Cong. Ch. $10.75; Miss Janette Thompson
      $5.—Ladies $18, _for Student Aid, Atlanta,
      Ga._                                                    97.06
    Greenwich Village. Daniel Parker                           5.00
    Groton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.79
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                       15.75
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., by Mrs. P. J.
      Claflin                                                150.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         16.00
    Littleton. Ladies’ Mission Circle                          4.70
    Lowell. N. C. Wiley                                       25.00
    Medford. Mystic Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       148.45
    Millbury. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                    7.05
    Montague. Cong. Ch.                                       11.20
    Monson. Ladies, bbl. of C. and $3 _for Freight_            3.00
    Newburyport. Belleville Cong. Ch.                         57.46
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                50.00
    Oakham. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., bbl. of C.
      Orange. Cong. Ch.                                       11.86
    Quincy. F. Hardwick $100; Evan. Cong. Ch. and
      Soc. $20                                               120.00
    Rehoboth. F. A. B.                                         1.00
    Shelburn. Cong. Ch.                                       63.75
    Sherborn. “A Friend.”                                      3.00
    South Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        16.13
    Spencer. “A Friend” in First Ch.                          10.00
    Sudbury. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., bbl. of C. and $2
      _for Freight_                                            2.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Sab. Sch. to const. MRS.
      ELLEN M. WILLIAMS, L. M.                                20.25
    Sutton. Ladies’ Soc. _for Freight_                         1.25
    Wayland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.30
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       60.00
    Westfield. Mrs. H. O. C.                                   1.00
    West Hawley. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             20.50
    Worcester. “A Friend.”                                     5.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $1,245.50.

    Bristol. Mrs. M. De W. Rogers $250; Miss C. De
      Wolf $250; Cong. Ch. $15                               515.00
    Nayatt. R. S.                                              0.50
    Providence. Central Cong. Ch.                            730.00


  CONNECTICUT, $4,401.43.

    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  24.91
    Bethlehem. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                     5.12
    Canton Centre. Sarah B. Hallock                           10.00
    Collinsville. M. A. Warren, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            5.00
    East Berlin. “Z.”                                          5.00
    East Windsor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    10.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                17.00
    Griswold. First Cong. Ch.                                 60.00
    Gurleyville. Second Cong. Ch.                              7.63
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. ANNA
      DELIA CHAPMAN, L. M.                                    32.63
    Hartford. ESTATE of Rev. Jonathan Brace, D. D.,
      by John Hooker, Ex.                                  2,000.00
    Hartford. Mrs. Ellery Hills, $300; Dr. John R.
      Lee. $50                                               350.00
    Harwinton. Cong. Ch.                                      39.36
    Hockanum. South Cong. Ch.                                  9.00
    Milford. Plymouth Ch. $40, and Sab. Sch. $20              60.00
    Morris. Leverett J. Waugh                                  5.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch. (a member)                   10.00
    New Hartford. Samuel Couch                                10.00
    New London. First Ch.                                     36.87
    New Milford. Ladies’ Soc. by Mary E. Bennett              30.80
    Northfield. Cong. Ch.                                     24.75
    Norwich. ESTATE of S. C. Morgan, by Lewis A.
      Hyde, Ex.                                              850.00
    Norwich. “A Friend”                                      200.00
    Norwich Town. First Cong. Ch.                             70.00
    North Stonington. Geo. A. Avery                            6.00
    North Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.73
    North Haven. Mrs. Alexis Painter, to const.
      WILLIAM S. TODD, L. M.                                  30.00
    North Manchester. Second Cong. Church, $34.51,
      to const. REV. M. J. SQUIRES, L. M.; S. H.
      B. $1                                                   35.51
    Pequabuck. “A Friend,” by R. D. H. Allen, FOR
      STUDENT AID, TALLADEGA C.                               25.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    Somers. Mrs. M. M. W.                                      0.50
    South Britain. Cong. Ch. (additional)                      3.00
    South Glastonbury. Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    Thomaston. ESTATE of Henry Brooks, by Jesse R.
      Brooks, Ex.                                            195.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      27.25
    Unionville. Cong. Ch. _for Talladega C._                  30.00
    Wallingford. Mrs. T. B. Bartholomew                        2.00
    Wapping. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.59
    Westport. “A. M. W.,” to const. MISS ARETTA M.
      WAKEMAN, L. M.                                          30.00
    West Winstead. “A Friend”                                 10.00
    Willington. Cong. Ch. (M. Coll’s)                          1.78
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00


  NEW YORK, $534.57.

    Aquebogue. Cong. Ch.                                      30.00
    Bergen. Mrs. F. D. Kingman                                 5.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Cortland. Miss C. E. Booth                                 2.00
    Ellington. Anson Crosby and Mrs. Nancy Crosby,
      $3 each                                                  6.00
    Elma. Mrs. E. S. A. Bancroft                               5.06
    Evans Centre. Miss L. P.                                   1.00
    Freedonia. Mrs. Thomas W. Stevens                          5.00
    Gerry. Mrs. Mary A. G. Sears                             128.36
    Hamilton. Miss M. Bronson                                  2.50
    Harlem. John Dwight                                      100.00
    Homer. Mrs. Electa Root $60; George W.
      Bradford, $5                                            65.00
    Irvington. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin                              5.00
    Nelson. J. L. Bishop                                       7.00
    Redfield. Mrs. Geo. McKinney                               2.00
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Silver Creek. Mrs. Eliza Lee $50; W. Chapin
      $5; Charlotte Howes $2; M. M. $1; L. C. $1;
      Mrs. P. F. 50c.; Miss D. A. 50c                         60.00
    Sinclearville. Earl C. Preston, $2; D. B. D.,
      $1; Dea. E. R., $1; Mrs. A. B. $1                        5.00
    Spencerport. *                                            50.00
    Syracuse. Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D.                       10.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                10.00
    Warsaw. L. H. H.                                           1.00
    West Farms. Mrs. Rev. Alphonzo Wood                        5.00
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                        2.65


  NEW JERSEY, $65.

    East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch. $25, and Sab.
      Sch. $10                                                35.00
    Jersey. First Cong. Ch. to const. WILLIAM JAY
      HUNT, L. M.                                             30.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $21.

    Clark. S. P. Stewart                                       2.00
    North East. B. T. Spooner                                  5.00
    Providence. E. Weston                                      5.00
    Wilkes Barre. Welsh Cong. Ch.                              7.00
    Worth. John Burgess                                        2.00


  OHIO, $644.31.

    Bellevue. S. W. Boise, $20; Miss Elvira Boise,
      $20                                                     40.00
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                         21.15
    Brocton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         24.81
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the Poor in New Orleans_           91.34
    Cleveland. Plymouth Cong. Ch. $73.71; Mrs. S.
      H. E., $1; A. L. H., 50c.                               75.21
    Cleveland Heights. Cong. Ch.                              40.50
    Collamer. Union Church                                    27.70
    Fredericktown. A. H. Royce                                10.00
    Freedom. Cong. Ch. $1.87; “J. C. B.” $5; W.
      K., $5                                                  11.87
    Lindenville. John Thompson                                10.00
    Madison. Mrs. S. H. Roe, and others, $10;
      Sarah E. Warner $5                                      15.00
    Martinsburg. Cong. Church Property, $55; Geo.
      Stewart, $3; Mrs. D. $1                                 59.00
    Medina. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                35.50
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 35.66
    Penfield. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                     20.15
    Steubenville. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of First
      Cong. Ch., by Miss M. J. Leslie, Treas.                 10.00
    Strongsville. Free Cong. Ch.                              15.00
    Tallmadge. Mrs. Annis Wolcott $5; L. C. Walton
      $5; H. A. Peck $2; Miss M. A. C. $1, _for
      Tougaloo Miss._                                         13.00
    West Andover. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. DWIGHT
      R. CARPENTER, L. M.                                     24.42
    Westerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            3.00
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Yellow Springs. “D.”                                      20.00


  INDIANA, $10.

    Crawfordsville. Prof. Caleb Mills                         10.00


  ILLINOIS, $985.61.

    Albion. Mrs. Martha Skeavington                            5.00
    Blue Island. Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
    Buda. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. $50 _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._—Cong. Ch. $20                             70.00
    Chicago. Col. C. F. Hammond, for Howard
      University                                             500.00
    Chicago. N. E. Ch. Mon. Con. Coll. $19.80;
      Mrs. M. J. Benton, $5; Lincoln Park Ch.
      (additional) $3.21; Mrs. W. 50c.                        28.51
    Chillicothe. G. W. Gillman                                 5.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Emerson. Mrs. E. H. D. French                              5.00
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                      100.00
    Freedom. “A Friend ”                                      10.00
    Galesburg. ESTATE of Warren C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard                                     14.00
    Geneseo. Woman’s Miss. Soc., by Mrs. A. H.
      Manington, Treas.                                       29.00
    Kewanee. H. T. Lay                                       100.00
    Lamoille. Cong. Ch.                                        6.30
    Malden. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Oak Park. John Merton, $5.25; Mrs. S. E.
      Hurlbut, $5                                             10.25
    Prairie Centre. John Crawford                             10.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch. $15.55; L. C. Axtell and
      wife, $10                                               25.55
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Waukegan. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                               5.00


  MICHIGAN, $154.67.

    Bellevue. Mrs. H. L. B.                                    1.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. $16.42; John C.
      Winans, $5                                              21.42
    Grand Rapids. Mrs. G. E. F.                                1.00
    Homestead. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
    Hudson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    2.00
    Jackson. Missionary Soc.                                   2.00
    Kalamazoo. Plymouth Ch.                                   17.00
    Memphis. Cong. Ch. $3.—Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $2,
      _for Bible Reader, Memphis, Tenn._                       5.00
    Union City. Cong. Ch.                                     96.25
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   5.00


  IOWA, $29.87.

    Cherokee. First Cong. Ch.                                 10.37
    Dover. M. W. H.                                            0.20
    Montrose. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    New Hampton. E. F. Powers                                  1.30
    Red Oak. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Wilton. D. C. S.                                           1.00


  WISCONSIN, $123.68.

    Beloit. Second Cong. Ch. $20; First Cong. Ch.
      (ad’l) $8                                               28.00
    De Pere. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.93
    Eau Claire. Cong. Ch.                                     18.00
    Evansville. Cong. Soc.                                    10.00
    Kinnick Kinnick. Cong. Ch.                                 2.25
    Mount Sterling. Peter Valentine                            5.00
    New Richmond. Addison Moffat                               5.00
    Oconomowock. Cong. Ch. $15; Mrs. W. R. and
      Mrs. C. L. A. 50c. ea.                                  16.00
    Paxton. Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Shaw                            5.00
    Pleasant Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                1.00
    River Falls. Wm. M. Newcomb $7.50; Mrs. S. W. $1           8.50
    Sparta. Mrs. O. L. Irwin                                   5.00
    West Salem. Mrs. W. L. Clark                               5.00


  MINNESOTA, $56.49.

    Austin. Cong. Union Ch.                                   30.52
    Medford. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch. $15.97; Cong. Ch. $2            17.97


  NEBRASKA, $5.00.

    Clarksville. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00


  KANSAS, 50c.

    Leavenworth. L. A. S.                                      0.50


  MISSOURI, $54.52.

    Saint Louis. First Cong. Ch. $53.52; “A
      Friend” $1                                              54.52


  CALIFORNIA, $641.60.

    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                        641.60


  WASHINGTON TER., $70.00.

    S’Kokomish. LEGACY of Mrs. M. F. Eells, by
      Rev. Myron Eells, to const. MRS. SARAH M.
      EELLS and MISS IDA M. EELLS, L. M’s                     70.00


  MARYLAND, $5.

    Emmettsburg. David Gamble                                  5.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $102.94.

    Wilmington. Normal School $92.20; Cong. Ch.
      $10.74                                                 102.94


  TENNESSEE, $15.50.

    Chattanooga. Cong. Ch.                                    15.50


  GEORGIA, $16.53.

    Athens. J. McI., Jr.                                       0.50
    Byron. Cong. Ch.                                           0.50
    Savannah. Cong. Ch. $5.53 and Sab. Sch. $5;
      Bible Class $5                                          15.53


  MISSISSIPPI, $8.35.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                              8.35


  INCOME, $2,733.33.

    ——. Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                         2,733.33
                                                         ———————————
            Total                                         15,134.09
    Total from Oct. 1st to Sept 30th.                   $166,891.23

                                              H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                      _Ass’t Treas._

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E.
      Palache, Treas., from June 20th to Sept.
      20th, 1878.
    FROM AUXILIARIES.—Petaluma Chinese Mission
      $14.45; Stockton Chinese Mission (of which
      from Mrs. M. C. Brown $3, Rev. M. Post $2,
      Dea. J. T. Mills $2, Miss M. Bye $1, Mrs. J.
      M. Cavis $1, Chinese 50c.) $9.50; Santa
      Barbara Chinese Mission (of which from W. E.
      Barnard $5) $26.85                                      50.80
    FROM CHURCHES.—Oakland—First Cong. Ch. (of
      which from Jee Gam and Lee Haim $2 ea.)
      $53.40; Sacramento—First Cong. Ch. (of which
      from A. C. Sweetser $2) $12; San
      Francisco—First Cong. Ch. $43.15; Bethany
      Ch. (of which from Chinese members $58) $77            185.55
    FROM INDIVIDUALS.—Balfour, Guthrie & Co. $50;
      Redington & Co. $50; J. J. Felt $25; Thos.
      Bell $25; Hon. F. F. Low $25; James M. Haven
      $25; Flint, Peabody & Co. $25; Tallant & Co.
      $20; Falkner, Bell & Co. $20; Charles
      Holbrook $10; John F. Merrill $10; J. S. H.
      $2.50                                                  287.50
    FROM EASTERN FRIENDS—Fitchburg, Mass. Col.
      Sab. Sch., Primary Class. $17.75; bal. to
      const. SAMUEL J. STEWART, L. M.; Amherst,
      Mass. “Mrs. R. A. L.” $100                             117.75
                                                             ——————
        Total                                               $641.60


  RECEIVED FOR TILLOTSON C. AND N. INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Greenwich, Conn. William Brush $400; David
      Banks $400; Charles Brush 100; Israel Peck
      $100; Solomon Mead $100                              1,100.00
    Greenwich, Conn. Joseph L. Roberts, to const.
      LAWRENCE ROBERTS, L. M.                                 30.00
    Middletown, Conn. Mrs. Anna H. Phillips                   20.00
    Norfolk, Conn. Robbins Battell                            25.00
    Union Falls, N. Y. Mrs. Fanny D. Duncan $30;
      Miss Margaret B. Duncan $30                             60.00
    Englewood, N. J. Rev. G. B. Cheever                      100.00
    Corpus Christi, Texas. Rev. S. M. Coles                    5.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,340.00
    Previously acknowledged, August Receipts               1,465.50
                                                           ————————
    Total                                                 $2,805.50


  RECEIVED FOR YELLOW FEVER SUFFERERS

    Fitzwilliam, N. H. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     22.00
    Rindge, N. H. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    Norwich Town, Conn. “G. M.”                                6.50
    Stonington, Conn. Third Bapt. Ch. $13.50;
      Rising Sons and Daughters of Abraham Soc.
      $10.——25c., by A. Morrison                              23.75
    Astoria, N. Y. Friends in Reformed Ch., by F.
      W. Whittemore                                           45.00
    New York, N. Y. Rev. L. Smith Hobart                       5.00
    New York, N. Y. “H. W. H.” $5; “A Friend” $2               7.00
    Jersey City, N. J. First Cong. Ch., by W. J.
      Hunt, Treas.                                            46.52
    Paterson, N. J. Broadway Tab. Cong. Ch.                   25.20
    Schooley’s Mountain, N. J. Mr. and Mrs. R. R.
      Proudfit                                                20.00
    West Alexander, Penn. Dr. Robert Davidson                 10.00
    Highland, Ill. French Evangelical Ch.                     40.00
    Hudson, Mich. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             10.37
    Imlay City, Mich. Cong. Ch.                               16.50
    Columbus, Wis. Cong. Ch.                                  19.00
    Clinton, Iowa. First Cong. Ch.                            26.85
    Mason City, Iowa. Cong. Ch., by Rev. E. C.
      Moulton                                                 11.00
    Fort Berthold, D. T. Rev. C. L Hall $10; D. W.
      Longfellow $5; W. C. Davie $5; E. H. Alden
      $5; Geo. B. Johnson $5; Hannah Briggs $5; C.
      W. Darling $5; Harvey Hendricks $3; James L.
      Neave $2; W. Courtney $2; C. F. Walker $2;
      J. W. Gould $1; Alice Johnson $1                        51.00
    Oakland, Cal. Plymouth Ave. Cong. Ch.                     10.50
    San Francisco, Cal. First Cong. Ch., by J. W.
      Clark, Treas.                                          155.00
                                                           ————————
          Total                                             $561.19


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Berlin, Vt. M. W. P.                                       2.00
    Enfield, Conn. “A Friend.”                                 1.00
    Hartford, Conn. Dr. John R. Lee                           25.00
    Meriden, Conn. Chas. H. Learned, to const.
      JAMES H. LEARNED, L. M.                                 30.00
    New Haven, Conn. Nathan Peck                              20.00
    New Haven, Conn. Mary S. Thatcher                          5.00
    Norwich, Conn. “A Friend.”                               200.00
    Watertown, Conn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      100.27
    Camillus, N. Y. Isaiah Wilcox                            100.00
    Gerry, N. Y. Mrs. Mary A. G. Sears                        50.00
    Gouverneur, N. Y. Eli Mix                                 15.00
    New York, N.Y. Mrs. Hannah Ireland                        50.00
    Saratoga Springs, N. Y. William Dawes                     10.00
    Cambridgeboro, Penn. Mrs. H. R. Ross                       5.00
    Albion, Ill. Mrs. Martha Skeavington                      10.00
    Chicago, Ill. Col. C. G. Hammond                         500.00
    Rockford, Ill. L. S. Sweezey                             100.00
    Kalamazoo, Mich. Rev. H. N. Burton, D.D., $5;
      Dr. H. O. Hitchcock $5                                  10.00
    Northfield, Minn. “A. N. N.”                               5.00
    Jonesborough, Tenn. Julia B. Nelson                        5.00
    Raleigh, N. C. Miss E. P. Hayes                           10.00
    ——Bristol. Mrs. Theodore Jones                             5.60
    INDIANA.—_Liber_: J. R. Wells $5; Thomas Towle
      $2; _Michigan City_: Mrs. J. C. Haddock $5;
      _Winchester_: L. O. Ward $10                            22.00
    OHIO.—_Bryan_: S. B. Blakelee $5; _Geneva_:
      Mrs. S. Kingsbury $5; _Kingsville_: M.
      Whiting $10; _Cincinnati_: E. W. Hyde $25;
      _Sandusky_: Lewis Moss $10; _Marietta_:
      Cong. Ch. $6; _Lenox_: A. J. Holman $10;
      _Edinburg_: B. E. Bingham $10; _York_:
      Ladies of Cong. Ch. $5; _Hudson_: William
      Pettengill $10; Miss Emily E. Metcalf $5;
      _Madison_: Mrs. S. H. Roe $10.——Rev. H. C.
      Hayden $10; _Radnor_: Edward D. Jones $10;
      _Ripley_: John L. Tweed $5; _Mallet Creek_:
      Mrs. Mary B. Branch $5; Dr. J. A. Bingham
      $5; _Painesville_: Mrs. C. O. Higgins $5;
      _Galion_: Mrs. E. C. Linsey $3; _Findlay_:
      Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $8; _Toledo_: Edson Allen
      $10; _Alexandria_: Mrs. Lucy C. Remington
      $5; _Cleveland_: W. H. Doan $10; _West
      Williamsfield_: Mrs. A. H. Robbins $5;
      _Delaware_: John H. Jones $10; _Cuyahoga
      Falls_: Mrs. Maria B. Clark $3.15; _Burton_:
      Charles Cutler $12; _Randolph_: W. J.
      Dickinson $10; _North Benton_: Margaret J.
      Hartzel $10; _Springfield_: First Cong. Sab.
      Sch. $10; _Sullivan_: Cong. Soc. $5; _South
      Newbury_: Mrs. Ruth Watertown $3.50; Rev. E.
      D. Taylor $2; H. P. G. $1; J. B. W. $1; Mrs.
      L. M. $1; Mrs. R. P. $1; Miss E. M. 50c.;
      _Cleveland_: Mrs. H. P. Hickox $10;
      _Wellington_: Ladies of Cong. Ch. $11;
      _Painesville_: “Three Friends” $3;
      _Madison_: Mrs. H. E. Hendry $15; _Berlin
      Heights_: Miss Mattie Kinney $5; _Marietta_:
      Mrs. Douglas Putnam $10; _Claridon_:
      “Friends,” by Mrs. Treat $20.21; _Norwalk_:
      E. E. Husted and Friends $10; _Gambier_:
      James S. Dawes $10; _Hudson_: Delia E.
      Hazeltine $2.50; _Cleveland_: Mrs. M. B.
      Lyle $5.50; _Medina_: Cong. Sab. Sch., by
      Ellen J. Nason, $10; _Saybrook_: Mrs. W. S.
      Streeter $10; _Centre Belpre_: Mrs. E. M.
      Goodhue $5; _Ashtabula_: James Hall $10;
      _Oberlin_: Mrs. E. S. Mead $5; _Elyria_: M.
      W. Cogswell $10; _Oberlin_: J. B. Clarke
      $10; _Akron_: Mary B. Monroe $5; _Gustavus_:
      Woman’s Miss. Soc. $5; _Sandusky_: J. E.
      Marshall $10                                           444.36
    ILLINOIS.—_Rochell_: W. H. Holcomb $10;
      _Galesburg_: Mrs. E. T. Parker $25;
      _Malden_: Miss C. S. Porter $10;
      _Sheffield_: A. W. Boyden $10; C. H. Boyden
      $5; _Odell_: Mrs. H. E. Dana $10; _Maywood_:
      Union Sab. Sch. $5; _Aurora_: H. C. Paddock
      $10; _Champaign_: Cong. Sab. Sch. $10; _Lake
      Forest_: Rev. W. A. Nichols $7;
      _Chicago_—Wm. H. Bradley $50; _Quincy_—Chas.
      W. Keyes $10; C. H. Bull $10: _Kewanee_—Mrs.
      C. L. Chapin and daughter $10;
      _Winnebago_—N. F. Parsons ($2 of which from
      a friend) $10; _Morrison_—Rev. E. G. Smith
      $5; _Moline_—“Friends” $10; _Payson_—P. E.
      Thompson $5; _Greeley_—Mrs. Joseph Farrell
      $5; _Prospect Park_—Mrs. Lloyd $5;
      _Peoria_—J. T. Rogers $5; _Collinsville_—J.
      F. Wadsworth $10; _Chicago_—S. B. French
      $50; _Oak Park_—Geo. Eckhart $5; _Aurora_—D.
      J. Pike $10; _Chicago_—Z. B. Taylor $5; _Oak
      Park_—Wm. Spooner $5; _Mendon_—Joel Benton
      $10; _Collinsville_—Mrs. J. S. Peens $10;
      _Kewanee_—Mrs. C. C. Culley $8;
      _Rockford_—Mrs. J. W. Briggs $5; Ladies of
      Cong. Ch. $18; James B. Agard $5;
      _Providence_—Mrs. H. B. Gulliver $6;
      _Quincy_—Joshua Perry $10; _Sandwich_—Mrs.
      A. P. Casper $10; _Peoria_—Rev. A. A.
      Stevens $10; _Lyndon_—D. F. Milliken $10;
      _Port Byron_—Mrs. E. T. Harper $5;
      _Plainfield_—J. Hagar $30, to const. MURTON
      HAGAR FRASER, L. M.; _Quincy_—H. P. Prentiss
      $5; Miss Louisa M. Rollins $5; _Tonica_—V.
      G. Lutz $5; _Galesburg_—Ladies of First
      Cong. Ch. $20; _Aurora_—N. A. James $5;
      _Waverly_—Miss Louisa Tupper $5;
      _Roseville_—Sarah J. W. Axtell $5; _Lake
      Forest_—Mrs. W. H. Ferry $3; _Sycamore_—Mr.
      and Mrs. H. Wood $10; _Springfield_—Five
      Ladies, by Mrs. C. L. Post $5;
      _Danvers_—Mrs. M. M. Longley $5;
      _Odell_—Mrs. B. F. Hotchkiss $5; _Bunker
      Hill_—C. V. A. Quick $10 _Payson_—Mrs. Eliza
      Harrington $5; _Elgin_—Cong. Ch. $5;
      _Chicago_—Col by Mrs. N. H. Blatchford $10;
      _Jerseyville_—G. W. Burke $5; _Dover_—M. M.
      Allen $5; _Matamora_—A. C. Rouse $5; Others
      $5.25; _Ottawa_—Mary H. Lewis $11.80;
      _Galesburg_—Mrs. S. D. Clendenin $15;
      _Joliet_—Wm. C. Stevens $12;
      _Granville_—Mizpah Circle, by E. J. Colby
      $8; _Sycamore_—$8.25; _Ivanhoe_—Church, by
      R. Osgood $13; _Lorain_—Mrs. C. M. Fields
      $3; _Woodburn_—Mrs. W. H. Bird $5;
      _Glencoe_—Mrs. S. T. Lockwood $5;
      _Clifton_—Mrs. E. F. Cummings $5;
      _Galesburg_—Geo. Churchill $10; _Quincy_—R.
      McComb $5; _Sheffield_—C. A. Davis and A. M.
      Davis $5.75; _Oak Park_—Mrs. J. H. Hurlbut
      $5; _Princeville_—Olive L. Cutter and Elmyra
      Jones $10; _Lamoille_—J. R. Jones $20;
      _Sandwich_—E. G. Coe $5; _Chicago_—Mrs.
      Willard Cook $30, to const. REV E. L.
      JAGGAR, L. M.                                          754.05
    MICHIGAN.—_Detroit_—Mrs. H. E. Baker $5;
      _Bellevue_—M. A. Hance $10; _White
      Lake_—Robert Garner $100; _Port Huron_—First
      Cong. Sab. Sch. $15; Individuals $3;
      _Hersey_—Mrs. C. L. Woodworth $5;
      _Pinckney_—Cong. Ch. $12; _Hamburg_—Cong.
      Ch. $3.70; _Bass Lake_—T. Burkett $7.50;
      _Bellevue_—David Young $5; _Churches
      Corners_—Mrs. A. W. Douglass $2; Cornelius
      Clement $2; Others $11; _Allegan_—Mrs. R. E.
      Booth $50; _Jackson_—Mrs. M. A. McNaughton
      $26; _Greenville_—Mrs. R. L. Ellsworth $5;
      _Benzonia_—A. T. Case $5; Dea. Amasa Waters
      $5; _Ransom_—Ladies’ Aid Soc. $5;
      _Detroit_—Mrs. Martha L. Miller $6;
      _Adair_—Henry Topping $5; _Owasso_—Mrs.
      Ament $10; _Vermontville_—Young Ladies’
      Miss. Soc. $11; _Detroit_—Rev. C. C. Foote
      $10; _Kalamazoo_—Mrs. J. O. Burrows $10.55;
      _Medina_—Miss Hattie M. Converse $3;
      _Memphis_—Juv. Miss. Soc. by Mrs. W. P.
      Russell $5; _Jackson_—Mrs. L. Kassick $5;
      _Detroit_—Mrs. M. R. Eddy $5; _Pontiac_—W.
      S. Albertson $10; _Romeo_—Mrs. A. M. Grover
      $10; _Grand Rapids_—S. L. Withley $5; Mrs.
      S. L. Withley $5; _Three Oaks_—Mrs. M.
      Chamberlain $5; _Galesburg_—Mrs. Sarah M.
      Sleeper $5; _South Boston_—Cong. Ch. $6;
      _Benzonia_—Mrs. Elvira F. Spence $10; Cong.
      Sab. Sch. $5.25                                        409.00
    WISCONSIN. _Ripon_: A. P. Harwood $25; _Oak
      Grove_: Daniel Richards $10; _Beliot_: Mrs.
      A. L. Chapin $5; Mrs. A. Cheney $10; Mrs. S.
      M. Clary $10; Miss E. Field $10; _Brant_: E.
      W. & M. B. Scott $2; _Sheboygan_: Mrs. L. H.
      Chase $10; F. Lawrence $5; _Ripon_: C. T.
      Tracy $5; _Keshena_: P. Bridgman $3; Miss
      Alice Tapping $2; W. W. Wheeler $5; _Eau
      Clair_: Mrs. J. F. Dudley $13; _Rosendale_:
      Cong. Sab. Sch. $10; _Menomonie_: John H.
      Knapp $100; _Appleton_: Jared Lamphear $10;
      _Clinton_: “W. M. S.” $4; _Madison_: Women
      of Cong. Ch. $5; _Whitewater_: Cong. Ch.
      $10; _Evansville_: Mrs. M. V. Pratt and Sab.
      Sch. Children $5; _Milwaukee_: Mrs. Hiram F.
      Story $10.25; _Menasha_: A. E. Rounds $10;
      _Fond du Lac_: Helen S. Norton $10;
      _Koshkonong_: Mrs. A. V. Mills $10; _Elk
      Horn_: Cong. Ch. and Friends $10;
      _Burlington_: Mrs. C. B. Curtis $5;
      _Durand_: Rev A. Kidder and Family $4.20;
      Cong. Ch. $3.40; S. S. Class 40c.;
      _Kenosha_: First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $6.70;
      _Superior_: Mrs. J. W. Gates $5; _White
      Water_: Mrs. R. Coburn, [of which $5 from
      Primary S. S. Class] $5.50; _Oconomowock_:
      Cong. Ch. $5.50; _Shopierre_: Sarah A.
      Culver $5; _Alderly_: Mrs. E. Hubbard $7;
      _Fort Atkinson_: Mrs. Montague $5                      363.95
    IOWA. _McGregor_: Ladies’ Cong. Soc. $11.57;
      _Anamosa_: W. S. Benton $10; _Burlington_:
      Cong. Ch. David Leonard $25; _Oskaloosa_:
      Rev. Asa Turner and Wife $25; _Webster
      City_: Woman’s Miss. Soc. $7; _Glenwood_:
      Rev. S. L. Williams $5; _Clinton_: A. K.
      Nash $5.——A Friend of Missions $5; _Exira_:
      Lyman Bush $10; _Wintersett_: Mrs. S.
      Dinsmore $15; _Green Mountain_: Mrs. Nancy
      R. Chase $5; _Anamosa_: A. M. A. Tea Party
      $6.40; _Belle Plain_: Mrs. J. Baker, Mrs. J.
      P. Hunt and Mrs. E. J. Lane $11; _Tipton_:
      Mrs. D. F. Ensign $5; _Wilton_: Woman’s
      Miss. Soc. $10; _Montrose_: Mrs. E. B.
      Mathews $5; _Davenport_: Mrs. S. F. Smith
      $5; _Vinton_: Joseph Young $10; _Cedar
      Rapids_: J. C. Brocksmit $10; _Osage_: J. A.
      Smith $5; F. Peck $5; Mrs. G. W. Smith $5;
      _Stacyville_: Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $8;
      _Dubuque_: Mrs. S. N. Millard $5; _Keokuk_:
      Woman’s Miss. Soc. by Mrs. C. R. Vetter $13;
      _Monticello_—“A few Ladies” $11.25;
      _Durand_—Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $5;
      _Toledo_—Mrs. A. M. Austin $5;
      _Desmoines_—Mrs. A. R. Osgood $5;
      _Grinnell_—Hattie E. James $5; _Algona_—Mrs.
      J. E. Stacy $3.35; _Muscatine_—Ladies’ Miss.
      Circle $5; _Tabor_—Mrs. Todd and Mrs. H. E.
      Martin $10; _Central City_—Mrs. E. A.
      Blodget $10; _Grinnell_—Young Ladies’ Miss.
      Circle $10; Children’s M. S. $5; “Friends”
      $10; _New Hampton_—E. F. Powers $4;
      _Decorah_—Mrs. G. B. Willett $5;
      _Ladorah_—Mrs. D. D. Osgood $6.85;
      _Earlville_—S. J. Harris $2; _Le Grand_—J.
      N. Craig $2; W. V. Craig $10; _Clinton_—Mrs.
      H. R. Jones $5; _Seneca_—Rev. O. Littlefield
      and Wife $15                                           361.42
    KANSAS. _Mariadhal_—H. H. Griffin $10;
      _Atchison_—Rev. F. T. Ingalls $10; Woman’s
      Miss. Soc. $5; _Blue Rapids_—T. H. $1;
      _Leavenworth_—Mrs. C. B. Brace $2; Mrs. S.
      A. Cutter $10                                           38.00
    MINNESOTA. _Hastings_—R. B. Truax $5;
      _Minneapolis_—Mrs. J. B. Hanson $5;
      _Clearwater_—Mrs. M. M. Walker $7;
      _Rochester_—Mrs. J. Briggs $5; _Winona_—Miss
      Mary A. Keyes $5; _Austin_—Mrs. A. Morse and
      others $5.25; _Northfield_—G. W. Phillips $5            37.25
    NEBRASKA. _York_—Benj. Bissell $10.25;
      _Crete_—Mrs. M. A. Farwell $5; _Steel
      City_—Mrs. S. C. Dean $5; _Weeping
      Water_—Mrs. A. Beach $5.55                              25.80
    COLORADO. _Colorado Springs_—Ladies’ Miss.
      Soc. $10; _Denver_—Cong. Miss. Soc. $10                 20.00
    DAKOTA TER. _Sioux Falls_—Mrs. J. L. Phillips
      $10; _Fort Berthold_—“Friends” $30                      40.00
    MISSOURI. _Kidder_—S. C. Coult, Cong. Ch. $10;
      _St. Louis_—Mrs. M. P. Chapman $5;
      _Breckenridge_—Woman’s Miss. Soc. $7                    22.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           3,796.70
    Previously acknowledged in Aug. Receipts.             14,108.22
                                                           ————————
        Total                                            $17,904.92

       *       *       *       *       *




                     The Independent for 1879

Will have to be a VERY GOOD PAPER to satisfy the thousands of
readers who have become familiar with its good qualities in
the past. But we propose this year to excel the past. We shall
continue to print articles from the best writers and thinkers
in the country. The departments of Religious News, Literature,
Sunday-school, Fine Arts, Science, Missions, School and College,
Markets, Farm and Garden, Financial, and Insurance will, as
heretofore, be contributed to by specialists in each branch. These
departments are famous because they are able and trustworthy.

                         COOK’S LECTURES.

These famous Lectures, delivered in Boston every Monday, by the
Rev. Joseph Cook, will be published in full, together with the
Introductory Remarks, beginning in the issue of November 7th.

                              SERMONS

by eminent clergymen in all parts of the country will continue to
be printed.


                             PREMIUMS.

We offer Rev. Joseph Cook’s valuable new volumes, entitled
“BIOLOGY”, “TRANSCENDENTALISM” and “ORTHODOXY,” embodying, in a
revised and corrected form, the author’s last winter’s remarkable
Monday Lectures. They are published in handsome book form, with
colored illustrations, by James R. Osgood & Co., of Boston. We
will mail a copy of either volume, postpaid, to any subscriber to
THE INDEPENDENT who remits us $3.00 for a year in advance; or any
Subscriber may remit $5.50, and we will send him THE INDEPENDENT
for two years, in advance, and two volumes, postpaid; or, for
$8.00, we will send THE INDEPENDENT to any one subscriber for three
years, in advance, and the three volumes.

           WORCESTER’S UNABRIDGED PICTORIAL DICTIONARY.

 Bound in Sheep, 1854 pages, over 1000 Illustrations Issue of 1878

We have made a special contract with the great publishing house of
J. B. Lippincott & Co., of Philadelphia, by which we are enabled
to offer the most desirable Premium ever given by us or any other
newspaper in the country. We will send this =Dictionary= to any
person who will send us the names of =Three New Subscribers and
Nine Dollars=; or who will, on renewing his own subscription, in
advance, send us =Two New Names= additional and $9.00; or who will
renew his own subscription for three years, in advance, and send us
$9.00; or for a new subscriber for three years and $9.00.

The regular price of the =Dictionary= alone at all the bookstores
is $10.00, while the lowest price of three subscriptions is $9.00.
Both the =Dictionary and the three Subscriptions=, under this
extraordinary offer, can, therefore, be had =together= for only
$9.00. The =Dictionary= will be delivered at our office, or in
Philadelphia, free, or be sent by express or otherwise, as may be
ordered, at the expense of the subscriber.

The subscriber under this offer will not be entitled to any other
Premium.

  SUBSCRIPTION PRICE,     —         $3.00 PER ANNUM, IN ADVANCE.

           Including any one of the following Premiums:

Any one volume of the “=Household Edition of Charles Dickens’s
Works=,” bound in cloth, with 16 Illustrations each, by Sol Eytinge.

Moody and Sankey’s “=Gospel Hymns and Sacred Songs, No. 2=.”

“=Lincoln and His Cabinet; or, First Reading of the Emancipation
Proclamation.=” Fine large Steel Engraving. By Ritchie. Size 26×36.

“=Authors of the United States.=” Fine large Steel Engraving. 44
Portraits. Size 24×38-½. By Ritchie.

“=Charles Sumner.=” Fine Steel Engraving. By Ritchie.

“=Grant or Wilson.=” Fine Steel Engravings. By Ritchie.

“=Edwin M. Stanton.=” Fine Steel Engraving. By Ritchie.

“=The Inner Life of Abraham Lincoln.=” By Frank B. Carpenter. Bound
in cloth. 360 pages. It gives a better insight into his “inner
life” than can be found elsewhere, and is altogether one of the
most fascinating, instructive, and useful books of the kind ever
published.

        ☞ _Specimen Copies of_ THE INDEPENDENT _Sent Free_.

        Address                            THE INDEPENDENT,
                   P. O. Box 2787.                 NEW YORK CITY.

    ☞ Cut out this Advertisement, as it will not appear again.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.


                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish


Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Luke, $1.50: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.”—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._

                 *       *       *       *       *

                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS,

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY,

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

      C. Y. WEMPLE,
              _Vice-President_.

      J. L. HALSEY,
              _Secretary_.

      S. N. STEBBINS,
              _Actuary_.

      H. Y. WEMPLE,
      H. B. STOKES,
              _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           GET THE BEST.

[Illustration: WEBSTER’S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY ILLUSTRATED EDITION
3000 ENGRAVINGS]

        Published by =G. & C. MERRIAM=, Springfield, Mass.

                        Warmly indorsed by

      BANCROFT,
      MOTLEY,
      FITZ-GREENE HALLECK,
      N. P. WILLIS,
      ELIHU BURRITT,
      RUFUS CHOATE,
      SMART,
      PRESCOTT,
      GEORGE P. MARSH,
      JOHN G. WHITTIER,
      JOHN G. SAXE,
      DANIEL WEBSTER,
      H. COLERIDGE,
      HORACE MANN,

               More than =fifty= College Presidents,

           And the Best American and European Scholars.

One family of children having WEBSTER’S UNABRIDGED, and using it
freely, and another not having it, the first will become much the
more intelligent men and women.

More than =30,000= copies have been placed in the public schools of
the United States.

Recommended by =34= State Superintendents of Schools and more than
=50= College Presidents.

The sale of Webster’s Dictionaries is =20= times as great as the
sale of any other series of Dictionaries.

“_August 4, 1877._ The Dictionary used in the Government Printing
Office is Webster’s Unabridged.”

             Is it not rightly claimed that WEBSTER is

                      THE NATIONAL STANDARD?


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

                             BANKERS,

             59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                  66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment.

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.


They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   The Ives Patent Lamp Company,

                    105 CHAMBERS ST., NEW YORK.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           BRONZE LAMPS,

                                AND

                              CHURCH

                            CHANDELIERS

                   3, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 18 LIGHTS.


                               IVES’

                           PATENT LAMPS

                                AND

                            CHANDELIERS

                Can be lighted, filled and trimmed
                     without removing globe,
                         shade or chimney.

               By the use of Ives’ Patent Lamps an
                    explosion was never known.

           A Liberal Discount to Clergymen and Churches.

                            SOLE AGENTS

                              FOR THE

                          AMERICAN BURNER

                                AND

                         Blackman’s Patent

                          REFLECTOR BASE,

                      Requiring NO CHIMNEY,
                 and obviating SMOKE and BREAKAGE.

              Suitable for Brackets and Chandeliers.

                      Illustrated Catalogues

                        ON APPLICATION FROM

                  CLERGYMEN or CHURCH COMMITTEES.

[Illustration: =No. 854=—2, 3, and 4-Light Chandelier.

Two and three-light, 25 in. spread, 33 in. high; and four-light,
30 in. spread, 39 in. high. Suitable for Private Dwellings and
Small Churches, Lecture Rooms and Halls. Can be lighted, filled and
trimmed without removing globe, burner or chimney.]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE SINGER

                         LEADS THE WORLD!

[Illustration: Works of the Singer Manufacturing Co., Elizabeth, N.
J.]

Notwithstanding the great depression of business, THE SINGER
MANUFACTURING COMPANY made and sold

              282,812 Machines in 1877—BEING 20,496
                 =MORE= THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS YEAR.

_PRICES REDUCED =$30= ON EACH STYLE OF MACHINE. Send for Circular._

☞ The public are warned against a counterfeit machine, made after
an _old abandoned model_ of our Machine. To get a genuine “SINGER
SEWING MACHINE,” buy only of our authorized Agents, and see that
each Machine has our Trade-Mark stamped on the arm.

THE SINGER M’F’G CO., Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                                THE

                       MIDDLETOWN PLATE CO’S

                               FINE

                        Electro-Plated Ware

               Excels in BEAUTY OF DESIGN, HARDNESS
                   OF METAL, QUANTITY OF SILVER
                        DEPOSITED UPON IT.

                    Factory: Middletown, Conn.

                            SALESROOM:

                     13 JOHN STREET, NEW YORK.

                       FOR SALE EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE FAMOUS

                         VIENNA COFFEE-POT

                          [Illustration]

From the Vienna and Philadelphia Exhibitions. Imported only by

                          E. D. BASSFORD,

             Housefurnishing, Hardware, China, Glass,
                      Cutlery and Silverware
                              Stores.

                Nos. 1 to 17 COOPER INST. New York.

☞ To meet the popular demand, prices have been reduced 50 per cent.
PRICE LIST FREE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                       The Laundry,
                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             AQUARIA.

[Illustration]

=Automatic Fountains, Ferneries, Flower Stands, Flower-Pot
Brackets, Window Boxes=, &c., &c. Send 10 cents for postage on
Large Illustrated Catalogue. Send 6 cents for Scroll-Saw Catalogue.

                         C. WEBSTER PECK,
                                          110 Chambers St., N.Y.

[_Mention this Magazine._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


E. & O. WARD Give personal attention to the sale of all kinds of

                      PRODUCE ON COMMISSION.

                   No. 279 Washington St., N. Y.

      (Est’d 1845.) Ref., _Irving National Bank_, N. Y. City.

                  Also, Agents for Alex. Hornby’s

                STEAM-COOKED WHITE WHEAT AND OATS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 1832   MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.   1878

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           Table Cutlery

Of every description, with Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory,
Celluloid, Pearl and Silver-plated handles. The Celluloid Handle
(of which we are the exclusive makers) is a perfect substitute for
Ivory, equalling it in beauty when new, and far surpassing it in
durability and appearance in use. Also

              POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS

          All goods bearing our name are fully guaranteed

                        MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.

                                      49 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN SABBATH SCHOOL, OR SOCIAL OR
FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo. Cloth, 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent postpaid on receipt of price.

TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                         758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


THEOLOGICAL AND S. S. BOOKS. Immense stock. Good and cheap. We
publish Books upon the “Clark” plan. Our Sunday-school department
includes the best Books from all publishers, and =17= select
editions, from =$15= to =$357.85=. Special attention given to Books
for Colleges and Theological Students. Also, Books sold by Agents
only. Just ready, =The Old and New Bible Looking-Glass=, with
=280= Beautiful Emblem Engravings, written by Drs. CROSBY, GILLET,
CHEEVER, PUNSHON. It has received the best indorsements. Send for
particulars.

                           N. TIBBALS & SONS, 37 Park Row, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          CABINET ORGANS

HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXHIBITIONS. _Only American Organs
awarded such at_ ANY. _Before buying or renting, send for our_
LATEST CATALOGUES and CIRCULARS, with NEW STYLES, REDUCED PRICES
and _much information_. _Sent free._

                     MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO.,
                                   BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid =_$340_= ORGANS for =_$100_=. =_$300_= for =_$90_=.
=_$275_= for =_$80_=. =_$200_= for =_$70_=. =_$190_= for =_$65_=;
and =_$160_= for =_$55_=. PIANOS—=_$900_= Piano Forte for =_$225_=.
=_$800_= for =_$200_=. =_$750_= for =_$185_=. =_$700_= for
=_$165_=. =_$600_= for =_$135_=, =_cash_=, not used a year, in
perfect order. Great Bargains, Unrivaled Instruments, Unequaled
Prices. Send for Catalogues.

                                           HORACE WATERS & SONS,

_40 East 14th Street, New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.,

[Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.


                         Founded in 1832.


                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.

                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,

                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          ANNUAL MEETING.


                 The Thirty-Second Annual Meeting

                              OF THE

                  AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION

                       _WILL BE HELD IN THE_

          Broadway Congregational Church, Taunton, Mass.,

                          OCTOBER 29-31.

The Meeting will be organized on Tuesday, at Three o’Clock P. M.,
and at Half-past Seven o’Clock in the evening the Annual Sermon
will be preached by

               Rev. S. E. HERRICK, D. D., of Boston.

On Wednesday, papers will be read by Rev. GEORGE LEON WALKER, D.D.,
and others. Wednesday evening will be occupied with addresses and
reminiscences by present and former missionaries of the A. M. A.
Thursday will be devoted to reports of committees and discussions
of the work. The Meeting will close Thursday evening, with
addresses from able and distinguished speakers.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                        OUR NEW PAMPHLETS.

No. 1.—=HISTORY= of the Association.

No. 2.—=AFRICA=: Containing a History of the Mendi Mission, a
Description of the Land and the People, and a presentation of their
claims on America.

No. 3—=THE THREE DESPISED RACES in the UNITED STATES=; or, The
Chinaman, the Indian, and the Freedman. An Address before the A. M. A.,
by Rev. Joseph Cook, of Boston, Mass.

No. 4.—=THE EDUCATIONAL WORK.= Showing the nature and reality
of the black man’s needs; the way to help him; the sentiment of
Southern men; the work of the Romish Church; the wants of the A. M.
A.

        _WILL BE SENT FREE TO ANY ADDRESS ON APPLICATION._


                 *       *       *       *       *




                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

Besides giving news from the Institutions and Churches aided by the
Association among the Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the
Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa,
it will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, and shall be glad to increase
the number indefinitely, knowing from experience that to be
informed of our work is to sympathize with, and desire to aid it.

The Subscription Price will be, as formerly, =Fifty Cents a Year,
in Advance=. We also offer to send =One Hundred copies to one
address=, for distribution in Churches or to clubs of subscribers,
for $30., with the added privilege of a Life Membership to
such person as shall be designated. The Magazine will be sent
gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons indicated on Page 318.
Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                   H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t Treas.,
                                      56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for
which our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially
valuable. Our readers are among the best in the country, having an
established character for integrity and thrift that constitute them
valued customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                    J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                      56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation and spelling were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. Inconsistent hyphenation was retained
as there are numerous authors. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

“quanity” changed to “quantity” on page 323. (large quantity of
fagots)

“frugalit” changed to “frugality” on page 342. (health-giving
frugality)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.