VOL. XXXIII.                                                No. 4.

                               THE

                      AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                *       *       *       *       *

              “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                *       *       *       *       *

                          APRIL, 1879.




                           _CONTENTS:_


  EDITORIAL.

    MAP OF EASTERN AFRICA                               (Cover) p. 2
    THE ARTHINGTON MISSION                                        97
    FINANCIAL                                                    101
    PROGRESS--ENCOURAGEMENT                                      101
    CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH: Rev. C. L. Woodworth         102
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                         103
    GENERAL NOTES                                                104

  THE FREEDMEN.

    SUNDAY-SCHOOLS FOR THE FREEDMEN: Rev. J. E. Roy, D. D.       107
    VIRGINIA--Work at Hampton, from a Three Months’
      Observation: Rev. John H. Denison                          109
    GEORGIA, MACON--A Beginner’s Reflections, &c.                112
    ALABAMA, TALLADEGA--Revival in Church and College            113
      SELMA--Revival Work--A Well-organized Church               114
      MONTGOMERY--Thoughtful Congregation                        115
    MISSISSIPPI, TOUGALOO--A Praise Meeting                      116

  AFRICA.

    HEATHEN BUNDOO DANCE AND A RETREAT: Benj. James, M. D.       118
    VISIT TO THE INTERIOR: Rev. A. E. Jackson                    119

  THE INDIANS.

    SCHOOL AND CHURCH WORK AT DUNGINESS, W. T.                   120

  THE CHINESE.

    OUR CHINESE HELPERS: Rev. W. C. Pond                         121

  RECEIPTS                                                       123

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            NEW YORK.

       _Published by the American Missionary Association,_

                     ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.




[Illustration: Map of Eastern Africa]




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXIII.    APRIL, 1879.    No. 4.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE ARTHINGTON MISSION.

In the March MISSIONARY we published the letter containing the
offer of £3,000 to the A. M. A. for the establishment of a
mission in Central Africa, to lie between the river Nile on the
west, and the river Jub on the east, and to extend from 10 deg.
north latitude to 3 deg. on the Nile, and 1 deg. on the Jub. The
offer has received as much and as careful attention as the time
has allowed, and we submit in this issue the results so far as
yet attained. We call attention to


THE ACCOMPANYING MAP

showing the location and accessibility of the proposed mission.
The territory assigned is included in dotted lines, and is nearly
in the centre of the map, which has been drawn in accordance with
the latest discoveries. The sources of the Nile are indicated in
the Victoria and Albert Nyanza lakes. The rivers Sobat and Jub
are given as by the best authorities. The stations of Gondokoro
and Fatiko are shown, and the general location of the various
known tribes. The report says nothing of the Abyssinians in
the northeast, being confined thus far to the most accessible
portion of the region. The mission stations on the three lakes
have been conspicuously lettered and underlined; that of the
Church Missionary Society at Rubaga, the capital of King Mtesa,
and Kagei on the south end of the lake, where they propose to
have at least a depot; Ujiji on the Tanganika, where the London
Missionary Society have located; and Livingstonia on the Nyassa,
from which the missionaries of the Free Church of Scotland will
move to a location probably on the west coast, where they will be
free from the tsetse fly.

The proposed field will be seen to be accessible by the Nile. The
cataracts have been ascended by vessels of considerable size,
at very high Nile, but always with great danger and difficulty.
It is more feasible to transport from Souakim, on the Red Sea,
across the desert by camel-back to Berber, thence by steamer to
Khartum and Gondokoro, which, or the military station only a few
miles south on the opposite bank of the river, may be the best
point of departure and depot of supplies. It may not be a matter
of great difficulty to explore the Sobat and penetrate by it into
the very heart of this region.

For the view of the field and the attitude toward it taken by
the Association, we refer to the following report of the Foreign
Committee, which was unanimously adopted and ordered to be
printed at the last meeting of the Executive Committee:


REPORT OF THE FOREIGN COMMITTEE.

The Committee beg leave to report that they have consulted
such books as have been accessible, respecting the part of
Africa designated by Mr. Arthington, and have also obtained an
interview with Col. C. Chaillé Long, the African explorer, who
has penetrated both by the Sobat and the Jub further into that
territory than any other white man now living.

From the information gathered, they conclude that though there
are difficulties, there are no insurmountable obstacles in the
way of the establishment of the mission proposed. The country has
been visited by a number of explorers, merchants and officers of
the Egyptian Government. Steamers ply up and down the Nile in
close proximity to some of the tribes it is proposed to reach.
Sir Samuel Baker has illustrated the feasibility of conveying
steel steamers in sections across the desert, from Souakim on
the Red Sea, to Berber on the Nile, at which point they can be
reconstructed and used on the Nile and its tributaries. With a
small screw steamer, a missionary expedition can explore the
different portions of the country mentioned by Mr. Arthington,
using the boat for storage of supplies, and as a mission house,
until stations can be established.

The locality on the east bank of the Nile and along the river
Sobat we believe to be more easy of access than either of the
three central African missions established by the English and
the Scotch on the Nyassa, Tanganika and Victoria Nyanza lakes,
and that every argument for establishing these missions can be
applied with greater force to a mission in the Nile basin.

Of the region and peoples accessible by the river Jub, your
Committee have as yet been able to gain no clear information,
further than that the high lands, extending back for perhaps
twenty miles from the sea-coast, sink into low, marshy plains,
through which the river runs as far as it has been navigated. The
higher region in the interior, in which it must have its source,
is as yet utterly unknown.

We not only deem the proposed mission practicable, but the call
to it Providential. The attention of the civilized world has
recently been directed in a striking manner to the Nile basin.
The opening of the Suez Canal, and the explorations of Speke,
Grant, Petherick, Schweinfurth, Long, Baker and Stanley, have
familiarized us with the country and its people, awakening an
interest in its behalf that is wide-spread; while the efforts
of Sir Samuel Baker and Colonel Gordon for the suppression of
the slave-trade open to this Association an opportunity for
co-operation in a work consistent with its origin and history.

The number of slaves that come down the Blue and White Nile is
probably 25,000 annually (Southworth, see page 355; Charles New’s
“Wanderings in Africa,” page 492). Many of these are gathered
from the Fatiko, Obbo, Latooka and Madi country (see “Ismailia,”
page 355), and efforts for their relief by missionaries
co-operating with the Government of Col. Gordon would be of
much promise (Col. Long, before Executive Committee A. M. A.),
especially as Col. Gordon has been appointed Governor General of
the Nile basin for life, by the Khedive of Egypt, which position
he has accepted, with the avowed purpose of suppressing the slave
trade. (“Khedive’s Egypt,” page 294.) He appears to have entered
upon this task with the spirit of an old Scotch Covenanter,
taking his Bible with him in his tent, in the desert and in the
wilderness. (“Khedive’s Egypt,” page 291.)

It is a matter of interest that the proposed mission is among
the real heathen. Moslem Africa extends across the continent
to about 9 deg. north latitude. (See Reade’s “African Sketch
Book,” Vol. I., page 312.) Below that belt of country there are
no obstacles in the way of religious efforts among the natives,
except those common to all missions among an unclad and tropical
people. Sir Bartle Frere, as quoted by Secretary Hutchinson of
the Church Missionary Society, says that the “missionary, by the
negro, free or slave, is everywhere regarded as a friend. He
has not the slightest objection of any kind, moral or material,
political or social, to the missionary, whom he is glad to
welcome as doing him good in many ways, and greatly adding to the
importance of the tribes, in the midst of which a mission station
is established.”

The peculiarity of the climate and the characteristics of the
people indicate that the proposed mission should be manned
largely by Freedmen from America. The climate is sure to wear
out a white man in the course of a few years, if he remains
constantly on the ground. (Col. Long, before the Executive
Committee of the A. M. A.) The degree of mortality among the
white soldiers of the Egyptian army, and the fate of the
missionaries of the Austrian Mission at Gondokoro, illustrate
the same fact. Besides, the general testimony is, that black men
are better able to convince people of their own color of the
attainments that may be reached in religion and civilization by
the African race. Thus it appears that not only the climate is
for the Negro, but the work of missions as well. It is the office
of this Association to make use of the Freedmen educated in its
schools as missionaries to Africa, as speedily as Providence
shall open the way. It is able to furnish a portion of the force
required at an early day.

The animal and vegetable productions of the country are so
abundant that the material interests essential to the success
of the mission are assured. The resources of the country are
immense. “It is estimated that in the nine provinces of the
Soudan there are 140,000,000 acres of fine, black, soft, loamy
soil, an acreage that would make two productive cotton empires,
each larger than France. You need not plough this soil; you
need not work it; you have only to scatter the seed, and the
periodical rains, or _sikeahs_ (water-wheels for artificial
irrigation) water the earth, and then at maturity you reap your
harvest.” (“Four Thousand Miles in Africa,” page 357.)

The Madi country, for example, is thickly settled, and abounds
with vast herds of the finest cattle. (“Ismailia,” page 286.) The
Fatiko people are muscular and well built, and, generally, their
faces are handsome (“Ismailia,” page 282); while the Obbo people,
living as they do at an altitude of 3,600 feet above the level of
the sea, wear clothing, and afford a market for cloth, for which
they exchange ivory, giving promise of an active market at an
early day. (See “Albert Nyanza,” page 224.)

The physical geography of a portion of the territory mentioned
by Mr. Arthington is as attractive as any found in Central
Africa. In latitude 3 deg. to 9 deg. north, on the White Nile,
and eastwards, the elevations vary from 1,500 to 4,000 feet above
the level of the sea (“Ismailia,” page 522), and possess all the
variety of scenery of mountain, plain, forest and meadow, which
give a park-like beauty to portions of the country. At Fatiko,
in latitude 3 deg. north, during eight months the range of the
thermometer was between 60 deg. at 6 A.M. and 90 deg. at noon,
the average temperature being equal to about 75 deg. (“Ismailia,”
pages 513, 514, 515, 516.)

From all that can be gathered, your Committee believe that,
if the means shall be furnished for entering upon the proposed
mission field, it will be wise to inaugurate the work among the
highlands south of Gondokoro, among the Berri, Fatiko, Latooka
or Obbo tribes, selecting a locality, if possible, accessible
by steamer, not too far from some station of the Egyptian
Government, and among tribes of mild and friendly disposition,
and thus open to religious and civilizing agencies.

The Committee also urge that the relations of America to the
slave trade have been such that we are in duty bound to do all
we can for the redemption of the people of Africa, and that as a
thank-offering to God for His overruling Providence in ridding
our country of slavery, we, of America, should be ready to
establish one new mission at least in addition to the three that
have recently been undertaken with so much enthusiasm and at so
great expense by our British friends.

The special claims of this field upon the American Missionary
Association are obvious. Equatorial Africa is not a new and
untried field to it. The Mendi Mission was organized by the
Amistad Committee thirty-seven years ago, and was transferred
to the care of the Association in 1846. We are not unfamiliar
with the discouragements or the hopeful aspects of the work. We
ought to have learned something by so long experience. It is by
no means proposed to divert strength from the old mission, which
has never, perhaps, been in more promising condition, to a new
field. Rather it would be our hope, if the Lord should lay this
work upon us, that these eastern and western fields, balancing
each other across the dark continent, would more than double the
interest of those who work through us in the evangelization of
Africa. The negro race has always been our prominent and peculiar
charge. That the people of this district have been degraded more
by the slave trade than by their native heathenism, makes their
claim on us the less possible to resist. And the fact that the
missionary spirit among the students in our Southern colleges
will soon demand room in which to expend itself in self-denying
labor, forbids that we should refuse such an offer without
careful and prayerful consideration.

We, therefore, advise that an appeal be made for $35,000, which,
with the $15,000 offered by Mr. Arthington, will amount to
$50,000, as a fund for the establishment of a mission in the Nile
basin, to be called “The Arthington Mission,” in remembrance
of the beneficent donor, who, under God, has by his liberality
already made it possible for the great missionary societies to
establish Central African missions.

The Committee hope that the Lord may incline some one or more
of the friends of African missions, whom He has blessed with
wealth, to put into our hands the larger part of the sum required
for this undertaking, and that the Association may receive, say
$30,000, from one, two or three contributors, which will still
leave room for the many who may desire by smaller gifts to have a
part in the enterprise.

We further suggest that a force of not less than ten missionaries
would be required to enter upon this work; that of this number,
eight should, if possible, be of African descent, and that
correspondence should be entered into with a view to their wise
selection at such time as sufficient funds shall be subscribed
to warrant a beginning of the undertaking. Also, that estimates
be obtained respecting the dimensions and cost of a suitable
steamer to serve the purposes of the mission. We recommend
further that this report be printed in the April number of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, and thus submitted to the prayerful
consideration of the friends of the African race, and that the
Executive Committee await their decision as it shall be indicated
in their response, trusting in it to read the full disclosure of
the Master’s will, and purposing to be wholly guided thereby.

  GEO. M. BOYNTON,       M. E. STRIEBY,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER,     G. D. PIKE,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,      H. W. HUBBARD.
  CLINTON B. FISK,

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL.

The American Missionary Association is practically out of debt,
but not out of danger. If receipts for current expenses are not
kept up, a new debt is inevitable. The receipts for February and
up to March 14th (the date of going to press), are $7,233 less
than for the corresponding months of last year. This falling off
may be partly due to the effort made to pay _our_ debt and that
of the Home Missionary Society, and partly to the unconscious
feeling that with the debt paid little else is needed. But our
work and workers are on our hands. Our office expenses are
brought down to the most economical figures, and our expenditures
in the field are most rigidly confined to the appropriations.
If the receipts of this fiscal year are brought up to those of
last--the basis of the appropriations--the work will be carried
through successfully and without debt.

We earnestly entreat our friends to grant us that desired result.
We cannot ourselves avert the calamity of debt, for if we should
recall every laborer, and close every school and church, we
should still owe the salaries and return traveling expenses,
so that the saving would be very little. We ask, therefore, a
generous and steady support for the rest of the year. Pastors can
be our greatest helpers. They can see to it that our collections
are not forgotten. If our cause is on the list, they can secure
the collection at the regular time. If it is not, and we have
received no contribution for a year or two past, the pastor is
entreated to consider if our work is not worthy of support, and
to present it to his people. Even if the offering should be
small, it would be gladly received. Individual donors are also
asked to aid us in this endeavor. Our experience in the last two
years gives us hope that this, our appeal, will not be in vain.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROGRESS--ENCOURAGEMENT.

The work in the Southern States moves slowly; there are many
hindrances, and we are sometimes discouraged. But then, again, a
way-mark is reached showing such progress as to rebuke unbelief.
We point to one such.

Will the reader picture to himself the early toils and trials
of Rev. John G. Fee in Kentucky. The son of a slaveholder, he
began to preach an anti-slavery gospel, and organized a church
excluding slaveholders. In 1855 he was mobbed; again in 1858;
and in 1859 a meeting was assembled in Richmond, the county seat
of Madison County, which sent a committee to Berea to warn Mr.
Fee’s associates (he was then in the North) to leave in ten days.
The warning was given with such quiet emphasis that it had to be
obeyed. Thirty-six persons were banished from the State.

The change in twenty years is indicated in the following extract
from the _Kentucky Register_ of February 21, 1879, published
in that same town of Richmond, Ky. It can be seen, too, in the
prosperity of Berea College, with its 273 pupils, one-half of
them white:

“REV. JOHN G. FEE AT THE COURT-HOUSE.--Probably no man
in Madison County in past years has been talked about as much as
Rev. John G. Fee, the founder of the town and college of Berea.
He has been a resident of the county for more than twenty-five
years, has been a preacher of the gospel, and, yet strange to
say, never until last Sunday preached a sermon in this place.
On the day named, he occupied by invitation the pulpit of Dr.
T. H. Clelland at the Court-House. Owing to the fact that no
general notice of Mr. Fee’s intention to speak had been given,
his audience was very small; otherwise the Court-House would
have been filled to its utmost capacity. Mr. Fee is a forcible
and pleasant speaker, agreeable in his manner, and impresses
his bearers that he is in earnest, honest in his convictions,
and conscientiously seeks the advancement and well-being of his
fellow-men.

“As he stood before his audience, a messenger for Christ, and
preached the words of the Master, one could but recall the trying
years of the past, when the speaker fearlessly combated a race
prejudice and battled for the freedom of a people who seemed
hopelessly enslaved; when he stood alone in his advocacy of negro
liberty, and in his mild and gentle way, sought to convince
his neighbors that human slavery was wrong and condemned by
God; when his enemies persecuted him, and the people among whom
he lived sought to pull him down, and even threatened to take
his life--one could but recall these stormy days of hate and
sectional prejudice, and at the same time remember that when the
war came and Mr. Fee’s party was in the ascendant, he had no man
punished; he sought to avenge no personal grievance, but went on
with his life-work in his quiet, unobtrusive way, forgetting his
enemies or only remembering them to forgive them.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We print in this number the first of a series of five articles,
from the pen of Dist. Sec. Woodworth, on the general topic,
“Congregationalism in the South.” They will give an outline of
its history, and hints as to its responsibility and opportunity.
While it will not be, as it has not been, the sole object of the
Association to extend the form of church polity, to which most
of the churches which contribute to it are attached, but rather
to labor for the intelligent Christianization of the people
who most need it, we are disposed to think that there will be
found a greater affinity between the Southern people and the
Congregational way than many have supposed. We do not endorse all
the utterances on the incompatibility between the two which were
made at the last Annual Meeting, and are glad to have so careful
a survey of the whole subject as these articles will furnish.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.

1. Before the War.

DIST. SEC. C. L. WOODWORTH, BOSTON.

Few are aware, perhaps, that up to 1861 Congregationalism had but
two churches south of Mason and Dixon’s line; and these were not
indigenous to the soil, but the transplanted growths of other
lands. The first was the old Circular Church of Charleston,
S.C., organized in 1690, of Irish and Scotch Presbyterians, of
Congregationalists from the North, and of Huguenots from the
persecutions in France.

The second was the Midway Church, in Liberty County, Georgia,
which was formed in 1695, as a colony from the First Congregational
Church of Dorchester, Mass. It first planted itself on the Ashley
River in South Carolina, at a place which is called Dorchester;
but in 1752, the colony having grown to more than five hundred
souls, emigrated bodily into Georgia, transplanting the church
into that new country. Among the eminent men on its roll of
preachers was the father of Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes.

Both these churches have a very distinct and striking history.
Both sent out hundreds of most intelligent and worthy members,
who adorned all the walks of life--teachers, preachers,
professors, lawyers, judges, governors, senators--but neither of
them ever propagated itself. Both were ministered to for years by
men of other denominations, though none ventured to tamper with
their polity. It is a singular illustration of the toughness and
vigor of the Congregational life, and of the uncongenial soil in
which it was planted.

The two churches held on their way with no signs of age or
weakness until the outbreak of the war. The old Circular Church
unfortunately lost its meeting-house in the great fire during
the siege of Charleston. It was also weakened by deaths and
emigrations, as well as by the withdrawal of most of the colored
membership to form the new Plymouth Church of Charleston.
Notwithstanding all this the white membership have bravely
held together, have built themselves a small chapel, and until
recently have been ministered to by Rev. William Adams, son of
the late Dr. Nehemiah Adams, of Boston.

The Midway Church in the same way split on the color line, but
not to form two Congregational churches. The white part of it
at the close of the war surrendered the polity to which they
had clung with heroic tenacity for more than one hundred and
sixty years, and went over in a body to the Presbyterian Church
South. Not so the larger part of the colored membership. They
knew nothing but Congregationalism, and they refused to accept
anything in its stead. The result was that they were formed into
the new Congregational Church of Midway. They have built a new
meeting-house, and are showing marvelous energy in maintaining
their institutions and working towards self-support. It is matter
of interest that many of these colored Congregationalists of Old
Midway were scattered during and since the war into the towns
and counties around, and have formed the seed out of which six
or seven other Congregational churches have sprung. Right here,
then, these two facts confront us: The _one_, that our polity,
for some reason, stopped short at the boundary between freedom
and slavery. The _other_, that, having _passed_ that boundary, it
seemed to have no power to propagate itself, either by sending
out colonies or by organizing new converts on the ground. It is
certainly a strange anomaly in church extension, and we leave
each one to answer for himself whether it was some instinct in
Congregationalism which held it North of the latitude of slavery,
or whether the overruling Power, which gave it its mission in
America, turned it back until it could go with an open Bible,
free speech, and its democratic equalities.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

ORANGEBURG, S.C.--Last month we printed a very short
plea for a musical instrument for the church. We express here our
thanks to Mr. S. T. Gordon, of New York, who sent us word a few
days ago that an organ was at our disposal for this use. Such
ready responses are full of encouragement.

ATLANTA, GA.--“A good degree of religious interest still
prevails in Atlanta University. On the first Sunday of March,
four persons united with the church by profession of faith, and
a number of others propose to do so at an early day. An equal
number of those converted here will join churches at their homes.”

OGEECHEE, OR NO. 1 MILLER STATION, GA.--The station
called “Ogeechee” in our printed list in Feb. Magazine, should
be _No. 1 Miller Station, Chatham Co., Ga._ Miss E.W. Douglass,
formerly at McLeansville, N.C., has been transferred to this
field, and finds ample opportunity for missionary labor. Friends
communicating with her, or with Rev. John. R. McLean, pastor of
the church, will please note the correct P.O. address.

TALLADEGA, ALA.--“A precious work of grace. Eighteen
hopeful conversions, and many more almost persuaded. The meeting
we have just come from has been seldom paralleled in our
experience. Many seem to be discovering that there is life for
a look at the Crucified One. ‘Pray, watch, work,’ has been our
motto for some time past, and these are the blessed results. Will
our dear A. M. A. pray for this part of its Israel?”

MONTGOMERY, ALA.--The Swayne School has
received a valuable box for its “Teachers’ Home” from the ladies
of the church at Lyonsville, Ill. It contained a rag carpet,
comfortables, bed and table linen, etc.

ANNISTON, ALA.--March 2d, six were received into this
church on profession of their faith. Two infants were baptized.

ATHENS, ALA.--“There is great zeal in study, especially
in Bible study. This has greatly strengthened our hearts, for
we know ‘The entrance of Thy word giveth light,’ and we are
encouraged to hope for the speedy conversion of several young men
who have publicly asked the prayers of Christians.”

TOUGALOO, MISS.--“Students are manifesting more than
usual interest in study and general improvement. We do hope we
can be allowed to put fences around the place; we are losing so
much every year by having the farm all open to the public. We can
make it a source of income when properly fenced and stocked.”

NEW IBERIA, LA.--The South-western Conference of
Congregational Churches will meet at St. Paul’s Church, New
Iberia, April 2d.

BEREA, KY.--An encouraging religious interest
is reported. Five young men of excellent promise have,
within a week, confessed Christ. This has been under the
regular ministration, without help from abroad. Most of the
prayer-meetings are well attended. The community is very
harmonious.

MEMPHIS, TENN.--The school never was in a more
flourishing condition than now, and the future has never before
seemed so full of promise.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

--There are probably a million and a half of church members among
the colored population of the Southern States.

--Ex-Governor Brown, of Georgia, expresses himself as follows
in regard to the position and claims of the Freedmen: “I think
I speak the sentiments of a vast majority of our people, that
it is our interest to make of the colored race the very best
citizens we can. To do this it is necessary to educate them as
far as our means will allow, and to lift them from the ignorance
in which they were found at the time of their freedom to a much
higher grade of intelligence. They can never be good citizens and
exercise intelligently the rights of freemen till they have these
advantages.”

--We regret to see that the Young Men’s Christian Association,
of Washington, D. C., by the Rev. O. C. Morse, its secretary,
feared to have a few colored Sunday-school teachers mingle with
white persons engaged in similar work, withdrew invitations
given, and at first refused admission to the three or four who
came with cards of invitation, though they were afterwards
allowed to enter. Meanwhile Senator Bruce was occupying with
dignity the chair of the Senate of the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *


Africa.

--The Khedive of Egypt, at the close of 1877, appointed Captain
George Malcolm (Pasha) for the suppression of the slave trade
in the Red Sea. As late as June 1878, he reported that he could
accomplish nothing, as the trade was effectually protected by the
Turkish flag.

--Mr. Maples, of the Universities Mission, writes from Masasi,
East Africa, that, owing to the energy of Dr. Kirk and Seyid
Borghash, the wholesale slave trade at Zanzibar, and up and down
the coast for hundreds of miles, is almost entirely stopped; but
that they are still smuggled into dhows by twos and threes so
clothed and disguised as not to awaken suspicion; that in the
interior, slave caravans make their way from the Nyassa region to
the coast as far north as Somali, and south to and beyond Lindi.
He says: “I should scarcely be believed were I to tell you how
great is the deterrent effect upon the slave trade in these parts
of a solitary mannered Englishman dwelling among the people.”

--Mr. Penrose, of the Church Missionary Society, with all his
camp followers, has been killed in the country of the Unyamwesi.

--Mr. Mackey, of the C. M. S., arrived last July with the caravan
at Kagei, on the Victoria Nyanza. (See map.) He visited Lukonge
at Ukerewe, in regard to the murder of Mr. O’Neill and Lieutenant
Smith; heard the explanations given, and demanded the note-books
and pistols of his friends, as an evidence of regret and a pledge
of friendship. These were not given up to him, and he, therefore,
declined to have further relations with that people.

--Mr. Wilson writes of the healthiness of the Uganda country, and
thinks that missionaries’ wives may safely accompany them thither.

--There are large deposits of kaolin, or china clay, near Mtesa’s
capital, and abundance of nutmeg trees.

--Col. Gordon has advised the C. M. S. to establish a mission on
the west shore of the Albert Nyanza, which he represents to be a
healthy location, free from foreign influence, and substantially
under protection of the Egyptian Government.

--Rev. J. B. Thomson, of the London Missionary Society at Ujiji,
on Lake Tanganika, died at his post January 20th. It is a great
loss to this new mission. The Directors ask, “Who now will be
_baptized for the dead_?”

--The English Baptist Missionary Society will occupy San
Salvador, 50 miles from the west coast of Africa and south of
the Congo, as the head-quarters of their work, with a station
at Makuta. Mr. Comber returned to England after a tour of
observation, and hopes to return this month with two associates.

--Mr. Stanley strongly advocates the construction of a railway,
which would be about 500 miles in length, from a point on the
east coast to the southern end of the Victoria Nyanza. Another
railway 150 miles long would bring us to Lake Tanganika, which
has a water-way of about 330 miles, and another 200 miles long
to Lake Nyassa, which gives many hundred miles of water-way. A
fourth short railway would lead to the navigable waters of the
Shire and the Zambesi, which flow into the sea. These link-lines
of railway would open up about 1,300 miles of splendid navigable
water. Connect these lines also with the sources of the Congo
or Livingstone river, and a chain of trading posts is possible
across the continent to the west coast. The value of this new
market to English and American merchandise would thus be immense,
and the speedy downfall of the slave trade be made sure.

--The _Wesleyan_ (English) _Missionary Notices_ publishes an
account of a recent visit by two of their missionaries into the
interior, seventy miles west from Sierra Leone. They found a
healthier country, though only 210 feet above sea level, and a
cooler climate. Fruit is grown, cotton spun, and iron implements
made. The villages were increasing in size, and are now at peace.
Slavery and polygamy exist among them. The country is open to
missionary effort, and Mr. Huddleston is speedily to be located
at Fouracaria, in the Limba country.

--The following extract is of special interest as relating to the
region proposed to us for missionary work by Mr. Arthington:

African research, in its relation to commerce merely, is being
taken up with energy in the three principal emporiums of the
Mediterranean--Genoa, Marseilles and Trieste. The experienced
African traveller, Dr. Mattenci, has started from Genoa at the
head of an expedition fitted out at the charge of a number of
Italian merchants. He goes through the Suez Canal to Suatin and
Matamma, in the southwest of Abyssinia, and will penetrate, if
time and circumstances permit, into the Galla Lands. Almost
at the same date an Austrian expedition leaves Trieste, under
charge of two marine officers, Pletsch and Pizzighelli. They
propose to remain for above a whole year in Shoa, in order to
make an exhaustive study of its capacity for export and import
trading, and to return a complete report to a number of eminent
Austrian mercantile firms. From Marseilles, lastly, several
representatives of commercial houses in south-western Europe have
been despatched to the Red Sea, Shoa, and Abyssinia, with similar
instructions.--_African Times._

--The Vatican has entrusted to the Algerian Roman Catholic
Mission the creation of two stations in Central Africa--one on
Lake Tanganika, the other on Lakes Victoria and Albert Nyanza.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Indians.

--The House Committee reported against the several bills to
establish territorial government in the Indian Territory. The
conclusions of the Committee are as follows:

_First_--That the bill (Oklahoma) under consideration conflicts
with existing treaty stipulations.

_Second_--That to decide that a treaty is no longer binding
requires for its justification reasons which commend themselves
to the principles of equity and good conscience, particularly
where the parties to the compact with the United States are
weak and powerless and depend solely on the good faith of the
Government.

_Third_--That no such reasons exist for violating the treaty
stipulations which reserve the Indian Territory exclusively for
Indians, and which secure to the Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws,
Creeks and Seminoles, the right of self-government, under the
restrictions of the Constitution of the United States.

_Fourth_--That even if there were no opposing treaty
stipulations, no objections resting on good faith, it would be
unwise and impolitic to throw the Indian Territory open to white
settlers without the consent of the Indian owners.

_Fifth_--That while official recommendations--some of them
entitled to the highest respect--are strongly in favor of making
Indians citizens of the United States, and transferring their
land titles from the national tenure in common to the individual
tenure in severalty, experience has shown that in the great
majority of cases such measures, instead of benefiting, have
proved injurious to the Indian.

_Sixth_--That experience fully demonstrates that the holding
of their lands in common by the Indian tribes is an effectual
safeguard against the worst effects of Indian improvidence. Apart
from any considerations of justice or humanity, it would be
unwise and unstatesmanlike to adopt measures which, by destroying
that safeguard, would be calculated to reduce the great mass of
them, in opposition to their own earnest protests, to a state of
hopeless penury and degradation.

The report is signed by Messrs. Neal, Riddle, Muldrow, Aldrich,
Reed, Bagley and James T. Jones of the committee.

--When Gen. Howard went alone, as it were, and unarmed among the
hostile and ferocious Chiricahuas, and boldly faced their head
chief Cochise, he showed them a moral power which they had never
seen before, and so produced a deep impression of respect for
the superiority of white men that has probably done more than
any brute force could have effected towards the pacification
of the tribe. The treaty then made was, and is still, sacredly
respected by Taza, the son and successor of Cochise, and by all
the Apaches, except, perhaps, fifty hostiles, who still prowl on
the Mexican border.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese.

--Last month we recorded the failure of the proposal to transfer
the Indians to the War Department. This month, with equal
pleasure, we note the failure of the bill virtually to prohibit
Chinese immigration. After passing both House and Senate, it
was vetoed by the President, and on the motion to pass it over
the veto, was defeated, having evidently lost ground in the
intervening days.

--Among the many memorials addressed to the President on this
subject, the following was sent by our Executive Committee:

_To the President of the United States:_

  SIR: The Executive Committee of the American Missionary
  Association respectfully but most earnestly ask that the
  Executive veto be affixed to the bill passed by Congress
  affecting the relations of this country with China. We regard
  that bill as a surrender to caste prejudice, an injury to
  this country, a wrong to China, and a violation of treaty
  stipulations, of the fundamental principles of the Declaration of
  Independence, and of the law of God.

  Signed by vote of the Committee,

                                                 CHARLES L. MEAD,
                                                 JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  _February 21, 1879._                           M. E. STRIEBY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.


REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

SUNDAY-SCHOOLS FOR THE FREEDMEN.

The International Sunday-school Convention at Atlanta, upon the
motion of Rev. Joshua Knowles, of Georgia, passed this resolution:

“That the present mental and moral condition of the colored
people of this country, especially their lack of proper and
adequate instruction, is calculated to enlist our sympathy, and
call forth our earnest prayers and endeavors in their behalf.”

At the request of the executive committee, Rev. W. S. Plumer, D.
D., of South Carolina, spoke upon this resolution. The venerated
man, cutting down the tangle about the entrance to the subject,
showed that the prophetic curse uttered by Noah did not apply to
the African race, but only to the Canaanites, a single branch of
the family of Ham. He spoke of the Ethiopian eunuch as one of the
first trophies of the Gospel out of the Jewish nation. Africa now
says to us when we put the question: “Understandest thou what
thou readest?” “How can I, except some one guide me?” And that is
what these people are looking to us for to-day. Now a great work
is to be done for these people, and it is to be done just as it
is to be done for white folks. We must do this in self-defense.
It is not possible that this great mass of uneducated mind can be
among us without in the end doing great mischief. In 1825, Dr.
John H. Rice predicted that if this country was ever desolated,
it would be by some crisp-haired prophet, arising and claiming
inspiration from Heaven, holding himself ready to lead on these
people to damage and mischief of every sort. He had known for
sixty years that colored children could learn by rote as well
as white children; he had sometimes thought better. And here is
encouragement. He had written a memoir of a Christian negro,
Monroe. His own life had been saved by a negro, when, as a boy,
he was capsized in the Ohio. “Be kindly affectioned toward these
people,” said the patriarchal man in the spirit of the aged
John, “and God will provide for them a future of great honor and
usefulness among us. Let us love them and treat them as brethren,
and remember that ‘the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from
all sin’--_us_, the black man as well as the white man.” In the
printed report of that speech “applause” is counted nine times.

At that convention, in the report by States of Sunday-school
work, Maryland announced three Sunday-school missionaries, one
of whom labored among the colored people, and two teachers’
associations in Baltimore, one for the colored. “We wish it
understood that we are taking care of the colored children
and gathering them into our schools.” Virginia reported: “We
are earnestly engaged in pushing the work among the colored
population.” The colored Sunday-school organized in 1855, by
Stonewall Jackson, was still alive, superintended by Col.
Preston, and having as teachers some of the ablest professors in
the university at Lexington. Experience has shown that the best
way to elevate the colored man is to give him well-ordered and
well-taught Sunday-schools. Florida said: “The work in colored
schools is gaining ground, one of them having over 300 scholars.”
Texas reported many flourishing colored Sunday-schools, and
was happy to have one of her intelligent Christian colored
superintendents in that convention.

Besides what is being done by the several denominations in their
respective way, the American Sunday-school Union has in the South
twelve of its missionaries. I met one of them the other day, Rev.
J. J. Strong, whose field is the State of Alabama. In five years
he had organized 157 schools, of which 37 were colored. Of the
142 schools aided by him, 58 were colored. He finds much aid and
comfort at the home of Judge Thornton, in the northern part of
the State. As he was about to start out on foot for the tour of
the county, the judge said: “You must take my pony.” As the pony
was known all over the county, he served as an introduction from
the judge. This missionary is one of two who are sustained by one
of those “unabridged” Christian men in the North. The other one
works among the Swedes in Wisconsin. The salary and traveling
expenses, and $100 to be given away by this worker in Alabama,
uses up $1,100 a year in this excellent work of Christian
philanthropy.

Besides all this at the South in this line, the American
Missionary Association reports for the last year 5,894
Sunday-school scholars connected with its sixty-four churches.
Then there is a vast amount of such work done every year that
does not come into these statistics. During the last summer
vacation Atlanta University sent out 150 day-school teachers,
and Fisk as many more, and all our institutions furnish more or
less of them. Nearly all of these also run for the time their own
Sunday-schools, thus reaching many thousand children with the
truth of God’s word. It is known that up to this time our colored
teachers have reached 100,000 of these day scholars, a multitude
of whom have been taught in Sunday-schools.

Talladega College, the last year, by its students, reached 1,200
Sunday-school scholars. In the past years they have reached, in
all, 20,000. Out of these schools six Congregational churches
have grown up. Rev. G. W. Andrews, the instructor in theology,
has been accustomed to take his class on Saturday morning over
the lesson of the next day, thus training them in a normal way as
well as in the way of the truth.

I had the pleasure of attending, in the month of February,
the convention held in New Orleans for organizing the State
Sunday-school Association for Louisiana. Florida was organized
the week after, which leaves only three State associations
yet to be set up. At Atlanta, the delegates from the South
reported their purpose to go home and organize every State. At
New Orleans it was reported that Louisiana had already 96,000
children in Sunday-schools, and this is nearly one-seventh of the
entire population of the State. With an association under the
vigorous administration of its president, Mr. W. R. Lyman, and
his live executive committee, it is hoped that all the parishes
(counties) of the State will soon be organized, and the work
greatly set forward. In that convention, colored delegates were
present, participating. The resolution of the Atlanta convention
quoted above, upon introduction by the man who was elected
president, was unanimously adopted. Upon taking the chair, he
assured colored people of sympathy and co-operation. Rev. W. S.
Alexander, our president and pastor in New Orleans, who was made
officially prominent in the convention, was also put on as one
of the vice-presidents and one of the members of the executive
committee of the State association. Two colored pastors were also
put upon that committee. More and more the heart of the good
people of the South is turning toward the colored children.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

The Work at Hampton, from a Three Months’ Observation.

REV. JOHN H. DENISON

“_Arbores seret, diligens Agricola, quarum adspiciet baccam ipse
nunquam._” A diligent husbandman plants trees, the fruit of which
he himself shall never behold. With such sentiments did our
excellent Arnold support us in the arduous pursuit of Latin prose
composition. It is evident, however, that there is a difference
in trees, if not in diligent husbandmen.

“Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute” is a tree whose fruit
may be speedily beheld, not only by those who planted it, but by
those also who cultivate or enrich it. It is a paying investment.
Every year it sends its roots deeper and stretches its boughs
out farther. It commends itself to the practical Christian
sentiment of the South. It is a peace-making force throughout
this section. Its attitude towards all Southern questions is
intelligent, considerate and just; it gives no sympathy to
fanaticism on either side, and nothing but discouragement to
political schemers. It sends out every summer the wholesome
leaven of a class of young men and women who have been trained to
teach intelligently; to use their hands as well as their heads;
to see the dignity of labor; to accept the situation, and not to
be ashamed of their color. In short, they are trained to the work
that lies before them, and not trained away from it.

It is a rare thing for a graduate of the Normal School to enter
into political life. Not one has been known to be a demagogue.
The standard set before them is that of a hard-working Christian
manhood; and it must be said that they bid fair to make the best
citizens we have, in a time when the great demand is for men who
will not work for an office, but who will work honestly for a
living. Our country seems to be crying for a further supply of
that article which forms the staple and the grit of nations--a
contented, practical manhood--the “_vir integer vitæ_” of Horace,
re-inforced by grace. It is that demand which Hampton is seeking
to meet, and does meet, with its yearly class of graduates.

Many years ago all England was startled by the arraignment of an
educated gentleman for stealing; he was a graduate of Oxford;
he plead guilty, but said it was his only resource; he had not
been able to find any business by which he could support himself
honestly. Since then the history of our financial institutions
has made it appear that this gentleman was not alone in his
unhappy predicament; there has been a world of college education
which has not fitted its beneficiaries to gain an honest
livelihood. It has given them the accomplishments of a social
rank, but not the power to earn that rank; it has simply made
them miserable. It has done worse even: it has left them in the
midst of a moral snare. It is the grand miscalculation of our
educational system. Here are millions of acres at the South
waiting to be reclaimed by skilful hands; here are thousands of
educated men who cannot find an honest self-supporting business.
The lever of education is not applied at the right place. It is
the merit of Hampton that it does apply the lever at the right
place. It trains the hand as well as the head. It fits a man to
take up the work God has placed before him. It gives him the
conditions on which a Christian life may flourish.

The religious teaching is evangelical. The school regards
itself as representing the American Missionary Association, and
is faithful to the trust. Nowhere can teachers be found more
earnestly evangelical, laboring often beyond their strength
to bring souls to Christ. To their honor be it said, however,
that both Unitarians and Friends have not only contributed of
their means in large proportion, but have also served in the
work of education and Christian culture with the most unselfish
devotion. They reap a far richer reward than that of theological
proselytism. Their noble spirit, scorning all partisan ends,
seeking only for an opportunity to do good, has greatly increased
the humane and beneficent influence of the school; has caused it
to be widely felt outside of its own walls, and to become every
day more and more an instrument of peace and reconstruction.

There is a world of kindly deeds and neighborly acts which cannot
be enumerated, but which prove to the community the kinship of
our Northern Christianity, and they meet with a _response_.
When a petition was presented this winter for the purpose of
subjecting the school to taxation, a large majority of the most
influential citizens in Hampton entered their protest, and the
petition fell to the ground. It was a sign of the times.

The religious work of the school has been well directed,
although not a thing that could be put in figures. It is
largely an endeavor to counteract the tendencies of ignorance
and prejudice in the colored churches and so give free play
to the spirit of grace. A large proportion of the students
are professors of religion when they come. The emotions and
prejudices have been trained to excess by an ignorant but fervid
system of religion which has exercised but slight control
over immoral practices. The effort is to balance this by the
cultivation of the conscience and understanding in Scriptural
truth; especially to hold up before their minds the idea of an
every-day religion and a practical Christian manhood.

The interest this winter has not reached the revival point, but
students have been led to Christ from time to time. Our hope
is not in transports, but in that steadily increasing lump of
leaven, a practical, self-denying piety. It shows itself in the
_morale_ of the school. We have 316 students--214 boys and 102
girls; of these, 56 are Indian boys, and 9 Indian girls.

In such a mass of human nature, fresh from uncivilization,
one might expect serious disturbances and scandals, not to
say rowdyism; yet Washington’s birthday was celebrated on the
open green by Negroes, and Indians who had just taken off
their blankets, with an Arcadian good behavior, while blacks
and aborigines met together in the school parlors and played
games together, boys as well as girls, without indecorum. It
is a frequent comment how little trouble they make, for so
miscellaneous a collection. There is a spirit, an atmosphere of
Christianity that pervades everything.

Perhaps the most striking fact of the winter is the Indian work.
It is a pity that people at the North do not see the great
importance of this, for it is much in need of funds. Four years
ago a party of hostile Indians of the most intractable sort were
captured and sent in irons to St. Augustine, under charge of
Capt. Pratt, U. S. A. They were desperate fellows; one killed
himself rather than submit. Under the Christian treatment of
Capt. Pratt they experienced a wonderful change, laid aside
their savage propensities, and heartily embraced the principles
of civilization. A year ago it was proposed that they should be
brought to Hampton. The experiment was tried successfully. They
mingle in a kindly way with the negroes, and have manifested
an earnest disposition to learn what they call the white man’s
road. They have given up their tobacco and their whiskey; they
hold prayer-meetings together, where one may hear their tones
of earnest entreaty, pleading with God in their own language.
Furthermore, they show their faith by their works, and may be
seen digging ditches or picking potatoes with all the energy of
an Anglo-Saxon. This for aboriginal gentlemen who, four years
ago, accounted manual labor to be the deepest degradation to
which a warrior could submit.

Best of all, they have manifested repentance toward God and
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. At the first communion in March,
eleven of them are, at their own earnest desire, to be admitted
to the church. Last summer the experiment proved such a success
that the school offered to take 50 more, and educate them for
Government, at the low rate of $167 apiece. It was too low an
estimate; but it was thought that friends would help, especially
in the erection of a building. They came last fall--40 boys
and 9 girls--bright-faced, ready to learn, full of response
to kindness. They are better than could have been expected;
already some of them have shown an interest in Christ. No work
could promise better. They have a great desire to learn, and are
especially interested in the mechanical arts that will help their
people toward civilization. Mr. Corliss has offered one of his
engines for a machine shop, but there is no money with which to
put a roof over it; even the Indian dormitory is yet unpaid for.
For want of $18,000 the work is checked; but it is a vital work.
If there are two classes of men to whom the people of the United
States owe a helping hand, they are the Indians and the Negroes.
Besides, it is God’s time; both races have been awakened to their
needs; there is a cry for help. Even from the far neighborhood of
Puget Sound have come letters asking if there is room at Hampton.
The time has come for the elevation of the Indian race; the
fulcrum is at Hampton. Here, too, is part of the lever; what we
want is the other part.

“Freely ye have received,” Christ says, “freely give.” We cannot
wash away our national injustice; God does not expect that. We
can show penitence by our helpfulness toward those who have been
its victims. So much God will expect, and it is likely to be sad
for us if we fail to meet the expectation.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

A Beginner’s Reflections--The Gospel--Congregationalism--The
Negro.

REV. S. E. LATHROP, MACON.

I have been at this post for about three months, and as it is my
first experience with the colored people, I may be pardoned for
offering some impressions that have come to me since entering
on the work. Having preached eight years to white people in the
North, I was somewhat curious to compare the results of the
same Gospel as applied to different races. The comparison thus
far is entirely satisfactory. I am more than ever convinced of
the priceless value of the Gospel as an elevating, purifying
power in human hearts, no matter what is the color of the skin.
Judging medicines by their results, we say that this or that is
a specific for certain diseases; so judging Christianity by its
results, as applied not only to different individuals but to
different races, it is a specific for the deep-seated disease of
sin everywhere.

As different doctors have formulæ of their own, differing more or
less each from the other, so are the different sects or schools
of religious thought. I, as a Congregationalist born and bred,
the son of a Western Home Missionary, with Puritan ancestry
running back to the days of John Robinson, am, as a student of
human nature and of theological therapeutics, convinced more
than ever of the value of our Puritan ideas, modified, mellowed
and improved as they are by the additional light which has
broken forth out of God’s word. I think Congregationalism is
adapted to African as well as Caucasian Christians; both from its
lack of iron-bound traditions and mannerisms, and “theological
slang,” and also from its flexibility, its adaptedness, its
“sanctified common sense,” which does not make a Procrustean bed
of inflexible length for tall and short alike, nor like that
which the prophet mentions, “shorter than that a man can stretch
himself upon it, and the covering narrower than that he can wrap
himself in it.” Its covering is, like Christ’s seamless robe,
broad enough to envelop in its generous fold every forlorn heart.

I have also verified what I had before heard, that the Negro
race is not all composed of Uncle Toms--that, in fact, such
transcendent characters are rare. The negro is neither a prince
in disguise nor a hero in rags. He is exceedingly human,
fallible, ignorant, childlike, fickle, improvident, thoughtless.
We could easily lengthen this catalogue of failings, painful
things which oftentimes tend to discourage the Christian
worker. But hence is all the more need of the Gospel among
them. Their animalism makes necessary the proper antidote of
spiritual training. Their unsteadiness calls loudly for patience,
perseverance, courage, on the part of teacher and missionary.
Past centuries mightily influence the present. When I consider
how far from perfect is our boasted Caucasian race, and how
the home pastors and home missionaries toil unceasingly amid
difficulties to teach sobriety, self-control and an embodied
Gospel among the world’s dominant race, I can have more patience
with the lower strata of humanity.

Remembering the defalcations, the immoralities, the outbreaking
evils which so often come to light among the white Christians,
who have many centuries of Christian ancestors behind them, I can
surely have more charity for these sable people who themselves
dwelt in bondage so long, whose ancestors were slaves, and
whose history shades off into the dim, remote, unknown past of
savage Africa. Even the Jews, that remarkable people, known as
they always have been for shrewdness, intelligence and business
prosperity, after being enslaved in Egypt for some hundred
years, were fearfully debased and demoralized, wandering in the
wilderness many years, and even when they had conquered their
promised land, were in turmoil and confusion. Can we expect
better things of the sons of Ham? No nation can be “born in a
day” whose minds and hearts are degraded by bondage for so long.

But there is evident progress. The colored people of Macon
deserve praise for their efforts after a truer life. There are
10,000 of them in this city, and among them is much poverty and
want. But others have, “since emancipation,” laid up property and
secured comfortable homes of their own. Their children in school
compare favorably in most respects with white children. Some
of them walk three or four miles each way to attend our Lewis
High School. The extravagance and effervescence of religious
gatherings is becoming more and more toned down as intelligence
increases. They are more and more winning the respect of the
whites, and I think there is more disposition on both sides to
live peaceably than at any previous time since the war. Our
church and school have had various trials, but now the prospect
seems more favorable. One man has united with the church on
profession.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Revival in the Church and College.

REV. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA.

On March 2d thirty were received into our church, the fruits, in
part, of a revival still in progress. It is the custom in the
South to admit converts to the church on the first convenient
opportunity, as in apostolic times, according to Acts ii. 47.

Of these thirty, seven were baptized in infancy, mostly by our
own missionaries, ten years ago; three were immersed; the rest
followed Ezek. xxxvi. 25. The youngest was not quite nine years
old; the oldest was between sixty and seventy, and as happy a
new-born soul as one often meets. Several were from forty to
fifty. Five are heads of families, one of whom I have heard
called “king of men,” because of his commanding influence. He
says: “I mean to be as faithful in the service of Christ as I
have been in that of Satan. I am now ready for any duty the
church may impose upon me; be it easy or hard, it makes no
difference to me.” His conversion has startled everybody. One
little boy scarcely ten years old often prays intelligently and
touchingly for a dear uncle and aunt, and asks others to join him.

All but two of the girls at Foster Hall are hopeful Christians;
and of the forty-five young men who board at the same place, but
four remain without a hope in Christ. Two in the higher normal
room still refuse to enter upon the better life, and fourteen in
the common school normal, out of the ninety in that department.
The community outside of the college, our people say, was never
before so awakened since the college was established here.

The meetings have been characterized by a wonderful freedom from
excitement; indeed, I was never in a revival before where there
was so little. It has pleased God in this instance to magnify
preaching in a wonderful manner. Dr. Roy was with us a week
lacking one day, and preached every night and on the Sabbath,
interesting and profiting every one. One night many hearts were
deeply moved by his tender recital of the “Old, old story of
Jesus and his love.” We held extra meetings for two or three
weeks. During the “week of prayer” and the remainder of January
there were no conversions save one, that of “reckless George,”
as he used to be called. He was one of our brightest young men,
and his conversion made a deep impression. The revival did not
commence in earnest until the first week in February, when there
were twenty who turned to the Lord from the ways of sin. Since
then the work has gone steadily forward.

This whole region seems ripe for a spiritual harvest; but whence
are to come the reapers, as there is a limit to strength, and
other duties press sorely. We cannot have many more extra
meetings, though there are many inquirers; still we do not
despair, as God has shown us how easily He can brush away all
obstacles to the progress of His kingdom. He has again and again,
during the continuance of these meetings, rebuked our want of
faith.

The theological students have rendered excellent service by
visiting from door to door. Christians have been fully awake.
It is a glorious work to be instrumental in starting a soul in
the better way; but there remains the work, greater if possible,
of development through a wise Christian culture. We constantly
remember Paul’s advice, recorded in Acts xx. 28.

I have time only for this hasty word concerning the work of grace
here. I hope some one else may furnish you a full account. We
all feel grateful for this quickening of our religious life, and
this seal of our labors in the Lord, and our prayer is that an
army of Christian young men and women may be raised up from this
beginning of new life. While we “watch, work and pray,” we want
to see the “desert rejoice and blossom as the rose.”

       *       *       *       *       *


Revival Work--A well-organized Church.

REV. C. B. CURTIS, SELMA.

An interesting work of grace is now in progress in our church. We
began by observing the week of prayer, remembering especially the
request for a concert of prayer with the officers and workers of
the A. M. A., and with great blessing, we felt, to those of us
who met together to claim the promises.

As the white churches held union meetings during the week in
the afternoon, I attended some of them also, and was cordially
received and invited to lead one of the meetings. It chanced to
be the day of prayer for nations, and I improved the occasion to
set forth as strongly as I was able, not only the obligation,
but the _necessity_ that lies upon all Christians and all
patriots, state or national, irrespective of denominational
or political affiliations, to engage earnestly in the work
of Christian education, if we would avert the terrible evils
already impending. I was listened to with respect and evident
appreciation, and there seems to be a growing spirit of
cordiality and co-operation.

After another week of preparatory meetings, we opened the
audience-room and began preaching every night, except Saturday,
which we have kept up for three weeks with considerable success,
having over thirty hopeful conversions and an uncounted number
of inquirers; in fact, almost all express a desire, more or less
earnest, to become Christians.

I find but few of the difficulties that trouble us so much in
the North. There is but little skepticism, or the so prevalent
idea of salvation by mere morality, and no Universalism that I
have met as yet. The colored people are emphatically a religious
people, and the difficulty is not so much in getting them to go
forward to the anxious seats, or enter the inquiry-room, or to
weep over their sins and cry for mercy, as it is to show them the
simplicity of the way of salvation. They have been taught that
they must see visions and dream dreams, must be _held by the hair
of the head over the bottomless pit_ and then _taken to heaven_,
before they can be soundly converted; and though they are, in
many cases, beginning to distrust this old-time teaching, yet it
is hard for them to see that all they need to do is to “repent
and believe the gospel.” Indeed, it is the universal testimony
of the converts that their faith is continually tried by the
declarations of their friends, that they haven’t any religion,
because they haven’t “been to heaven or hell,” or “come through
shouting.” We try to teach them that simple reliance on the word
of God is far better and safer than dreams or feelings, and that
“by their fruits ye shall know them.”

We are now holding three services during the week, and dislike
very much to give up while there are still some who have been
seeking ever since the special meetings began, with seemingly
great earnestness, and yet cannot see the way clearly. Many of
those who have been converted naturally belong to other churches,
so that the addition to our membership will not be large, but we
feel that the work is genuine, and those who go to other churches
will carry a warmer feeling of interest in us which will help our
work greatly in the future.

I enjoy this work exceedingly, and have been, from the first,
favorably impressed with the condition of things in my field. The
church has been thoroughly organized, and has a good record. Its
influence is being felt in this community. Temperance and virtue
are necessary to church membership, and as much cannot be said
of all the colored churches in the South. The church building
is commodious and pleasant, with reading-room and lecture-room
in basement, cumbered with no debt, and upon its sweet sounding
bell (the gift of the Sabbath-school) is engraved the fitting
invitation, “Come, and let him that heareth say come.” For a
church of its size I have never seen so many ready and efficient
workers. Indeed, nearly all the members are workers, not drones,
as has been thoroughly demonstrated during this revival.

Neither can too much be said in praise of the work of the
teachers of Burrell School, who, though no longer under the
commission of your society, and necessarily undenominational in
their efforts, do much real missionary work. Such an intelligent,
faithful and efficient corps of coadjutors it has never been my
fortune to meet before.

I wish to acknowledge through your columns the receipt of a large
quantity of second-hand Sunday-school papers, well preserved,
and greatly appreciated by our children, as they have been only
partially supplied before. The package came, prepaid, by express
from Cairo. Our heartiest thanks to the unknown donors, and may
other schools be moved to “go and do likewise.”

       *       *       *       *       *


A Thoughtful Congregation--Personal Work.

REV. F. BASCOM, D. D., MONTGOMERY.

The church has been quickened in its spiritual life and activity,
but no pervading revival influence has gone forth into the
community. A good proportion of our members seem to be earnest,
growing and happy Christians. Our social-religious meetings are
very enjoyable. Some who have been delinquent now promise better
things. One or two have just begun a new life of faith in Christ,
and some others have promised to take the subject of their
salvation into serious consideration. By following up such cases,
I trust some of them may be won to Christ by personal effort. I
learn, on inquiry, that most of our members were brought one by
one to the Saviour by persevering and judicious pastoral labor.
The colored people are very accessible to such effort; and what a
boundless field for it they furnish! But “the laborers are few”
that care to gather such a harvest.

I still enjoy my work, and the privilege and importance of it
grow in my estimation. Last Sabbath I preached three times: twice
for my people, and once for the A. M. E. church. Quite a large
congregation.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

A Praise Meeting.

REV. G. STANLEY POPE, TOUGALOO.

Soon after the opening of the school we gathered together in our
chapel, to tell a few of the things for which we were _thankful_.
I wish some of our friends had been present to share the
enjoyment of the occasion with us.

One said: “I have had the severest sickness of my life, but it
proved a good thing for me. It kept me from going to my second
school at Lake, where the fever was so bad afterwards. I see a
great change in the people. They have been more thoughtful. I
have not prayed once without asking God to protect and bless the
teachers and scholars of our institution. My prayers have been
answered.”

Another said: “I am thankful that I have been blessed with more
light than many others. I never before saw how great the darkness
is in our country. The condition of the people where I have been
teaching is dreadful.”

Another, who is not a Christian: “I am thankful that I have at
last got here, where I have so long desired to be. I hope I may
be blessed spiritually as well as in my studies.”

Another: “I see the need of _good_ teachers and preachers as I
never did before. I am thankful for this, and that I am spared to
get back under these kind instructors.”

“I have been in a very intemperate place, but the Lord has helped
me to do good work. Secured a good many signers to the pledge.
I am thankful for this, and that I have been spared during the
sickness.”

One who was converted last winter said: “I am thankful that I
have been with Christians who have led me to the Lord. I don’t
know how to tell my gratitude. I am just beginning to know what
it is to be upright and truthful.”

“When I left here last summer to go to a new place, I felt that I
needed God’s aid. I asked Him to be with me. He has kept me and
made my work successful. I thank Him for it. I will continue to
thank Him.”

“The _old mother_ thanks the Lord that she has been able to get
here to hear the Bible read, and see the teachers back again.”

“I was teaching near Grenada. That was my P. O. The fever was on
three sides of me. Some of my scholars had to leave school; but
amidst it all God spared me, and I am thankful for it. There were
some white young men came into my Sunday-school. At first I was
afraid, but I spoke to them, and asked them if they would like
some papers. They kept coming, and seemed just as much interested
in what I said, and in getting the papers, as any of my pupils.”

“‘He leadeth me.’ I cannot begin to tell all the things for which
I am thankful. Aside from the health of my own family, nothing
rejoices me more than to see these faces. Our friends at the
North cannot begin to realize the gloom that settled down over us
here. It seemed as though we were breathing in death continually.
I am thankful that God has spared us, and that I have had such a
pleasant family during the summer.” To this effect spoke Brother
Miner, who remained here during the summer with several of the
young people to take care of the farm.

These are only fragments that were jotted down. An hour and a
half was spent in this way. A few of our students had the fever,
but we have not heard of one who died with it. This continues to
be the cause of great thankfulness.


OUR TEMPERANCE MEETING,

a few nights later, was no less interesting. I noted down a few
sentences, as one after another reported, which will show what
kind of work has been done by our students during the summer.
One young woman said, “When I first spoke to my scholars about
temperance, they did not know what I meant. I would not allow any
one to sign the pledge until I was sure he understood it. I read
temperance stories, etc. I found one lady using snuff and toddy,
who said she didn’t know as there was anything about _drink_
in the Bible. She thought the Lord would forgive such a little
thing. A minister said he never saw drink to be such a bad thing.
He would not sign the pledge, but I have since heard that he is
going to try to establish a temperance rule in his church. I got
28 signers to the pledge.”

Mr. T. said: “I got 48 names to my pledges; most of them were
young people, some of them children. I tried not to receive any
unless they thoroughly understood it. I met some opposition from
the old folks, but some of them signed. One young man fifteen
miles away came in and signed. He was afterward taken sick, and
the doctor prescribed toddies, but he stoutly refused them. I
think many can be depended upon. There is no other such work
being done in the county.”

Mr. H.: “My work was not so great as I think it should have been.
The community was very wicked, most of the older ones hung back,
24 signed, most of them my scholars. I took my pledge to school
every day, and to Sunday-school. I told them very plainly what is
meant by signing the pledge, or more would have signed, I found
the very small ones understood it as well as the older ones. Some
are so poor they cannot get drink.”

H. T. T.: “I have not much of a report. Did not find one who
believed in temperance. Went to the older ones first, but they
were not willing to sign. I secured 12 signers. Might have had
more, but did not take the small ones. One minister said he had
looked at it a long time, and thought it would be well to present
it to his people, but would not sign. Another minister _did_.”

There are ministers here as well as elsewhere who are willing to
preach, on the Sabbath, a purer type of Christianity than they
exemplify in their home life during the week.

C. J. T.: “I did not make an effort at first. I was invited
to their “Loving Society.” I went with my Bible, pledge and
statistical essay in hand. I put in _a good deal of vengeance_
and converted a good many right there. Got 25 names. At close
of school I got some more; in all 47. We must keep this subject
before them. A Baptist Convention was held there. I got three
ministers to sign. Mr. Tanner labored with one minister who wrote
out a resolution, and secured its passage in Convention, that
their members should not drink.”

Miss C.: “I presented the subject to my Sunday-school. Had a
meeting at night. Many of the parents came. I read about Daniel
_purposing_ in his _heart_, and then sung ‘Dare to be a Daniel.’
The first one to sign was a man about fifty years old; 24 signed.
The next Saturday I went ten miles into the country and spent the
Sabbath. 26 signed there. One man, who had no children and was
well off, but spending his money rapidly for drink, signed and is
now saving his money. I went to Lake to help Mr. T. Many signed
his pledge there. One little boy at Forest wanted to be a Daniel
and signed. He was snake-bitten, whiskey was prescribed, but he
refused to drink it even after he was told that that would not be
breaking his pledge. He recovered. Most of my signers were among
the older ones.”

Other reports were as interesting as these, but I am afraid I am
writing too much now. I have taken these reports in the order in
which they were given. After hearing from all our students, I may
send you the number of signers to the pledge, secured during the
summer by them.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.


       *       *       *       *       *


MENDI MISSION.

A Heathen Bundoo Dance and a Retreat.

BENJAMIN JAMES, M.D., GOOD HOPE STATION.

Dr. James, who accompanied his two children to Freetown, whence
they returned to this country, in care of Mr. Snelson, on his
way back to the mission, made a brief visit to Mr. Gomer and the
Shengay Mission of the United Brethren. After speaking of the
excellent religious and industrial work accomplished at that
mission, he gives this account of a Bundoo women’s dance, which
he chanced to see in that vicinity.

Have patience with me while I relate a curious sight that I
accidentally witnessed at a town near the mission, showing
the power for good exercised by this little band of Christian
workers. About ten o’clock in the morning on Tuesday, the beating
of a country drum was heard afar off. My boy Joseph said to me,
“Let us go and see them cut rice by the beat of the drum,” to
which I consented. We followed the sound of the drum until we
came to the town of Debia, much larger than the one under the
Christian charge of our mission, and governed by a female chief
of the noted Caulker family. In a grove near this town, within
which no male was allowed to enter, proceeded those sounds from
mystic drums which attracted us to this place. Madam Caulker gave
me a very cordial welcome; indeed, her dignified manners made
me almost forget that she was the representative of a heathen
clan. Edibles were set before me, although brought by a little
naked girl; which circumstance was not calculated to improve a
relish for the seemingly palatable food, yet I do assure you I
devoured it greedily. Soon after eating, the drumming ceased
from the forest; then came out a large number of women, with
white cotton bands, two and a half inches wide, tied around
their brows, led by an old woman with a white country cloth
around her, and a white handkerchief tied, covering the frontal
and occipital portions of her head. When they saw me they were
amazed and appeared timid, but this perplexed condition of the
organization was soon removed by the head-woman, who had been
previously summoned into the presence of the chieftess. Soon the
drums, which had attracted me, began to rumble out their peculiar
sounds to dancing thumps, beaten by female drummers, arranged in
dancing order, with their backs towards us, coming from where
they were placed in this array. These same women, who appeared
timid, bashful and reserved a little while before, sung, beat and
stepped to time slowly, motioned with their hands to something
apparently to me in the sky, and moved towards a place where they
were soon to stand.

As they gently and elegantly wheeled in regular order into their
respective places, three well-formed and comely girls, about
nineteen, side by side, tossing their bodies right and left, to
and fro, in a very graceful manner, danced together for nearly
a quarter of an hour. After the triple dance there was a double
one; this was succeeded by a single dance. These three girls were
then withdrawn and other members of the order were selected to
fill their places. Many feats of skill in dancing were performed
by the first three. I noticed that when they danced their supple
limbs were tossed in many enigmatical postures, which drew forth
applause and great laughter from the bystanders, who understood
them. After dancing for an hour before us, the leader of the
mystic sisterhood ordered it discontinued, and they retired to a
capacious bamboo-covered hut to partake of refreshments, which
seemed to have been prepared and furnished by every village
for miles around. Before taking my departure I inquired of the
chieftess who these women were. She replied that they were the
Bundoo women, who were about to remove their place of meeting to
Carter, farther into the interior, because they were molested or
hindered by the advance of Christianity, which is continually
increasing about their old meeting bush. All must acknowledge
this as a triumph for Christianity, and those who contribute to
the support of the Shengay mission ought to rejoice that they
have had the privilege of being instrumental in causing one of
the greatest evils to Africa’s social and Christian advancement
to move back into the forest, there to await the coming day of
its inevitable dissolution, which, I trust, is not far off.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Visit to the Interior.

REV. A. E. JACKSON, AVERY.

Avery is situated at the head of navigation on the Little Sherbro
river, a beautiful site overlooking a vast scope of country. It
is about forty-three miles from Good Hope, and quite accessible
to any point where we may wish to push our work in future; and
it is hoped that this station will be the centre from which
many stations may be planted still further into the interior at
no distant future. The Little Sherbro river, with its rippling
stream, glides within a few hundred feet of Avery, and flows into
the Big Bargroo river, and the Big Bargroo, with its tributaries,
opens an avenue to any part of Africa accessible by water.

We have a very beautiful little chapel, and it is very well
filled each Sabbath by persons from the surrounding villages
as well as our own. For the most part, all appear attentive to
what is said to them, and when questioned seem to have quite a
clear idea. Through the blessing of Divine providence, three
of the chiefs have come into my church, and I think that they
are hopefully converted. They add very greatly to the interest
of the church, because where the chiefs go their subjects will
follow. By this means I am enabled to reach a great portion of
the heathen element. I have now about thirty-six enrolled upon my
church book, twenty-five of whom I have baptized. It is really
remarkable to see how readily they take hold of the truths of
Jesus. I am also glad to say, that in many of them one can see a
marked improvement in their lives. They are a people that delight
to engage in palavers or quarrels, and I mark a very great change
in many of them in this respect. They seem to desire peace,
and when a palaver comes up they frown upon it with seemingly
sincere indignation. They are also beginning to see the wrong
of polygamy. That of itself is one of the best signs of reform,
for polygamy is one of the prevailing sins of this country. Mrs.
Jackson has been holding meetings for the women, in which great
interest was manifested. So the Lord has been greatly blessing
both sexes.

Quite recently I had a pleasant tour in the Bargroo country. I
was very agreeably surprised to see everything so favorable. In
the first place, the people were as hospitable as one could wish,
and far more so than one could have expected in a heathen land. I
am persuaded to believe that the tribes further in the interior
are much more docile and far more industrious and a finer class
of people than those living on the coast. I visited eight of
their towns, and, with very few exceptions, their villages were
as clean and neat as any I ever saw. Their houses were made of
mud and sticks and covered with bamboo, but all seemed to have
been done in taste. Some of their villages were laid out in a
perfect system. One that especially attracted my attention for
its neatness, and the systematic plan on which it was laid out
was Do-do. It has a population of about fifteen hundred persons.
It is a very beautiful town, situated on a peninsula, with a
fine view of a large extent of country. It is densely populated
and the houses are built close together. Three tall lines of
barricade enclose the entire town, with only three large gates
through which persons can enter. I chanced to stop there all
night. I found the chief a very hospitable man. He entertained me
as best he could, and gave me my supper and a bed to sleep on.
Next morning he sent me my breakfast, which consisted of a goat,
chicken and some eggs. On going to the door I found three men
ready to slay and dress the goat. The interpreter of the chief
accompanied these gifts. He said that the king did not know how
to cook English fashion, and therefore he would advise that I
have it cooked in the English way. This being rather more of a
breakfast than I could consume, I only had the chicken and eggs
cooked. I had the goat made fast and carried him home to my wife,
who I knew would be delighted to have him for a pet.

After I had eaten, the king came to see how I enjoyed my
breakfast. After talking a while he told me that he would be glad
to have a missionary station planted at or near his town, so
that he could send his children to school that they might learn
about God’s law. He then took me around the town and showed me
the barricade. Then he took me on the outside of the barricade
and pointed out to me a very beautiful spot of ground, which he
would give for a mission station. I could only thank him for his
hospitality toward the mission and his seeming love for the work.

On Sunday I preached in a very large village, and I really
believe that every man, woman and child was present, and it
seemed as if they were completely spellbound during the entire
service. It inspires one to put forth greater efforts when
he chances to penetrate into the interior and there see the
difference between these tribes and those living on the coast.
They are not so corrupt in habits from association with the low
class of traders. One thing very remarkable about this people is
that they are not at all hostile toward the light-skinned man
nor the dark-skinned man, but will soon learn to put implicit
confidence in either, and more especially if he speak to them
about Jesus Christ. They, from some source or other, have learned
that there is a Saviour. Even those who have never seen or heard
a missionary themselves seem to be thoroughly informed as to the
objects of this mission.

I am impressed more and more each day that the many years’ work
of our missions in Africa has been a great success. Not only
blossoms but fruits are already seen in the immediate vicinity of
the mission, and far into the interior there has been a silent
influence for good that we knew not of. The labors of the dark
days of our missions were not in vain, but are now being crowned
with the glorious fruits of righteousness, which will only be a
brighter crown for those who have fallen asleep at their post of
duty.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL AND CHURCH WORK AT DUNGINESS.

REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH, WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

We have an excellent young man at Dunginess as school-teacher.
Although I never met him until he took charge of the school, I
learned that his reputation was good where he had previously
taught, and he has taken hold of the work among the Indians
wisely and earnestly, and also satisfactorily to the Agent and
the Indians. He has earned an excellent reputation among the
whites in the neighborhood, and has grown in their estimation as
a conscientious Christian since he first went there about nine
months since. Last summer he was married to a lady whose heart
is in the work, and who assists him as she is able. Her health,
however, does not admit of her doing as much as she wishes to do.

In addition to his day-school for the children, he has lately
begun an evening school, three evenings in the week, for half a
dozen of the older Indians who wish to learn. These older Indians
are accustomed to talk English, more or less, some of them quite
well, and hence find it easier to learn than wild Indians would.
He holds services regularly with them on the Sabbath, and on
Thursday evening a prayer meeting has been sustained since last
May; the only one in the county.

The last Sabbath I spent with them, I baptized two of the older
Indians and received them into our church--the first-fruits of
our work there. I have been tolerably well satisfied for a year
that they were suitable candidates for church membership, but
preferred to wait until our teacher could become thoroughly
acquainted with them, as I thought that he could form a more
intelligent opinion after almost daily intercourse with them,
than I could by semi-annual visits. But we agree in our
conclusion.

Last Sabbath we had the privilege of receiving another of our
school-boys into our church here. He is one of our older pupils,
an elder brother of one already a member.

The report of our Sabbath-school for this place, read on
Christmas, showed that three Indian girls had been present every
Sabbath on which there was school during the year, it having been
necessarily omitted on three Sabbaths, and on every one of these
Sabbaths they had recited at least six verses of the Scripture
lesson, and without making a single mistake. This is better than
has ever been done before in the history of the school, only one
having been perfect last year. The average attendance during the
year has been fifty-seven.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


       *       *       *       *       *

CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D.
VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L. Stone, D. D., Thomas C.
Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low, Rev. I. E.
Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey, D. D.,
Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D., Jacob S. Taber,
Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer,
Rev. E. P. Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev.
John Kimball, E. P. Sanford. Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E.
Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR CHINESE HELPERS.

REV. WM. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

I am trying to contrive how, while keeping within our limited
means, to increase our force of Chinese helpers. I am sure that
with reference to immediate results, these who know by experience
the darkness of heathenism, who have themselves trodden the path
out of that darkness into the light of Christ, are better fitted
to lead others along the same path than we could possibly be,
even though we had their language at our tongue’s end. But it
is not easy to provide for these helpers the things needed for
their best efficiency. They ought to be entirely supported by
us, so as to give their whole time to study and to Christian
work; and they need special teachers, since they cannot be taught
in school-hours. First of all, they ought to study the Bible,
and learn how to interpret it; but should add to this, constant
attention to our language, and to the rudiments of geography,
astronomy, and history. I have ventured thus far to appoint only
five: Wong Sam and Chung Ying for schools in this city, Jee Gam
for Oakland, Lee Haim for Sacramento, and Hong Sing for Petaluma.
Besides these, there are many volunteer helpers who, in the
schools, in the Association, in the Bible and prayer meetings,
“instant in season and out of season,” bear their testimony, and
do whatever work they can; for most of our Chinese Christians, I
rejoice to say it, are witnesses and workers for their Lord.

Readers of the MISSIONARY have heard from Jee Gam and
Wong Sam several times heretofore. Hong Sing is the one last
added to our list;--for five years a Christian, and during most
of that time the leader among the pupils in our Bethany school,
and my interpreter when I spoke to them. He understands English
well; talks it quite easily and intelligibly; but when he comes
to write it, like most of our brethren, he gets it twisted badly.
The idioms of his native tongue are very unlike ours. He went to
Petaluma, expecting, for the most part, to support himself as a
house-servant, accepting, however, low wages in consideration
of having time for missionary work; but he found that the
house-work crowded the Lord’s work so hard that he seemed to be
accomplishing little, and was almost discouraged. He wrote, a
month ago, as follows: “I write a few words to let you know that
I have a place and been working a few days; but not a steady
work, because that man was sick; so I take his place till he get
well. It is pretty hard to get a place. And I tell you about
the school. It is very small. Evening I be present at 8 o’clock
and explain to them. After school close I take fifteen minutes
for Bible lesson. I try to explain to them as I can. I thought
I come back to San Francisco, but I will wait a little longer,
as much our people here [many of our people are here], but most
all like gambling. I do not know what is the matter, they wont
come. I heard somebody say, because they have been learning for
awhile, and not understand the words what it meant; so they don’t
come any more. I hope soon to have time to go out to ask come
again. I am very sorry and expends [since you expend] so much
for the school. It seems to be sow, having no reap [seed-sowing,
but no harvest]. Yet ‘my sheep hear my voice.’ We must try
to do the best way.” He concluded that the best way was to
abandon everything else and give himself to mission work, asking
only--since we could afford nothing more--that we pay the cost of
his board; and it is on that basis he is working now.

From one of the letters of Lee Haim, from Sacramento, I give the
following extract: “Now I will tell you the


TRIALS OF WONG THONG

by his father. He has been a member of our Association four
weeks. Three weeks ago his father came into our Association rooms
to find out who leads his son to be a member of our Association,
I made reply to him, ‘It is I.’ Then he answered me unpleasantly,
and said he do not know the regulations of our Christian
Association; but only he knows, whoever believes in Christ
Jesus, they don’t want to worship or serve their own fathers
from generation to generation. That is very bad. And disobey the
parents. Then I ask him: ‘Would you rather your son to serve you
or take care of you in your lifetime, or rather to have your
son’s worship when you died? I perceive that you would rather
your son serve you personally. Nobody needs to be worshipped
after death.’ Then he said he would not converse with me. Then
I said, ‘Well, sir, please to hear me in these few words: Every
one ought to be punished by God who did not put their trust
in Him, and also transgressed the commandment of God by their
tradition. For God has commanded: ‘Honor thy father and mother.’
And another thing; God commanded us not to worship any false
gods. But our fathers, from generation to generation, did not do
as God commanded. For that fact we are in great fear of God. So
we are turned from the bad thing which we did before, and now
are transformed by the renewing of the mind.’ Then he felt very
bad at my words, and departed from me immediately. On Friday,
after Wong Thong was dismissed from school and went back to his
old home, then his father chased him with a hatchet, attempting
to kill him, for his father disliked him to become a Christian.
But Wong Thong’s heart never be fail, I think the Lord God Jesus
Christ is near to protect those who will put their trust in Him.”


OUR SAN FRANCISCO ANNIVERSARY

was held last Sunday evening, February 16th. _The Pacific_ has
the following notice of it:

  “At Bethany Church, last Sunday evening, the fifth anniversary
  of the Chinese Sunday-schools and Mission schools connected with
  that church was celebrated. It was an occasion of rare interest.
  Nearly one hundred Chinese were present, and forty-two took part
  in the exercises. These consisted of recitations of Scripture and
  other religious selections, short original addresses, several
  dialogues, and the singing of hymns in English and Chinese.
  A quartet of Chinese sung in English with a distinctness of
  utterance and harmony which some choirs composed of persons ‘to
  the manner born’ might profitably imitate. But the best and
  highest joy connected with the occasion lay in the confident
  hope that almost all these Chinese had passed from death unto
  life--from the selfish and slavish worship of demons to a loving
  loyalty to the true God.”

It illustrates the fact that, in spite of adverse prejudices
and public sentiments, men brought face to face with a good
work cannot refuse it the tribute of their appreciation and
sympathy; that our new church has never been so full since its
dedication as on that evening; and that, after two of the brief
original addresses, the applause, though discountenanced, was
irrepressible.

I had proposed to write a thought or two about recent
anti-Chinese legislation; but I fear I have trespassed too much
on your space already; and I am sure that if Congress and the
country can bear the sin and shame such laws involve, our work
can bear whatever of hindrance it may bring to us. It isn’t the
first time that King Canute has tried by his royal chair to
breast a rising tide; but I have been slow to think such folly
was reserved for my own country and this nineteenth century after
Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR FEBRUARY, 1879.


  MAINE, $223.90.

    Augusta. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $27.50;----$10               $37.50
    Bath. “Cash”                                             100.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        7.40
    Hampden. H. S. and J. L.                                   1.00
    Limington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.00
    Newport. M. S. N.                                          1.00
    Norridgewock. S. D. and J. S. B.                           1.00
    North Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         5.00
    Orland. Mrs. Buck and daughter                            30.00
    Scarborough. “A Friend”                                   30.00
    Winthrop. C. Fairbanks                                     5.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $1,174.67.

    Bedford. Presbyterian Church _for Wilmington, N. C._      11.60
    Brookline. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.96
    Center Harbor. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.61
    Colebrook. E. C. $1.; J. A. H. 50c.                        1.50
    Concord. South Cong. Ch. and Soc. $38.94;--W. H.
      Pitman, $2 _for Mendi M._                               40.94
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.15
    Hillsborough Bridge. J. D., Mrs. J. G., Mrs. E. T.,
      and Mrs. D. W. $1. ea.                                   4.00
    Hillsborough Centre. John Adams, $5; O. C. $1              6.00
    Keene. Sec. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $50,; “A Friend,”
      $56.24; Mrs. N. R. C., 60c.; Mrs. E. A. W., 25c.       106.99
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $59.99;
      --Ladies of First Cong. Ch., bbl of C. _for
      Talladega, Ala._                                        59.99
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $4.69; Ladies
      of Cong. Ch., box of C. and $2 _for freight_;
      Mrs. Dr. G., $1                                          7.69
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                18.00
    Pelham. “Friend”                                          15.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $4.14; H. E. W., 35c.          4.49
    Sullivan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.00
    Temp e. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   14.00
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               13.00
    Wilton. A. B. C.                                           0.50
    ---- “A Friend”                                          803.25
    ---- Geo. Cook                                             5.00


  VERMONT, $208.46.

    Barre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 18.33
    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                              66.62
    Berlin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 3.61
    Burlington. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                     50.00
    Cambridge. A few Ladies, Box of C., by Mrs.
      Madison Safford; Cong. Ch., Communion Set.
    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $16.10; Mrs.
      L. G. S. $1                                             17.10
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox                                5.00
    Fayetteville. A. Birchard, $5; Mrs. L. C. C. and
      Mrs. A. E. K. H. $1                                      6.00
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            14.26
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Quechee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  13.04
    Waitsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc                              0.50
    West Brattleboro. Mrs. F. Gaines                           5.00
    Weston. Mrs. C. W. Sprague, $2; Lucy P. Bartlett, $2       4.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $977.42

    Abington. Mrs. S. B. F                                     1.00
    Acton. Mrs. H. C. L. _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._         1.00
    Andover. Misses McKeen, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._      2.00
    Ashfield. Mrs. G. B. Hall                                  5.00
    Auburndale. Cong. Sab. Sch., $28.75, _for Tougaloo_;
      --Mrs. D. W. Scott, $5; Mrs. D. W. Scott and Friends,
      bbl. of C., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._              33.75
    Barnstable Co. “A Friend”                                 20.00
    Bedford. M. E. R.                                          0.50
    Beechwood. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              1.45
    Belchertown. D. B. B.                                      0.50
    Billerica. H. B. S                                         1.00
    Boston Highlands. E. E. B.                                 1.00
    Braintree. J. M. L.                                        0.12
    Cambridgeport. Mrs. L. D. C.                               1.00
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             104.65
    Charlestown. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                           56.11
    Danvers. First Cong. Ch. $6.25, and 10 bbls. apples,
      _for Atlanta, Ga._                                       6.25
    Harvard. Mrs. C. S.                                        0.50
    Haverhill. R. S. C.                                        0.50
    Holbrook. Miss Sarah J. Holbrook, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            25.00
    Hyde Park. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid.
      Hampton Inst._                                          70.00
    Lowell. L. Kimball, $25; H. M. Hunt, $5                   30.00
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Milford. Mrs. B. H.                                        0.50
    Middletown. Mrs S. Fuller, 3 bbls. apples; Mrs.
      W. W. Fuller, 2 bbls. apples, _for Atlanta Ga._
    Natick. ----                                               0.10
    Northampton. “A Friend”                                  100.00
    Oakham. Cong Ch. and Soc.                                 65.00
    Reading. “A Friend”                                        2.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. $50 _for Missionary Work_;
      --Elijah Shaw, $20                                      70.00
    Salem. J. H. T.                                            0.60
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                12.00
    South Boston. Miss J. A.                                   0.50
    Southbridge. “A Friend”                                    3.00
    South Deerfield. Mrs. Mary C. Tilton                       2.00
    Springfield. South Ch., “E. M. P.,” $10; Mrs.
      R. K., $1                                               11.00
    Sunderland. Dorcas Soc., bbl. of C. _for Atlanta,
      Ga._
    Topsfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., box of C. Watertown.
      Mite Box, $2.50; Mrs. E. S. P., 60c.                     3.10
    Webster. Rev. B. F. P.                                     0.50
    Westborough. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $119.63;
      Freedmen’s Mission Ass’n, bbl. of C.                   119.63
    Went Cummington. Rev. J. B. B.                             0.50
    West Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           27.87
    Westminster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     67.00
    West Newton. J. H. P.                                      0.50
    West Stockbridge. Geo. W. Kniffin                         10.00
    Whitinsville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             28.00
    Williamstown. Rev. Mark Hopkins, D. D.                     5.00
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., bbl. of C., _for Atlanta,
      Ga._ Worcester. Union Ch., $60.29; M. F. W., $1;
      G. M. P., 50c.                                          61.79
    Wrentham. J. M. P.                                         0.60


  RHODE ISLAND, $32.00.

    Newport. Rev. T. Thayer                                   10.00
    Providence. Charles St. Cong. Sab. Sch.                   22.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,292.90.

    Bozrah. Miss H. Maples. $5; S. A., $1                      6.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN A. WAY, MILES L.
      PECK and W. H. NETTLETON, L. M.’s                       94.26
    Collinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          23.00
    Cornwall Bridge. Geo. H. Swift                            10.00
    Cromwell. Mrs. S. Topliff                                  5.00
    Derby. First Cong. Ch.                                    25.00
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
    Atlanta U._                                               31.95
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                     2.69
    Hadlyme. R. E Hungerford, $50; Jos. W.
      Hungerford, $50                                        100.00
    Hartford. Mrs. Lawson B. Bidwell, $30, to const.
      SAMUEL NOTT, L. M.; Mrs. P. Johnson (_of which
      $1 for Mendi M._), $1.50                                 31.50
    Huntington. Cong. Ch. and Friends                          7.50
    Kensington. Mrs. M. Hotchkiss                             10.50
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               17.90
    Meriden. The Chas. Parker Co., 9 doz. tea-spoons
      and 6 doz. forks, _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Middletown. ESTATE of Mrs. Anna H. Phillips, by
      J. M. Hubbard                                          300.00
    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                     130.00
    New Haven “A Lady Friend,” $5; “A Friend,” $5;
      M. N., $1; Rev. S. W. Barnum,  6 copies “Romanism
      As It Is”                                               11.00
    New Milford. Miss Susie F. Nettleton, $5;
      Mrs. F. G. B., 50c.                                      5.50
    Norwich. Park Ch. (of which $30 from Mrs. Chas. Lee,
      to const. REV. LEONARD W. BACON, L. M., and $30
      from Miss S. M. Lee, to const. EDWARD T. CLAPP,
      L. M.)                                                 694.76
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch. (ad’l), $250;
      Buckingham Sab. Sch., $20; Second Cong. Ch.,
      $128.22; S. H., $1                                     399.22
    Norwich Town. Samuel Case                                 10.00
    Old Lyme. Miss E. M. P.                                    1.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for College Farm
      Talladega, Ala._                                       100.00
    Prospect. B. B. Brown                                     10.00
    Stamford. J. A. Rockwell, M. D., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Stanwich. William Brush                                  100.50
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      27.37
    Unionville. First Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._           36.73
    Wapping. Second Cong. Ch.                                 20.26
    Washington. Cong. Ch.                                     14.65
    West Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     20.61
    Windsor Locks. Mrs. L. P. Dexter                           6.00
    Winsted. Dr. Lyman Case                                   10.00
    Woodbury. Mrs. E. L. Curtis                               10.00


  NEW YORK, $454.16.

    Black Creek. Cong. Ch. $1; Miss M. T. $1.                  2.00
    Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Lewis Edwards, two valuable quilts.
    Brooklyn, E. D. David D. Nicholson                        15.00
    Cambria Center. Cong. Ch.                                 15.00
    Canastota. E. B. Northrup, $5; R. H. and Mrs. R. H.
      Childs, $5                                              10.00
    Clear Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     3.50
    Eagle Harbor. A. P.                                        0.30
    East Palmyra. Mrs. Laura E. Dada, _for Student Aid_        5.00
    Ellington. Cong. Ch. $9.08; and Sab. Sch. $8.02           17.10
    Fredonia. Mrs. Sarah D. Chandler                           5.00
    Greenville. Mrs. H. M. Wakeley                             5.00
    Griffin’s Mills. Dea. Henry Moore                         15.00
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                       10.75
    Harlem. Cong. Ch. ("of which $10 from W. W.
      Ferrier, _for Student Aid, Atlanta and Talladega
      Colls._"), $35.64; Cong. Sab. Sch. $10                  45.64
    Havanna. J. F. P.                                          1.00
    Lima. Delia A. Phillips                                   25.00
    Moravia. First Cong. Ch.                                  11.92
    Mott’s Corners. Cong. Ch.                                  2.06
    New York. S T. Gordon, $100; Miss P. T. Magie, $5;
      --Meriden Cutlery Co., 4 doz. Knives _for Atlanta,
      Ga._                                                   105.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.00
    North Winfield. Miss E. J. Alexander, _for a
      Teacher_                                                10.00
    Otsico Valley. ESTATE of Mrs. Olive S. Frisbie, by
      I. T. Frisbie                                           50.00
    Patchogue. Cong. Ch.                                      17.06
    Perry Centre. I. M.                                        1.00
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Rochester. Mrs. A. E. Albright                             5.00
    Syracuse. “An Old Friend”                                 10.00
    Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan, $10.10; Mrs. Fanny
      D. Duncan, $5                                           15.10
    Verona. Cong. Ch.                                         19.23
    Walton. Chas. S. Fitch, _for Mendi M._                     5.00
    Westmoreland. A. S. B.                                     0.50
    Whitestown. James Symonds                                  5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $20.76.

    Bound Brook. Ladies of Cong, Ch., _for Tougaloo_          13.00
    Colt’s Neck. Reformed Ch.                                  5.76
    Millstone. Mrs. J. T. C.                                   1.00
    Heart’s Content. “A Friend,” bbl. of C. Trenton.
      Mrs. E. B. F.                                            1.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $46.00.

    Minersville. First Welsh Cong. Ch.                        10.50
    Philadelphia. S. A. J.                                     0.50
    Pittsburgh. Third Pres. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega, C._                                          25.00
    Troy. C. C. Paine                                         10.00


  OHIO, $367.38.

    Bellevue. J. S.                                            0.50
    Belpre. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    5.80
    Bucyrus and Sulphur Springs. “Friends,” box of
      Sundries, _for Tougaloo U._
    Burton. Mrs. H. H. F. and Mrs. H. F.                       1.00
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the poor in New Orleans, La._      67.20
    Cleveland. Rev. H. Trautman                                5.00
    Delaware. Wm. Bevan                                        5.00
    Greenwich Station. Wm. M. Mead                             5.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            12.30
    Jefferson. “Friends,” box of Sundries, _for Tougaloo
       U._
    Lenox. A. J. Holman                                        5.00
    Madison. Mrs. H. H. Roe and others, $35, _for
      Tougaloo_; Cong. Sab. Sch., $3, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            38.00
    Medina. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             9.00
    Metamora. Mrs. M. S.                                       1.00
    Napoleon. Mrs. N. B. P.                                    1.00
    North Benton. M. J. H.                                     1.00
    Oak Hill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.12
    Oberlin. ESTATE of Miss Mary J. Hulburd, by Hiram
      Hulburd, Ex.                                            32.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., $19.42; Mrs. C. C. W.,
      51c.; R. M. K., $1                                      20.93
    Painesville. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. of Cong. Ch., by
      Stella H. Avery, Treas                                  25.00
    Ravenna. S. H.                                             1.00
    Ripley. Mrs. Mary Tweed                                    2.50
    Rock Creek. L. C.                                          0.50
    Sandusky. First Con. Ch., $78.43, to const. LEWIS
      MOSS and E. E. UPP, L. M’s.;--by Rev. J. Strong,
      $5                                                      83.43
    Saybrook. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo, U._       7.00
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer, $2; Presb. Sab. Sch.,
      $1.10; Miss M. M., $1; Mrs. M. S., $1                    5.10
    Steubenville. Women’s Miss. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
      by M. J. Leslie, Treas.                                 10.00
    Toledo. Mrs. M. A. Harrington, $5;--Mary R.
      Pomeroy, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._, $3;--Mrs.
      P. G. H., $1                                             9.00
    Wayne. David Parker                                        5.00
    Weymouth. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._        2.24
    West Mill Grove. Rev. S. S. H.                             0.76


  INDIANA, 24c.

    Putnamville. R. H.                                         0.24


  ILLINOIS, $184.38.

    Chicago. Union Park Ch.                                   33.07
    Delavan. R. Hodgton                                        6.50
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                           6.24
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                       14.06
    Galesburg. J. G. W                                         1.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        54.51
    Geneva. “A Friend,”                                        5.00
    Hamlet. L. C.                                              1.00
    Lisbon. G. K.                                              0.50
    Port Byron. Ladies, Box of C. _for Tougaloo U._
    Rochelle. Mrs. A. C. F.                                    1.00
    Rockford. “A Friend,” $25;--Mrs. Penfield, $10, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              35.00
    Rock Island. “A Friend,”                                  10.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch.                                      15.50
    Tonica. W. B.                                              0.50
    Wilmette. Mrs. A. T. S.                                    0.50


  MICHIGAN, $901.60.

    Adrian. ESTATE of Sarah M. Wolcott, by Wm W.
      Brewster. Ex. (ad’l)                                    13.00
    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                46.10
    Blissfield. W. C.                                          0.50
    Calumet. “A School Teacher,” _for Straight U._             5.00
    Detroit. F. M. S. 50c.; S. Z. 50c.                         1.00
    Dowagiac. “A Friend.”                                      1.00
    Hillsdale. M. J.                                           0.51
    Homer. A. R. B.                                            1.00
    Jonesville. R. D. N.                                       0.50
    Kalamazoo. ESTATE of Mrs Clarinda B. Safford, by
      J. B. Cobb, Ex.                                        396.57
    Memphis. Ladies’ Missionary Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                              3.00
    Olivet. Mon. Con. Cong. Ch.                                8.92
    Parma. Mrs. M. B. Tanner                                   3.00
    Richland. S. M.                                            1.00
    Saint Johns. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20; G. V.,
      50c.                                                    20.50
    Thetford. ESTATE of Amasa Carrier, by Wm. C.
      Mathews                                                400.00


  WISCONSIN, $98.75.

    Brandon. “Friends,” box of C., _for Tougaloo U._
    Cooksville. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Fulton. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
    Menomonee. Cong. Ch. (in part)                             5.00
    Oconomowoc. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_            12.50
    Ripon. J. D.                                               0.75
    Salem. Wm. Munson                                         50.00
    Union Grove. Dr. Adams                                     5.00
    Windsor. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  16.50


  IOWA, $247.70.

    Davenport. Capt. E. A. Adams, $50 _for Student Aid,
      Talladega. C._;--Geo. W. Ells, $11                      61.00
    Dubuque. ESTATE of Calista C. Rogers, by Dr. R.
      Clark, Ex.                                             100.00
    Dubuque. Cong. Ch.                                        15.00
    Eldora. C. McK. Duren                                      5.00
    Grinnell. Prof. B.                                         0.50
    Iowa City. Mrs. E. A. B., $1; Miss H. C., $1;
      J. T. T., 50c.                                           2.50
    Lyons. Cong. Ch.                                          50.00
    Tabor. “A. C. G.”                                          1.00
    Toledo. Mrs. E. N. Barker                                  5.00
    Traer. “Little Ones of Cong. Ch.,” $5; _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._;--Mrs. C. H. Bissell, Box of C., and
      $2.70 _for Freight, for Tougaloo U._                     7.70


  MINNESOTA, $36.38.

    East Prairieville. Union Sab. Sch.                         9.00
    Hersey. Cong. Ch.                                          5.60
    Leech Lake. Rev. S. G. W., $1; Miss S. B., $1.             2.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 13.52
    Sleepy Eye. Cong. Ch.                                      5.26
    Tivoli. L. H.                                              1.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch. Quar. Coll., $15
      (incorrectly ack. in March number).


  MISSOURI, $18.75.

    Kidder. S. C. Coult                                        5.00
    Laclede. E. D. S.                                          1.00
    Saint Louis. Mrs. P. Penrose                               4.75
    Warrensburg. Rent                                          8.00


  OREGON, $1.00.

    Forest Grove. J. W. M.                                     1.00


  CALIFORNIA, $109.71.

    Benicia. Mrs. N. P. S.                                     0.51
    Oakland. S. Richards                                     100.00
    Santa Barbara. Mrs. H. M. Van Wrinkle                      9.20


  MARYLAND, 50c.

    Baltimore. ----                                            0.50


  VIRGINIA, 50c.

    Farmville. F. N. W.                                        0.50


  TENNESSEE, $428.25.

    Chattanooga. Rent, $150; Cong. Ch., $2;
      Individuals, $2                                        154.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   109.75
    Nashville. Fisk University                               164.50


  NORTH CAROLINA, $136.12.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch.                                  33.40
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $99; First Cong. Ch.,
      $3.22; P. J. I., 50c.                                  102.72


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $288.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  288.00


  GEORGIA, $1,189.12.

    Atlanta. Storrs School, $256.60; Atlanta
    University, $190.50; “A Student, Atlanta U.” $3          450.10
    Brunswick. Risley School, _for Mendi M._                   1.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    50.65
    McIntosh. Rev. Joseph E. Smith, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Ogeechee. Miss E. W. D.                                    1.00
    Savannah. Beach Inst., $630.54; Cong. Ch., $5.83         636.37


  ALABAMA, $212.

    Childersburg. Rev. A. J., _for Mendi M._                   1.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                     36.00
    Montgomery. Public Sch. Fund                             175.00


  FLORIDA, 50c.

    Orange City. Mrs. M. D. H.                                 0.50


  LOUISIANA, $110.25.

    Orleans. Straight University                             110.25


  MISSISSIPPI, $47.93.

    Deasonville. H. L. B.                                      0.50
    Livingston. “Friends,” _for Tougaloo_                     10.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., $27.43.;--Rev. G. S. Pope,
      $10 _for Student Aid_                                   37.43
                                                          ---------
           Total                                           9,809.33
    Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 28th      $65,733.41
                                         H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                   _Ass’t Treas._

         *       *       *       *       *


  Receipts for Debt.

    New Haven, Conn. Mrs. Sarah A. Hibbard                    10.00
    Rockville, Conn. Ladies, by Mrs. H. F. Hyde               25.00
    Whitneyville, Conn. Ladies in Cong. Ch. by Elias
      Dickerman                                               26.00
    Ashburnham, Mass. Collected by Mrs. E. L. Evans           23.00
    Haverhill, Mass. Gyles Merrill and Wife                  100.00
    Campello, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.69
    Millbury, Mass. Tyler Waters                               5.00
    North Abington, Mass. Cong. Ch. $7; Mrs. Noah
      Ford, $3                                                10.00
    West Roxbury, Mass. Rev. Edward Strong                    25.00
    Griffin’s Mills, N. Y. Dea. Henry Moore                   25.00
    North Winfield, N. Y. Miss E. J. Alexander                10.00
    Rochester, N. Y. Collected by Mrs. M. P. Porter           17.00
    Spencerport, N. Y. Mrs. Upton. $1; Mrs. Jones, $1;
      Others, $3, by Mrs. I. B. Clark                          5.00
    Baltimore, Md. Collected by Mrs. Martin Hawley            25.00
    Illinois. “A Friend,”                                  1,388.58
    Olivet, Mich. Wm. B. Palmer                              500.00
    College Springs, Iowa. Cong. Ch.                           5.00
    Iowa. Sales of Iowa Mortgages                         10,669.51
    S’kokomish, Wash. Ter. Rev. Myron Eells and Wife          25.00
                                                         ----------
           Total                                          12,801.78
    Previously acknowledged in January receipts           11,587.19
                                                         ----------
           Total                                         $24,488.97

           *       *       *       *       *


  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    ----, Maine. “Two Insane Friends of the Freedmen,”
      to const. JAMES M. PRINCE, L. M.                       $30.00
    Springfield, Mass. By Rev. A. Winter                       5.17
    East Hartford, Conn. Abraham Williams                    100.00
    Meriden, Conn. Mrs. J. R. Yale                            10.00
    Plainville, Conn. Ezekiel Cowles                           5.00
    Waterbury, Conn. Charles Benedict                        100.00
    Palmyra, N. Y. MRS. MARY A. WOODWARD, $50, to const.
      herself L. M.; MRS. HARRIOT H. SEXTON, $30, to
      const. herself L. M.                                    80.00
                                                          ---------
           Total                                             330.17
    Previously acknowledged in January receipts            1,297.00
                                                          ---------
           Total                                          $1,627.17

       *       *       *       *       *




                            73,620 MORE

                Singer Sewing Machines Sold in 1878

                    Than in any previous year.

           In =1870= we sold =127,833= Sewing Machines.
           “  =1878= “   “   =356,432=   “       “

Our sales have increased enormously every year through the whole
period of “hard times.”

We now Sell Three-quarters of all the Sewing Machines sold in
the World.

For the accommodation of the Public we have 1,500 subordinate
offices in the United States and Canada, and 3,000 offices in the
Old World and South America.

                      PRICES GREATLY REDUCED.

Waste no money on “cheap” counterfeits. Send for our handsomely
Illustrated Price List.

                 THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

                     Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,


  59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
          211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                        66 State Street, Boston.

Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money between
this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory
guarantee of repayment,

                 Circular Credits for Travellers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent
countries, and in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part
of the world.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders.

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES.

               _By New York Standard of Valuation._

_It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

    HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

  C. Y. WEMPLE,
          Vice-President.

  J. L. HALSEY,
               Secretary.

  S. N. STEBBINS,
                 Actuary.

  H. Y. WEMPLE,
  H. B. STOKES,
   Assistant Secretaries.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                         PUBLISH THE ONLY

                     SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and
enlarged. Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For
Samples (loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.

                          LYMAN ABBOTT’S

                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.

                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.

                             EDITED BY

          Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D. and Rev. E. S. Lorenz.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his
meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church Prayer Meetings.=

      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.

                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.

                  A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,

                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

   ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN SABBATH SCHOOLS, CHURCHES
                        OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices:_ 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth, 70 cts.
per copy, $56 per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

  TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                          758 Broadway, New York.



                 *       *       *       *       *

                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

Manufacture a superior quality of Bells.

Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.

☞Illustrated Catalogues sent free.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        BUY THE BEST GOODS

                          BOGLE & LYLES,

             Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place ...     NEW YORK,

                            Dealers in

                       CHOICE CANNED FRUITS

                  VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,

               Sole Agents for RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’

                       Extra Yellow Peaches.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          DUDLEY’S PATENT

                             DIAGONAL

                           ROAD SCRAPER

                           IS THE BEST.

Weighs but 50 lbs., has Steel Cutter Plate, can be worked square
or at any desired angle, and is rapidly superseding all others
where it is known.

[Illustration]

             A Few of Many Testimonials of its Value:

“Works in rough or smooth ground. No one who has used it will be
without it.”--M. Bartholomew & Sons, Goshen, Ct.

“Select-men of the Town of Litchfield, Ct., say: It is the
best Scraper ever invented, and cheerfully recommend it to all
interested in Roads, as calculated materially to lessen the
expense of making and repairing the same.”

“Is twice as good as you represent it. With same labor will do
two or three times as much as any scraper I ever saw. Answers our
fullest expectations.”--H. TUCKER, of Rockville.

“Leaves a road in better shape, and is easier for man and team
than any scraper I ever saw.”--J. S. KINNEY, Washington. Send for
circular.

                           S. H. DUDLEY,

               Bantam Falls, Litchfield County, Ct.



                 *       *       *       *       *

                         SABBATH READING.

A weekly paper composed of matter of a high order of excellence
and interest, and wholly suitable for perusal on the Sabbath-day.
Every number contains a first-class sermon, which may be read
in meetings where there is no preaching, or at home by persons
necessarily detained from church; also much excellent selected
matter, some of which is especially adapted for children.

SABBATH READING is a handsome small eight-page paper, suitable in
appearance for the parlor table, and suitable for binding at the
end of the year or half year. It is sent post-paid to any address
for 50 cents a year, and stops when subscription expires. A club
of five will be supplied for a year for two dollars.

This paper, which makes a most acceptable tractate for
distribution in prisons, poor-houses, asylums, ships, etc., or in
visitation from house to house, is sent post-paid to any part of
the continent at the rate of a dollar per 100 copies.

                                      Address, JOHN DOUGALL,
                   WITNESS OFFICE, No. 7 Frankfort St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    SPRING AND SUMMER FASHIONS.

=Mme. Demorest’s Reliable Patterns.=--Beautiful and distingue
novelties in every department of dress for ladies and children,
March 10. 5 Rue Scribe, Paris; 17 E. 14th st. N. Y., and at all
the 2,000 agencies in Europe and America. Mme. Demorest’s “What
to Wear,” 15c.; “Portfolio of Fashion,” 15c.; “Mammoth Bulletin
of Fashions,” 25c.; “Demorest’s Journal” (quarterly), 5c.;
yearly, 15c.; either post free.

=Demorest’s Monthly Magazine.=--Largest in form, largest in
circulation, best in everything that makes a magazine desirable,
and in every respect the model magazine, combining gems of art,
literary excellence, household matters, fashions, correspondence,
criticism, humor, and other useful entertaining features, with
artistic and costly illustrations, fine steel engravings, oil
pictures in colors, and altogether a combination of attractions
unparalleled in one magazine. Do not fail to see the splendid
April number, now ready; price 25c., post free; yearly, $3, with
Mme. Demorest’s “What to Wear,” one year, “Portfolio of Fashions”
one year, and “Demorest’s Journal,” one year, as a premium; all
four periodicals, one year, post free, for $3; or a choice from
over 20 other valuable premiums. Address, W. JENNINGS DEMOREST,
17 E. 14th St., N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PURE OLD

                            PALM SOAP.

                          [Illustration]

                     For the Laundry,
                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N.Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1832.      MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.      1878.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           Table Cutlery

                   _Of every Description, with_

         Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory, Celluloid,
                 Pearl and Silver-plated Handles.

                       The Celluloid Handle,

(of which we are the exclusive makers), is the equal of Ivory in
beauty, when new, and surpasses it in durability and appearance in
use.

              POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS.

         All goods bearing our NAME are fully guaranteed.

                       MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.,

                                     49 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY, N.Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
  SUI GENERIS
]

                  Mason & Hamlin Cabinet Organs.

_Demonstrated best_ by HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
FOR TWELVE YEARS; viz: at PARIS, 1867: VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO,
1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876; TWO HIGHEST MEDALS at PARIS 1878; and
GRAND SWEDISH GOLD MEDAL, 1878. Only American Organs ever awarded
highest honors at any. Sold for cash or installments. ILLUSTRATED
CATALOGUES with new styles and prices, free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN
CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid =$340= ORGANS for =$100=. =$300= for =$90=. =$275= for
=$80=. =$200= for =$70=. =$190= for =$65=, and =$160= for =$55=.
PIANOS—=$900= Piano Forte for =$225=. =$800= for =$200=. =$750=
for =$185=. =$700= for =$165=. =$600= for =$135=, =cash=, not used
a year, in perfect order. Great Bargains. Unrivaled Instruments.
Unequaled Prices. Send for Catalogue.

                                            HORACE WATERS & SONS,
                                        40 East 14th Street, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         UNFERMENTED WINE.

=Pure Juice of the Grape; no Alcohol=; tested for years; received
=International Medal=.

                T. H. JOHNSON, New Brunswick, N.J.

National Temperance Society, 58 Reade St., N Y.; Congregational and
Baptist Publication Societies, Boston and Philadelphia.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE FAMOUS

                       _VIENNA COFFEE POT_.

                          [Illustration]

From the Vienna and Philadelphia Exhibitions. Imported only by

                          E. D. BASSFORD,

         Housefurnishing, Hardware, China, Class, Cutlery
                      AND SILVERWARE STORES,

             Nos. 1 to 17 COOPER INSTITUTE, New York.

☞ To meet the popular demand, prices have been reduced 50 per cent.
PRICE LIST FREE.


       *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO OBTAIN THE MISSIONARY.

Enclose Fifty Cents for your subscription (or One Dollar for two
years, or for yourself and some friend), to H. W. Hubbard, Esq.,
Assistant Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York.

If a Life Member or Pastor or S. S. Superintendent of a
contributing church, or an annual contributor of $5 or more to the
A. M. A., order it sent to you on that ground.

Keep us informed of your changes of address, etc.


HOW TO READ THE MISSIONARY.

In these busy days few people read anything all through; but you
can do better than to open at random, read a page and lay aside. 1.
Read the Editorial paragraphs for the latest aspects of our work.
2. Read the titles of longer Editorials and Contributions to see if
they contain anything you want. 3. Read through at least the one
which attracts you most. 4. The General Notes furnish a summary of
facts, opinions, legislation, discussion, and progress concerning
the three races of our care, such as you will not find elsewhere.
5. Glance over headings of Letters from the Field, and you will be
sure to find something you will want to know more about.


HOW TO CIRCULATE THE MISSIONARY.

Mark something which interests you in it, and lend it to your
neighbor.

Read or refer to a fact gleaned from it in your Prayer Meeting or
Monthly Concert.

Secure subscriptions for it in your church or community. We will
send you a list of present subscribers in your town to work from,
if you request it.


HOW TO PRESERVE THE MISSIONARY.

It is often useful for reference. The December number contains
minutes of the Annual Meeting. The February number has our list of
workers. Friends from contributing Churches come to the office for
information, which, nine times out of ten, is pointed out to them
in a recent MISSIONARY.

To preserve and bind them, punch two holes near the back and three
inches from top and bottom, through which put a string and tie
behind; open and add as the monthly numbers come to you. This
makes a simple, cheap, flexible and effective binding, and is not
patented.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                               J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                      56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious punctuation errors corrected.

“reponsibility” changed to “responsibility” on page 102 (its
responsibility and opportunity)

“repect” changed to “respect” on page 106 (entitled to the
highest respect)

Duplicate word “the” removed on page 108. (work among the the
colored population)

“emancicipation” changed to “emancipation” on page 113 (since
emancipation laid up property)

Arithmetic or printing on page 124 is incorrect. The entry
beginning with Keene is 10 cents off, and was left as printed.

A letter was missed by the printer on page 124. “Temp e” is
probably “Temple”.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 04, APRIL 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.