VOL. XXXIII.                                                No. 1.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                *       *       *       *       *

                          JANUARY, 1879.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    OUR OUTLOOK FOR 1879                                           1
    OUR APPEAL FOR THE NEW YEAR                                    2
    THE LORD’S WORK AND THE LORD’S COMING                          3
    THE LONDON UNION MISSIONARY CONFERENCE                         3
    POLITICAL PROGRESS OF THE FREEDMEN: Rev. M. E. Strieby         4
    THESE MY BRETHREN                                              6
    FIVE TESTS OF AMERICAN CIVILIZATION: Prof. C. D.
      Hartranft, D. D.                                             7
    RETURN OF REV. FLOYD SNELSON                                  10
    ITEMS FROM THE CHURCHES                                       10
    GENERAL NOTES                                                 11
    OUR QUERY COLUMN                                              14


  THE FREEDMEN.

    DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA—Revival in Howard University             14
    VIRGINIA—A Destitute County                                   14
    ALABAMA—New Church at Shelby Iron Works—Talladega a
      Missionary Centre                                           15
    FLORENCE—Thin End of the Wedge—First Thanksgiving Service     16
    MISSOURI—Free Schools in the State                            17


  AFRICA.

    THE MENDI MISSION—A Church Organized and Dedicated at Avery   18


  THE INDIANS.

    THE LATE INDIAN WAR AND CHRISTIANITY: Rev Myron Eells         20


  THE CHINESE.

    CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHRISTIAN CHINESE: Rev.
      W. C. Pond                                                  21


  RECEIPTS                                                        24


  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                   27


  PLEASE READ, THINK, COPY AND MAIL                               28

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXIII.     JANUARY, 1879.     No. 1.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

      *       *       *       *       *


OUR OUTLOOK FOR 1879.

The review of our last year’s work has been so recently and
so fully given in connection with the annual meeting of the
Association, that it is scarcely needful for us to ask our readers
to join us in another survey of what has already been accomplished.
It is more fitting, as we stand upon the threshold of the new year,
to ask what are the signs of the times, and what the demands of the
work before us.

There are still dark clouds in the Southern sky. A mere granting
of civil and political rights by formal enactment is of small
importance unless the rights themselves are honestly allowed and
faithfully accepted. The adjustment of alleged wrongs we must leave
to politicians if not to statesmen, and to courts of law if not
of justice. Our work, obscure and remote as it may seem, is more
fundamental and important than that of either Congresses or courts.
For by whatever defences the Freedman may or may not be surrounded,
the only safeguard of his rights must be in his fitness to exercise
and his ability to maintain them. It is for us, through all the
changes of the year, to keep steadily to our work. It is not
checked because the winter is upon us; nor will it be over when the
summer comes. It is not for this year’s harvesting alone that we
are working; we are sub-soiling and so laboring for the permanent
reclamation of these vast fields. We believe that more depends
upon the moral and intellectual elevation of the Freedmen of our
land, not only in regard to their welfare, but in regard to the
great questions of which they are only a factor, than upon anything
which can be done for them by legislative enactment or military
power. We purpose, then, to press on with the school and the
church. Intelligence and virtue are the Jachin and Boaz, the two
great pillars of the porch of the Temple of American citizenship
and liberty. While it rests on anything else, it is uncertain and
unsafe.

Our lesser work at home among the Indians and Chinese will demand
the same moderate but constant share of our attention as before.
Our connection with the six Indian Agencies, through the Interior
Department, is not a matter of expense, but mainly of time and
care. If we shall be relieved from that, our missionary work will
still remain and may be enlarged. And though the immigration of
Chinamen has been checked to some degree, and their interest in
learning English has been abated by the abuse they have received,
the work has been, and is yet, too fruitful of good to be given up.

Our African mission has passed through one year under its new
organization, with apparent prosperity and success. We shall need
to strengthen its forces before long. We shall want both the men
and the means.

There is work enough in our outlook and encouragement to do it. We
would remind our readers as well as ourselves, that the year which
is most full of sacrifice and service for the Master, is most sure
of all to be _A Happy New Year_.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR APPEAL FOR 1879.

Our friends are thoroughly informed of the fact that our debt of
late has been rapidly diminishing. We are sorry to say that _the
same thing is true of our income_. That, too, has been growing
less. We learn that this is true, also, of our sister societies.
They, also, have noticed a falling off in their revenues. We do
not like to make much ado over our troubles; but we have been very
frank in acknowledging our mercies, and we owe it to the work, and
to those who sustain it, to tell them our perplexities as well.

Our receipts for the last two months have been very inadequate
for the work we have in hand. What does this mean to us with this
outlook for 1879? Does it signify withdrawal from fields already
under cultivation? Already the Executive Committee have had under
serious advisement two cases, in which it was necessary either
to stop fruitful work at important points or spend a little more
money. Retrenchment is easier to talk of than to accomplish. It
costs as much sometimes to stop as to go on. A temporary suspension
is sometimes more expensive than continuous work. Our teachers are
engaged and our buildings are prepared for the year. Shall we stop
the whole machinery of a great factory to save the price of the gas
which lights it? That would be ruinous economy indeed.

But we do not seriously believe that the friends of the three most
needy races on our continent have lost heart, or hope, or means, to
carry out the generous plans they have devised. These last months
of 1878 have been trying alike to them and to us. Our plea is only
this, that, with the new year (if the debt be not by that time
altogether a thing of the past), there may be a fresh and final
attack upon that enemy of our peace; and more even than this, that
there may be a fuller and a steadier flow of the Lord’s money into
our treasury for the wants of the work of 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are happy to say that a goodly number of ladies whom we have
asked to assume the responsibility of raising a share of $25,
towards the payment of our debt, have replied favorably. The
following extract from a letter sent us by one who has been
abundant in her efforts for the Freedmen, indicates the enthusiasm
and thankfulness with which some of the ladies respond:

Your kind letter of November 26th found me watching in the sick
room of my brother; but my heart went right up to God in gratitude
that I was not forgotten by the officers of the A. M. A., and that
they still think I can do something to help on this great work. I
have never ceased to be interested in the work in all its length
and breadth, and to do what little I can for it. The debt has
occupied much of my thought. I have wanted to do something to help
pay it beyond the little I could give myself. Now that I can go out
under your guardianship, I will be one of two hundred to raise one
share ($25), and as much more as I can. I am sure the debt will
soon be paid. There should be no lack of funds to carry on this
work. It is very strange our _nation_ cannot see it and feel it
too.

An old and faithful friend from Sag Harbor, N. Y., sends us thirty
dollars to make a life member. At the same time he asks us to star
the names of his two oldest children, who were among the first of
the twenty whom he has thus added to our list. They have gone up
higher. He concludes thus:

  I was much interested in reading the article in December number,
  page 387, “Students Want to ‘Batch’—Who will Help?” I would like
  for my $30 to go to assist in building one of those $100 houses.
  Can’t you get some one to add the other $70, and put up one of
  those dwellings for those scholars who are so anxious to get an
  education to teach and to preach?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LORD’S WORK AND THE LORD’S COMING.

One of our friends, (Rev. T. S. Robie, North Carver, Mass.,) who
was at our annual meeting at Taunton, remembering doubtless that
the Prophetic Conference was in session during the same days in New
York City, puts the two things together thus:

  One comes from a meeting like that, through which glimpses are
  caught of opportunities for work, of openings by the Unseen Hand
  into spheres of service which stretch out into the future beyond
  the range of our human vision, with the overwhelming conviction
  that the Lord isn’t just at present to stop the wheels of this
  world. It is not _like_ the Lord to give such problems to His
  people, which are pressing upon this Christian nation today with
  such power, and which demand time for their solution, and then
  to cut the Gordian knot by the sword of His “coming,” as if He
  had met with a tangled question which He himself could not untie.
  The red, blue and white and black marble, which Divine Providence
  has brought into this land, tell of a building of God grander
  than any Persian palace, the foundations of which seem to be just
  being laid, rather than the completion thereof to be nigh at
  hand. The vastness of the preparation points to the magnificence
  of the Lord’s dominion in the hearts and over the lives of men.

  The Book of God’s Providence is as much inspired as the Bible
  itself. And whoever studies the former as prayerfully as the
  latter, must labor hard to stifle the feeling that the clock of
  earth, instead of getting ready to stop, is being wound up to
  keep good time for a thousand years, as a prelude to that perfect
  righteousness which shall dwell forever on the new earth and
  beneath the new heavens.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LONDON UNION MISSIONARY CONFERENCE.

The London Union Missionary Conference was held in November. The
Congregational churches of America were represented by Dr. Clark
of the American Board, and Dr. O. H. White of the Freedmen’s Aid
Society, of London, who also represented the American Missionary
Association, to which the F. A. Society is auxiliary. The last
gathering of the kind in England was in 1860, at which one
hundred and twenty-six delegates assembled. The sessions were
mainly private, the societies represented were chiefly British,
and plans were discussed rather than achievements reported. This
later meeting was somewhat different in its character. Six hundred
delegates were in attendance from various lands and denominations
of Christians. It was not so much a conference on methods as a
comparison of results. The sessions of the week were apportioned
to the work in the various lands. A great mass of information was
collected, which will doubtless be more impressive and complete in
the volume of proceedings to be published, than it could have been
in the hearing.

The character of the meetings may be inferred from the following
sketch of the time devoted to the “Dark Continent,” in which we
are especially interested. We copy from the correspondent of
the _Christian Union_: “Two sessions on Tuesday were devoted to
Africa and its many tribes. An Irish peer, the Earl of Cavan,
presided, and the attendance of delegates and friends was large.
Dr. Underhill, of the Baptist Missionary Society, discoursed on
the benefits of emancipation, and showed what an important bearing
the evangelizing of the negro race must have on the conversion of
all West Africa. Sir Fowell Buxton, the son of the great advocate
of emancipation forty years ago, described the three schemes now
being carried out for planting new missions on the three great
lakes of Central Africa. Dr. Stewart, of the Free Church Mission
at Livingstonia, on Lake Nyassa, described the principle and
the plan of the missionary institution at Lovedale, in the Cape
Colony, which he has managed for several years. This is a model
institution, with industrial as well as educational and theological
departments; and is just the thing which the native tribes of South
Africa need for their enlightenment. Dr. Lowe, the Secretary of the
Edinburgh Medical Missionary Society, also read an admirable paper
on the work, methods and usefulness of medical missions generally.
Several of the medical missionaries who have recently gone out to
Africa were Dr. Lowe’s pupils.

“Among the effective speakers on these African missions were
Dr. Waugemann, of Berlin, who described the work of the Berlin
Society, especially in the Transvaal; Dr. White, of the Freedmen’s
Aid Mission; the Rev. E. Schrenck, of Basle, who spoke of work
in Ashantee; and the Rev. Dr. Moffat, who told the Conference
about his Bechuanas, and of course with his strong gray hair and
his eighty-three years of age and sixty-two years of service for
Christ, received an ovation at its hands. The noble presence and
the stirring words of the grand old man on the African day were a
striking feature in the meetings of the Conference.”

Such gatherings must help on the cause of Christian comity in
missions, as well as broaden the views of all who are engaged
in working the field under their hands. It is well to look up
sometimes from our own furrow, even if we have to stop ploughing
for a little, that we may realize that the field is the world, and
that the harvest belongs to one Master.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE POLITICAL PROGRESS OF THE FREEDMEN.

BY REV. M. E. STRIEBY.

Was it wise to give the ballot to the ex-slaves? The answer that
came in the hour it was given, from the Congress that gave it,
from the Northern people that sustained it, and from the colored
people that enjoyed it, was an emphatic and enthusiastic “Yes!”
The answer that came at that hour from the Southern white man was
in a suppressed voice, and was an execration hissed out between
grinding teeth. Since that hour the voice of the Southern white
man has grown firmer, and, as it came up from misgoverned South
Carolina and Louisiana, has rounded out into a full-toned “No!”
Nay, more, it has been re-echoed from the North, and recently with
special emphasis from the lips of one of the purest Christian
scholars on the heights of Christian learning in New England. What
answer do I give? Unhesitatingly, “Yes!” I say nothing about the
mere party reason given either then or since, for I do not write
as a partisan. I put the wisdom of the ballot on more substantial
grounds.

1. It saved the Freedmen from being again reduced to slavery.
Vagrant laws were passed, which confined them to the plantations
on which they had engaged to work, the end of which would have been
a serfdom attaching them to the soil. The ballot saved them from
this.

2. It gave the Freedmen and the South a free school system—a
greater boon than Southern legislation ever gave them before—a
boon without which all else would have been well-nigh in vain.
That system was modeled after the best patterns at the North, and
although it has been somewhat modified and enfeebled in practical
operation, is yet a solid corner-stone in the foundation of the new
superstructure which the South is rearing.

3. The ballot gave the Freedman a sense of self-respect, and
commanded for him the respect of others. To him it was an education
and an inspiration. It gave him the standing of a man among men,
and prompted him to become worthy of his position. It was a power
to him in the early days of his freedom, when he needed every help
to sustain him in that freedom; and to-day, though it is held in
check and almost useless, yet it is a slumbering giant, and is
watched with respectful caution by the whites. For who can tell
what such a slumbering power might do if aroused?

At present the black voter is politically conquered. The “white
man’s government” is established, and it is the purpose of the
white man that it shall remain so. This has been easily attained in
the States where the white majority is undoubted. In the few States
where the blacks are in the majority, the white man is determined
to rule, peaceably if he can, forcibly if he must. The Chisholm
murder and the Hamburg massacre are but samples of the methods
that will be resorted to if the effort is pushed persistently
to restore the supremacy of the black man in politics. When we
remember how that supremacy in those States was abused, how can we
ask the restoration if the abuse must again follow? The problem
is difficult. It can be solved only by one formula. The black
man must be protected in his political rights, and he must be so
enlightened as to use and not abuse those rights. There will be no
permanent advantage from a mere partisan triumph of the black man.
If achieved, as matters now stand, bayonets will again be needed to
sustain it, and will become once more a source of angry discussion
at the North and of concentrated bitterness at the South. The
experiment may again be necessary; but a far better thing should be
speedily, steadily and efficiently pushed forward—the training of
the colored voter for an intelligent and responsible manhood and
citizenship.

If every colored voter could be accompanied to the polls by a file
of soldiers armed with muskets, his ballot would represent the
musket and not the man. But if he becomes a property owner, with
all the interest in the welfare of the community which property
gives; if he is educated and can take an _intelligent_ interest
in the welfare of the community; and if he acquires a weight of
character that challenges respect, he will need no soldiers to
guard him to the polls, and his vote will represent the man and not
the musket.

When the black man shall reach such a position he conquers
caste-prejudice and wipes out the color-line in politics. Color is
significant only as it represents condition. Change the condition
and the color is of no consequence. With that change the white and
black men at the South will divide on politics as white men do at
the North, from differing views as to the best measures to promote
public weal.

Look on this picture: An armed and organized mob is breaking up a
political gathering of the blacks and their friends, and in the
background are the overawed Freedmen retiring from the polls.
Look, also, on this picture: A company of United States soldiers
are keeping guard over a body of legislators, mostly black, who,
with reckless rascality, are squandering the public funds, to
the ruin of the State and the disgrace of the nation. Turn not
from these pictures with indifference, for they are no fancy
sketches; nay, face them, for the history of at least two States
of this Union is liable to be a perpetual oscillation between the
two. But now look on this picture: A colored man is tilling his
land, adorning his home, and gathering around him the refinements
of life. Near by is the school-house, where his children, with
hundreds of others, are receiving the instruction of skilful
teachers, and not far off is the church edifice where that man and
his neighbors worship God under the ministration of a well educated
and pious minister.

Which picture do we choose, not as a matter of artistic preference,
but as the practical model for patriotic work? The only safety is
to extend that last picture till it shall cover the whole canvas
and blot out the other two. In that way only can a life and death
struggle between two irreconcilable forces be avoided.

       *       *       *       *       *


“THESE MY BRETHREN.”

In the Saviour’s great “Inasmuch” there is the power of
personality. “I was an hungered; I was thirsty; I was naked; I was
a stranger; I was sick; I was in prison.” It was Christ in the
person of these suffering and lowly ones; and service done to them
was done to Him. He might well have stopped there. But the marvel
of His personal identification with them is in the relationship
which He claims between Himself and them—“_these my brethren_.”
Oh, the touching condescension to name them by this title! What
we do for these humble and desolate ones we are not only doing
for our Lord, but for the brethren of our Lord. He takes it as a
special favor to Himself. And this service is graduated to the
lowest capacity—it is service done to only _one_ of the _least_ of
these. The standard is not that we should serve the mass of these
His brethren, but any one of them, according to the measure of our
ability, even down to a single act done to one of them in the right
spirit and as a revelation of a character in which we delight. Then
the obligation runs up to as great a number as our opportunity and
our ability may reach.

The intervention of organic efficiency greatly multiplies the
duty and the privilege of the individual. The American Missionary
Association, as has been potently said, is set for the care of the
three despised races in our country. Though the Indian and the
Negro and the Chinaman are the objects of prejudice and violence
and injustice and hatred on the part of our people, nevertheless
Christ speaks of them as among “these my brethren;” and the prayers
and the sympathy, and the service and the giving of substance
in their behalf He counts as rendered to Him. This organization
cannot discharge any one’s personal duty, but its instrumentality
is offered to all who would use it in the discharge of individual
obligation to Christ and to His brethren. Its opportunities belong
to all who would use them, and by these a single Christian may
reach not only “unto one of the least of these,” but unto many.

At the Great Day, when the Master shall surprise you, humble
Christian, with a benediction for service rendered to His brethren
among these despised ones, and you deprecatingly answer, _when_
and _where_, His revealing response may be—_when_ you reached them
with your prayers and your substance through that Association which
offered you its means of operation. And surely all its workers
among these outcast peoples, in the ostracism and opposition
and hatred which confront them, may even in this life have their
abundant recompense in this, that they are serving those whom the
Master owns as “these my brethren.”

       *       *       *       *       *


FIVE TESTS OF AMERICAN CIVILIZATION.

Notes of an Address at the Annual Meeting.

BY PROF. C. D. HARTRANFT, D. D. HARTFORD, CONN.

(1.) The Indians, the Negroes and the Chinese I regard as the
divinely appointed agents by which the principles that underlie
American civilization are to be finally tested. Every utterance
on the Fourth of July, from the Declaration of Independence till
this hour, has made the _right of asylum_ a pre-eminent feature
of American civilization. So whenever a man has been impelled by
the dictates of his conscience to leave his native land and seek
a foreign shore, that he might not be compelled to live in false
alliance with the Church and worship God in a way he did not elect;
whenever a man, full of noble impulses, has felt the hopelessness
of his life, so far as any ambitious scheme was concerned; or the
education of his children—a man feeling the tyranny of continuous
labor, without the possibility of accumulation—this man has ever
been gladly welcomed to America. So the Puritan, so the Huguenot,
so the Dutchman, so the Lutheran—whatever a man’s religious
training, America has given him hearty greeting. Even the atheist
and the infidel have found a refuge under the folds of this flag.
America has welcomed them to the shadow of her pines and palmettoes
and to her golden Pacific. But what a niggardly right of asylum
does she give to the poor Negro, as he is emancipated from his
bonds; and to the wretched Indian, whom she shuts up in Western
territories; and, most of all, to the poor Chinaman, as he comes
from his joss-house, with the instincts of a higher civilization
impelling him from the stagnation of centuries to the shores of the
Pacific!

It behooves us to inquire whether this precious right of asylum is
to be denied to the weaker races; whether we are going to lose this
peculiar feature of our nation, that throws its broad land open to
the world. Is it not true now, as in the past, that this is a vast
sanctuary, and that if a man lays hold of the horns of its altar,
there shall be nothing to drag him from his possession of freedom?
He stands on holy ground. In the British islands, the races that
have appeared in its history have been amalgamated—welded by the
mace and the battle-axe. In France, the various tribes and races
that, one after another, possessed that land, were woven together,
in warp and woof, by fire and blood. In Germany, the Prussians
have brought together that great mass of people as one, through
bitter and tremendous wars, the echoes of which have scarce died
away. America proposes a far different solution. She recognizes the
nobility of the characteristics developed by the various races. She
wants the African, the Chinaman, the Teuton—all races—to labor side
by side; to develop not only her wealth and prosperity, but, most
of all, the typical American humanity.

American civilization can better endure the savagery of the
Indian, the ignorance and brutality of the Negro, and the
semi-civilization of the Chinese, than it can afford to fraternize
with a civilization that is impregnated with a spirit of
ecclesiasticism, or endure the philosophies of St. Louis or the
Internationals. Rather is it for us to overcome these forces that
are the outcroppings of centuries of Roman development, as well as
those of Indian or Chinese or Negro semi-civilization.

This right of asylum involves another thing—the right of a man
to say, “I will leave this land and go to another”—_the right to
migrate_ if he does not find things subservient to him. We once
hailed the Irishman to come and build our railroads. We welcome
the German now, as he comes and terraces our mountains and teaches
us how to garden. We welcome the Frenchman—we welcome all. But we
say, “Lo! poor Indian, go West. East of the Appalachian is too good
for you; we want it. Go West; go West. We will give no rest to the
soles of your feet.” Do we want the Black Hills? Migrate! We will
surround you with a cordon of soldiers and a cordon of Government
agents, who will eat the life out of you. Keep on, poor ignorant,
keep on!

As to the African, there are not a few Americans, even in this
day, who think a righteous solution of the African question is to
ship them all off to the dark continent. So far as the American
Colonization Society keeps in view education and other Christian
instrumentalities, I bid them God-speed; but if they desire to send
the Negro out of the country, I say, No!—a thousand times, No! Let
us solve the problem right here where God has placed them.

And we say to the Chinese, as he comes upon his ship, “Turn your
prow back towards the Flowery Kingdom; don’t touch our golden
West.” Is that the spirit that welcomes the Irishman, the German,
the Italian, the Frenchman? Why not give as broad an opening to the
Chinaman as to the Irishman?

(2.) In the next place, God is testing that principle which is
set forth in the preamble of our Constitution—_the right of a man
to pursue happiness in such a way as he may elect_, provided he
does no wrong to his neighbor. And I opine that although happiness
involves the pursuit of higher aims, it begins on the basis of
labor. Labor is the essential element of American civilization.
If I labor, then I have the right of choice to enter into
whatever labor I please. No matter whether I am an adept or not,
circumstances will give the verdict. With the right of choice of
a man’s calling comes the right of competition. Carry it to its
extreme, if you please. If there are fifty-two thousand clerks,
I have a right to become the fifty-two thousand and first, and
starve. Then, after the inherent right of labor follows the right
to such property as I may accumulate. What I may produce, that
is mine absolutely, and no man can touch it. Here we are brought
face to face with this tremendous question between Irish and
German labor, and the low-priced labor of either the Negro or the
Chinaman. But, American citizens and Christians, if we respect
the right of a man to exercise such functions as God has given
him in such way as his conscience may dictate, and to choose his
own occupation, shall we not defend this right of labor, and the
right to pursue happiness as each may elect, and in the face of
Communism, defend the right of the Chinese to enter the market and
compete with all labor of whatever nationality?

(3.) There is a _third right_ or principle put to the test—_that
every man is equal before the law_. Whether he be Jew or Gentile,
Irishman or German, Negro or Chinaman, he is the equal of all men
before God. But what justice can a Chinaman get out of a Hoodlum
court? What justice has the Negro got out of a Southern court? To
the establishment of that justice we must bend our energies, for
it is vital to our institutions that a man before the law is equal
with his neighbor. If you have broken the shackles of the Negro,
break those of the Indian. If he outrages the law, try him by
process of the law and make him amenable, but deal with him as a
citizen. I opine that we shall arrive at this, sooner or later. Of
course this includes with it the privilege of every one to enter
public life, provided he proves his capacity.

(4.) But there is another principle being tested, and that is _the
right of education_. It is a settled point in the development of
American civilization, that education is essential to the proper
discipline of the citizen—some degree, at least, of elementary
education. Now when, according to the census of 1870, in the States
of Mississippi and Texas, 96 per cent. of the colored people were
thoroughly ignorant; and when in another State, 95 per cent. were
completely ignorant; in another, 93 per cent.; in two others, 91
per cent.; and in a last one, 90 per cent.; 88 per cent. of the
entire colored people of the South being in perfect ignorance;—does
it not behoove us to have a law for compulsory education if we
hope to have true culture and citizenship? Was our late President
far from right when he brought forward this idea? What salvation
is there for the Southern States unless universal education shall
be carried into effect? As the right to enter into competition is
inherent as much as the right of choice in labor, so we regard
the right of choice of one’s religion. The whole way should be
made open for the highest acquisition of intellectual and moral
knowledge.

(5.) So, too, our Protestant Christianity is under test. And
here we are encountered at once by the fact that Christians
still cultivate the caste spirit. If the Jew drew such a subtle
line between himself and the Gentile, the white Christian draws
a similar line between himself and the black Christian. If the
Greek considered himself to be of such high intelligence that he
classed all others as barbarians, Christians allow their prejudices
to make the same broad distinctions between different classes
of humanity, which it was the office of Jesus Christ—blessed be
His name!—to obliterate and utterly extinguish. That prejudice,
that caste spirit which Christians cultivate in the North to an
extent that amounts to social ostracism, must be broken down, if
we would maintain Protestant Christianity. Further, this question
connects itself with the true _missionary spirit_. The best way to
evangelize China is to evangelize the Chinese as they come to the
Pacific Coast. The best way to evangelize Africa is to evangelize
the African Negro of the South. Over against Protestant Christians
in the South and the Chinese on the Pacific is that dark power
which has involved the world in hopeless contentions. There stands
the Jesuit with his deep, treacherous features, his characterless
casuistry, and his sacrifice of all things else to glorify the
Church of Rome, no matter what may be the result on his country.
That subtle power which permeates our political institutions
with such great magnitude and force, stands face to face with
Protestantism in the South—with the Negro question, the Chinese
question, and the Indian question. If we are to serve Protestant
Christianity, we must free ourselves of caste, and learn to love
the African and the Chinaman at our doors. It is easy to speak well
of the Chinaman away off in China—to have an overflow of sympathy
for the poor African away in the dark continent; but it is a very
different thing to have sympathy for them in this country. The
spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ must actuate us and lead us to
this.

These, then, are _the five great principles_ that underlie American
civilization—principles that are being tested by these three races
or nationalities. Our professions are large. Let us live up to them
in these five great principles. It is Lord Bacon who says that
“When hempe is spun, England is done”—meaning that when Henry,
Elizabeth, Mary, Philip and Edward had passed away, England would
be done. We may say that _if these five principles_—the right of
asylum, the right of labor, of political freedom, of education, and
free play to Protestant Christianity be done—America is done. God
save the State!

And what is the agency—or one agency—by which that may be
accomplished? The American Missionary Association, because it
gives us Christian education. Because it brings together the
college, the church and the home. And will not your devotion to a
pure Christianity, free from the spirit of caste, and filled with
the spirit of genuine love, manifest itself by your support of such
an Association? May we not gauge your feelings in regard to these
five principles by the support you give to such a society? May we
not implore you that as you value the rights of property and free
government you array yourself solidly against Communism and its
ally—Romanism; because these are craftily working together.

Would you behold free Protestant Christianity established in this
country? Then give your support to this Association, that these
three races may prove us to be a people who love liberty in its
deepest significance as liberty in Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *


RETURN OF REV. FLOYD SNELSON.

Just after the annual meeting we learned that the health of
Mrs. Snelson was in such condition as to make her speedy return
from the Mendi Mission, West Africa, a probable necessity. Her
husband has arrived with herself, their children, and those of
Dr. James, whose wife had died abroad. The change of climate and
of occupation has already proved of great benefit to her. It is
a great disappointment to us all to lose so soon the earnest and
discreet service of the head of our Mendi Mission. Whether he will
be able to return or not is still an unsettled question. But these
experiences are teaching us some valuable lessons. First of them is
this,—that we must send no men or women to the West Coast of Africa
without submitting them to a severe physical examination, such as
is required for enlistment into the army or as a prerequisite to a
life insurance policy. For we find that upon those who went from
this country in thoroughly sound health, with no weakness from
previous disease or tendency to special complaints, the climate
has had little or no bad effect; but where there was any such
predisposition or impairment of physical vigor, the malarial heats
of the West coast have hastened its rapid development. We send no
more recruits, then, without medical attestation to their soundness
of body, in addition to the testimony we have heretofore required
as to their intellectual and spiritual health.

Mr. Snelson brings much valuable information from the field, which
we hope to lay before our readers at an early day.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEWS AND ITEMS FROM THE CHURCHES.

MACON, GA.—Rev. Stanley E. Lathrop, who was graduated eight years
ago from the Chicago Theological Seminary, commenced pastoral work
at Macon, December 1st. He writes: “I am quite agreeably surprised
with everything thus far. I shall do the best I can for this
people, with God’s help.”

MARIETTA, GA.—The school prospers, and, with two other schools, is
exerting a marked influence on the people. The Sunday-school and
literary society are both doing good work.

MARION, ALA.—Rev. Geo. E. Hill writes: “Our church has received
from the Sunday-school at Weymouth, Mass., Colton’s large
missionary map, and I have had the pleasure of introducing my
people to a view of the world—the field of missions. They propose
to contribute monthly to the cause. Our Sunday-school is filling
up.”

MONTGOMERY, ALA.—Rev. Flavel Bascom, D.D., who commenced work for
the winter December 1st, writes: “My first impressions are very
favorable. My heart is drawn out toward the people, and I expect to
enjoy my work for them very much.”

SELMA, ALA.—Rev. C. B. Curtis has gone from Burlington, Wis., to
the charge of the church here.

SHELBY, ALA.—A Congregational church was organized October 10th,
by Rev. G. W. Andrews, of the Theological Department of Talladega
College, consisting of twenty-one members (twelve men and nine
women). Rev. J. D. Smith, a graduate of Talladega Theological
Department, is pastor.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

—Over 3,000 people attended the Agricultural Fair for colored
people held at Talladega, Ala., in November, under the auspices of
the college. Stock, farm products, cookery, needle and fancy work,
flowers and pictures, were brought in for exhibition. Contests were
held in athletic sports, and in spelling, declaiming, etc., between
students of the different schools. Several hundred white people
attended, and showed their interest by acting as judges on the
committees with the colored people. The fair was kept entirely free
from all the objectionable features which so often mar our State
fairs, and indeed was opened with prayer, and, after the addresses
and award of premiums, closed with the Doxology.

—Dr. Rust, the Corresponding Secretary of the Freedmen’s Aid
Society of the M. E. Church, reports that its work during this
year “has never been exceeded in any year of its history. It has
erected more school edifices, more commodious and commanding;
educated more teachers, prepared more ministers, led more souls to
Christ, and set in operation more streams of elevating influence,
done more and better work for Christ and humanity, than in any like
period before.” The financial statement for the year ending July
1, 1878, gives its total receipts for the year as $63,403, and
its expenditures, mainly for salaries and board of teachers and
educational expenses, including $3,000 paid on its debt, at the
same. The society has aided in the establishment of five chartered
institutions having full collegiate powers, three theological and
two medical schools, also chartered, and ten other educational
institutions.

—Dr. Ruffner, Superintendent of Public Instruction in Virginia,
claims that $850,000 was collected from the people and set apart
by law for the support of the common schools, and charges that
this, with the interest, has been diverted from its proper use and
applied to the ordinary expenses of the State Government.

—A national colored Baptist educational convention was held last
summer at Nashville, Tenn. In an address published by them they
offer heartfelt thanks to Northern Baptists, who alone have
helped them to what educational facilities they have enjoyed.
To the Southern white Baptists they are grateful for the “good
resolutions” they have passed in favor of the black man. They
urge the colored Baptists to support their own publishing house,
newspaper, and the educational enterprises of the American Baptist
Home Mission Society.

—Public sentiment has almost effaced the color line in Virginia;
given political freedom and safety in North Carolina; and created
a powerful party of “Independents” in Georgia; and it will bring
South Carolina to her senses in time. Moral forces require more
time and patience than physical force.—_Christian Union_.

—Two colored students of Mr. Spurgeon’s Pastor’s College, Rev.
Messrs. Richardson and Johnson, with their wives, have left England
as missionaries to Central Africa. They were all freed slaves from
this country.

—The Rev. Alfred Saher, English Baptist Missionary at the
Cameroons, West Africa, has translated the Bible into the language
of the people, and now reports upwards of 2,000 converts.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—Mr. Wheeler writes from Keshena Agency, Wisconsin, of the second
successful Agricultural Fair among the Menomonees. About 200
entries of corn and potatoes were made, with other vegetables,
grains and grasses in abundance. The displays of woman’s work and
of live stock were very fine. A ploughing match was held. About
$200 was expended in premiums, voted from the tribal funds for
that purpose. Advantage was taken of the opportunity for giving
instruction in the arts of agriculture, and for exhorting them to
keep their children faithfully in the schools. Such gatherings both
prove and promote progress.

—Brig. Gen. Pope reports that the late outbreak of the Cheyennes
was caused by starvation. He says of the Indians in general: “If
they are left with the means to go to war, as is the custom, we
simply sleep on a volcano. Unless, therefore, ample, and above all,
regular supplies of food can be guaranteed to the Indians, I am
compelled, in justice to the Government and the frontier settlers,
to ask that more troops be sent to the agencies in the Indian
Territory, and that at least two of the posts in Western Kansas be
largely reinforced by cavalry. I have also to ask that any Indians
sent from the North into this department be disarmed and dismounted
before being sent here, so that they can be placed in the same
condition as the Indians with whom they are to live.”

—Major Mizener reports more in detail:—The causes which led to the
leaving of the Northern Cheyennes may be summed up as follows:
They were disappointed in the country. Their rations were poor
and entirely insufficient. They were home-sick, despondent and
disappointed, and were anxious to get back to a country better
known to them, and where game was to be had, while here they did
not have enough to eat.

—General Sheridan attributes our Indian wars to two classes of
causes; the first being the constant encroachment upon the lands
of the Indians, sacredly guaranteed to them by treaty, and the
constant removal of the tribes to distant reservations, in which
they are again troubled by the tide of immigration. He says no
other nation in the world would have attempted the reduction of
these wild tribes, and occupation of their country, with less than
60,000 or 70,000 men.

—Secretary Schurz affirms that the real cause of Indian wars has
been the breaking of treaties. He recites an exhaustive history of
Indian wars to show that this has been the case, and that very few
of the wars have arisen from the maladministration of agents.

—Gen. Sherman, in his annual report, declares that many of the
Indians prefer death to agricultural toil; that to convert them
from a nomadic into a pastoral race is the first and fundamental
problem; that each tribe must be dealt with according to its own
nature; that whatever department of the Government is charged with
this work, must be intrusted with large discretion to adapt its
measures to emergencies. He traces the Indian wars generally to
broken promises, insufficient rations and impending starvation.

—Of the joint committee to which the transfer of the Indians to
the War Department is referred, the three members of the Senate
are from Nebraska, Kentucky and Illinois; of the five members of
the House, but one comes from as far East as this. The committee,
therefore, represents communities that favor the army. It is
understood that the Indians themselves do not desire the change;
that the army does not want the responsibility; yet that it will
probably be done, unless the President interferes, because the
Indian ring desires it, and because the army makes it a point of
honor.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—The First Church in San Francisco, Dr. Stone’s, has just opened
a new and well-appointed room in the basement for its mission and
Chinese Sunday-school. The Petaluma Church has also enlarged its
lecture-room for the use of its Chinese school.

—As the Chinese children are not permitted to enter the San
Francisco public schools, those who have embraced Christianity are
taught in the Union Mission in the old Globe Hotel. The school has
two sessions, one of which is conducted by an American lady, the
other by Hung Mung Chung, who is a fine Chinese scholar and a man
of much dignity and scholarly attainments, said to be a lineal
descendant of Confucius. During the past year Hung Mung Chung was
baptized and became a member of the Protestant Church for Chinese.
He teaches the children the Chinese classics and the maxims and
precepts of Confucius. Each session of the school is closed by
singing and repeating the Lord’s Prayer—in the morning in English,
in the afternoon in Chinese.

—The San Francisco Chinamen contributed $1,200 to the yellow fever
sufferers of the South. The sand-lot meetings have not yet reported
the amount of their collections.

—The Chinese Sunday-school in Chicago has been in existence nearly
six months, with an average attendance of fourteen scholars. It is
said that the number can be largely increased if teachers can be
procured.

—Rev. W. P. Paxson, Superintendent of the missionary work of the
American S. S. Union in their Southwestern Department, says: “One
striking event in my missionary work has been the organization of a
Chinese Sunday-school in St. Louis.”

—Mr. Ha Shan Sin was baptized last Sabbath by Rev. E. D. Murphy
at the Immanuel Presbyterian Chapel of this city. The young man
is about twenty-two years old, was born in San Francisco, though
he has spent most of his life in China. This is the sixth of the
Chinamen that have been received into the churches of this city.
Three have been enrolled among the members of the Fourth Avenue
Presbyterian Church, Dr. Howard Crosby’s.

—The first Chinaman was admitted to citizenship in the United
States by naturalization, last week, and we count the event an
auspicious one just at this time. The man is Wong Ah Lee; by
trade he is a cigar-maker, and his wife is an Irish-woman. With
a view, mainly, to make a case which can be carried up to a
conclusive decision from the highest court, the Judge here ruled
that a Chinaman is either white or black, and so must come in.
California’s ruling has been that a Mongolian is neither white or
black, and so cannot come in.—_Congregationalist_, December 4.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR QUERY COLUMN.

  _Query._—South of the Ohio River the work of caring for the
  sick falls to the colored people. During the past weeks there
  has been greater demand for skilled nurses than for competent
  teachers. How can A. M. A. schools prepare their students for
  this important profession? What is the best method of instructing
  pupils in a knowledge of the simpler details concerning the
  proper care of the sick?

                                                         TEACHER.

We shall be glad to have full answers to this important inquiry
from those who have had experience. It calls attention to a most
important part of the teacher’s work. Meanwhile, we would suggest
that the _Hampton Sanitary Tracts_ may be found very useful for
distribution, or to be read to older pupils and parents. The first
three can be obtained by addressing the “Hampton Tract Editing
Committee,” Hampton Institute, Va. The cost is five cents apiece,
or four dollars a hundred copies. They are entitled: No. 1, “The
Health Laws of Moses;” No. 2, “Preventable Diseases;” No. 3, “Duty
of Teachers.” This last seems to be exactly addressed to the case
in hand.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

       *       *       *       *       *


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

Revival in Howard University.

Rev. Wm. W. Patton, D.D., President.

You will be glad to hear that there is much religious interest in
our institution at the present time. It has been gradually coming
on all the autumn, but was greatly aided by the week of prayer
held by the Young Men’s Christian Association of the University in
concert with other Associations. Some ten or twelve of the students
think that they have begun the new life lately, and we look for
further good results. This is highly encouraging, as showing that
in addition to the educational advantages which gather around our
location, spiritual blessings may also be received. We desire the
prayers of all Christians that the work may be continued with
power. Our theological students have been deeply interested in the
meetings for prayer, and have rendered valuable aid.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

A Destitute County.

The following extract from a letter by an esteemed friend in a
central county in Virginia is suggestive of the many dark places
throughout the South yet unreached by the school or the church:

The field in this county alone is an ample one. The colored
population of the county largely exceeds the white, and the yearly
ratio of increase is in excess of the white. A half generation has
passed since the era of emancipation, and it is melancholy, indeed,
to any Christian mind and heart, to contemplate how rapidly this
portion of the population, in the very heart of one of the oldest
States in the Union, is crowding the broad road to perdition;
how, in the entire absence of all organized efforts for elemental
education and proper religious instruction, they are relapsing into
semi-heathenism. There is not to-day a single school of any kind
or character for them within the limits of the county (which may
be safely estimated to contain five thousand souls of all ages and
sexes of the colored race), except the Sabbath-school which has
been taught by the writer.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

New Church at Shelby Iron Works—Talladega a Missionary Centre.

Rev. G. W. Andrews, Talladega.

A Congregational church of twenty-one members was organized
Oct. 10th, at Shelby Iron Works, Alabama. This is the fifteenth
Congregational church planted by the A. M. A. in this State. Eight
of them are in the vicinity of Talladega College, the most distant
being forty miles away. They are the out-growth of the mission work
carried on by the teachers and pupils of the college.

This new church at Shelby begins its existence under most favorable
circumstances, most of its members being present or former pupils
of the college. All are colored people; two are preparing for the
ministry; one has been a student at Oberlin, Ohio; one was for some
time a resident of Hartford, Ct., and more recently of Columbus,
Ohio, a graduate of the high school there and a former pupil here;
one is principal of an academy of ten years’ standing at Shelby and
a graduate from Talladega. With two or three exceptions, all of
them have for some years been trained in our Sunday-schools. The
Shelby Iron Company is in hearty sympathy with the movement; the
Superintendent, himself a Methodist, coming into the preliminary
meeting and saying publicly that the Iron Company would look with
peculiar favor on this church should it be organized, recognizing
as it did the necessity for more intelligent Christian instruction
for the colored people.

The sectarian walls, which in the South are built heaven-high,
have in this particular place been badly shattered. There is no
outspoken opposition on the part of the colored people, as in every
other place known to me. The different denominations worship in the
same building, the lower story being devoted to the school and the
upper one to the churches. The Iron Company own about two-thirds of
the building, the original cost being three thousand dollars.

I suppose there are a million of dollars invested by the Shelby
Iron Company at this place, mostly owned in the North. One owner
is an honored member of the Centre Church, Hartford, Ct.; another,
of the Park St. Church, Boston; another is a Massachusetts man
well known among “iron men” both in this country and abroad. The
Superintendent is a noble Christian man from Illinois, and was a
colonel in the recent war. Several of the local managers are from
the North, some are from the South. Most of the workmen, white
and colored, who stand all day side by side, are gathered from
the surrounding region. Here the North and South meet and learn
to know and love each other. The Iron Company is helping to solve
the great national problem no less truly than missionary schools
and churches. It seems to me sometimes that its entire business
is carried on as a kind of missionary enterprise on the broadest
basis. Owning thirty thousand acres of land immediately about the
“Iron Works,” it exercises wholesome restraint over all classes.
Nothing seems to be overlooked; the church, the school, the home,
the village morals, the town adornments and the State, are all
cared for.

Talladega College, a college only in name yet, is the rallying
point for our missionary work in this State. It is just such a
college as a missionary college should be, its whole work as a
school being subordinate to the church. It is a training school,
patterned after the missionary colleges of the American Board.
Its grand aim is to raise up a native ministry so as to plant
churches, and through them carry an intelligent gospel to the
masses. We are not especially afraid that there will be any lack
of school-teachers. With our eye fixed steadily on our missionary
work, enough who cannot attain to the Christian ministry will
become teachers, and they, catching the spirit of the institution,
will become missionary teachers. It is surprising to see how this
spirit has taken possession of our pupils. There is scarcely one
who goes into the country to teach who does not organize his
Sabbath-school as promptly as his day-school, and pursue it with
even more interest. It is the first thing he reports on his return.
Hundreds are converted by this means; Bibles, tracts, religious
literature, and light are spread in all directions; thus are
constantly carried forward many Sabbath-schools, and through them a
glorious pioneer Christian work. Out of this work have grown eight
churches, so near to the college as to be its special care, and in
which a hundred conversions are reported for the summer just ended.

Of the twenty pupils in the Theological department, all have been
reaping in this missionary field during the summer vacation, about
one-half as preachers. The home church takes a lively interest in
them during their absence. Prayer is made to God without ceasing
in their behalf, and often interested members go out to aid them
in their revival meetings. Letters are constantly received from
them to be read at the monthly missionary concert, and public
thanksgiving is rendered for the good work they report. Thus is
maintained a lively interest in Christian missions and Christian
work.

There has been an evident increase of interest in our mission
churches about the college this summer; all but one report revivals
of greater or less power; one reports thirty-two additions by
confession; four report the completion of their houses of worship,
free of debt—houses hitherto unplastered and otherwise much
exposed, but now neat and comfortable, and everybody is happy
over it. One is building a new house of worship unlike any of
the others; it is built of logs, large and commodious. One poor
fellow was so intent on pushing forward to completion his house
of worship, that he expended all his salary for the summer, and
then pawned his Sunday clothes. On his return to school he reports
twenty-three conversions, his house of worship completed, but no
money in his pocket. If ever there was a man worthy of aid, he is.
He is now in my back-yard sawing wood. You will hear from him some
day. These young prophets of the Lord are making rapid progress in
the knowledge of the Bible and the system of theology, and wherever
they go, are beginning to be recognized by all classes as well
qualified to break the Bread of Life to their people.

I am glad to report that the white people, seeing the character
and efficiency of these young men, are coming to understand and
appreciate our work. I believe they heartily approve what we are
doing. I have repeatedly experienced their hospitality this summer,
and had many conversations with them relating to our mission here.
From the president of a well-known college, down to the poor man
who did not know his letters, I have found nothing but approval.
The time is not far distant when this approval will be more
outspoken and pronounced. When the Christian men of the South and
your missionary workers from the North understand each other, from
that day they are one in Christian work. We bless God for this new
feast of love. Pray that no political excitement may interrupt the
growing good feeling.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Thin End of the Wedge—A First Thanksgiving Service.

REV. WILLIAM H. ASH, FLORENCE.

Our work here in Florence is the “thin end of the wedge,” and with
sufficient facilities, the smiles of the Master, and patience
in its workers, great good will result. The services are well
attended, and sometimes the house is disagreeably filled, and we
are without the proper means of ventilation. The members of the
church begged me to express for them to the Association their
sincere and heartfelt gratitude for the _new organ_ sent them; it
has increased the interest of our services greatly. Last Thursday,
Nov. 28, the first Thanksgiving service ever held in this place
among the colored people was observed in our church; therefore it
has a history in connection with our work here. I made it a union
service, inviting the Baptists and Methodists to worship with us.
This congregation of Baptists, Methodists, and Congregationalists
worshipped as though Christ was the Head of the Church, instead of
any one of the denominations present. The service was solemn and
intelligent. It truly seemed that the Lord was in His holy temple.
After service a gentleman of about sixty or seventy years of age
said, “I have been here forty years, but I never heard of such a
thing as a Thanksgiving service among the colored people.” This is
the “dawn of a new age.” Pray for us.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSOURI.

Free Schools in the State.

REV. J. E. ROY, D. D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

This noble Western State, plowed by war and sowed to freedom, is
now coming on with harvests of temporal and moral prosperity.
As I have been going over its territory, looking after the five
school-houses of the Association, I have been delighted with the
evidences of progress in the free school system. It is a great joy
to see in these cities and towns the new, large, two-story brick
school-houses of modern style and furnishing. The system works
more slowly into the back settlements. But in a Kansas City paper
I see it stated that in the country places of Jackson County there
are _one hundred and fifty_ of these schools. At Warrensburg I saw
the imposing three-story stone edifice of the State Normal School,
built by that town and its county of Johnson, and now occupied by
_four hundred_ pupils from every part of the State.

Special provision is made in the law for its enforcement in behalf
of free schools for the colored children. These are managed by
the same school board and are supported from the same tax fund.
These officers are compelled to provide schools wherever there are
fifteen of such scholars in the district. If they fail to do it,
it is the duty of the Superintendent to require it to be done. I
met one case where the out-districts declined to co-operate with
the Board in this matter, when only a threatened appeal to the
Superintendent brought them to terms. I have been gratified to
see the heartiness with which the five boards I have dealt with
are pushing the free school system in behalf of blacks as well as
whites. Nor have I been deceived, as some may imagine.

The Lincoln Institute at the Capitol, as a Normal School for
colored teachers, receives an annual appropriation from the State
of $5,000. A democratic editor told me that that was considered as
a matter of honor, and that so there was no danger of its being
discontinued. This institution of sacred name had also a sacred
origin. For its founding, the 62d and 65th Regiments of U. S.
colored infantry, when discharged from service in January, 1866,
contributed a fund of $6,379. The Freedmen’s Bureau furnished
$8,000; the Western Sanitary Commission, $2,000; and agents Beal
and Lane raised $2,000. The building is of brick, 60×70 feet,
three stories high, a comely structure crowning a hill just out
of Jefferson City. Its current catalogue enrolls 123 students. It
is controlled by a local board, of which the Governor and State
Superintendent are _ex-officio_ members. Revs. R. D. Foster and M.
Henry Smith have served as principals the most of the time since
it was opened in 1871.

The Association has its five school houses at Troy, Fulton,
Westport, Warrensburg and Lebanon. These were procured in part by
aid from the Freedmen’s Bureau in 1867–9. They were at first run by
teachers sent from the North, but were gradually taken up by the
local school boards. I find them all in such use now. Three will
probably be sold to those boards at their present low valuation.
Two will be sold to local colored Methodist churches, as the
schools require larger and better houses, which the authorities
intend to build. These houses have also been used all the time as
places of worship by the colored people. The seven or eight colored
teachers in these schools were educated in Lincoln, Fisk, and
kindred institutions. I have found them young people of character,
and of tact in handling their schools. They have to be examined.
They receive from $35 to $45 a month, about the same as white
common-school teachers.

The A. M. A. has done the work of initiation. By this tour of
inspection I am deeply convinced of the wisdom of the A. M. A. in
putting its strength upon Normal and Collegiate institutions, and
so doing a wholesale business. Raise up teachers and send them back
into the country. Raise up the men and women for the professions
and for the higher walks of social life. That is the work.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CHURCH ORGANIZED AND DEDICATED AT AVERY

A meeting of Counsel and Advice was convened September 29th at
Avery Station, by order of Rev. Floyd Snelson, and, on solicitation
of the minister in charge, Rev. A. E. Jackson, to organize and
dedicate a church to God. Owing to our inability to reach Avery
on Saturday in time to hold preliminary exercises, examination
of candidates for admission, etc., this part of our duty was
deferred till Sunday morning. This, with our other duties, made our
programme for the day quite full.

Early Sunday morning the Board met in the church to begin the
labors of the day. The sun shone brightly, yet we could but feel
that many round us were groping in darkness, without any clear idea
of Him in whose image they are made. Brother Snelson was elected
moderator, and A. P. Miller secretary. Brother Gomer, General Agent
of Shengay Mission, who favored us with his presence, offered
prayer. “Guide me, oh! Thou great Jehovah!” was sung.

In absence of letter missive, the minister in charge gave his
reasons why a church should be established or organized at Avery.
He spoke of the willingness of the people to receive the story
of the Cross; said that some came far to hear “God palaver,” and
express their joy in being permitted so to do. Brother Hallock,
the interpreter (native), and Brother Wise, were asked several
questions. Their reasons were clear and very satisfactory. It seems
evident that the industrial work at this station, which gives
employment to many, is a means of good both to mission and people.
It was deemed fit to organize a church at Avery, to be known as the
Second Congregational Church of the Mendi Mission.

By 11 o’clock, at the ringing of the second bell, the chapel was
crowded with natives, for the most part in native costume. Brother
Snelson spoke to them through an interpreter, telling them the
object of our coming together. The candidates for admission to the
Church were then called forward. “A charge to keep I have” was
sung by the congregation. Prayer was offered by Brother Snelson,
after which the missionary hymn, “From Greenland’s icy mountains,”
was sung; and as it was being sung, each missionary, as he looked
upon the sable congregation, could but feel that the “harvest is
plenteous, but the laborers are few.”

The roll was then called by Brother Jackson; after which the
candidates were examined, and by vote of the Council eighteen were
received into full membership. Some of the candidates were not
received because of not being legally married. They were instructed
to attend to this matter, and then they might be received into the
church. They are to remain under watch-care until this obligation
is met. After examination of candidates, Brother Snelson spoke to
them about things peculiar to their country—slavery, polygamy, etc.
The meeting was then dismissed to meet at 7 P. M. Brother Gomer,
who has for years known our work, expressed his astonishment at
seeing so large a congregation assembled in the house of God at
this place, and at the good order kept throughout the exercises.
Some of those received were old members, while others were new
converts, among whom were three chiefs, Peah Carle, Carray Phemah,
and Sei Lōtō. These men exercise a vast influence over their
people, and their being reached makes the reaching of their people
easier.

The people assembled at the ringing of the second bell. “Praise
God from Whom all blessings flow” was sung. Brother Snelson then
led the congregation in the Lord’s Prayer. A hymn was sung, after
which the Rev. J. Gomer offered prayer. “Alas! and did my Saviour
bleed?” was sung. Portions of Scripture were read by A. P. Miller.
The services of organization and dedication were combined, owing to
want of time. Brother Snelson spoke through the interpreter, and
told the candidates what their step meant—turning from death unto
life. The church, too, he said, we had come together to dedicate to
God and His service. Brother Snelson preached, choosing Luke xii.
32, as his text—“Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s
good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” A comparison was made
between the people to whom these words were spoken and these our
benighted brethren. The promises of God were dwelt upon. We must
trust in Him for salvation. The dedicatory prayer was then offered
by Rev. A. P. Miller. A hymn was sung. The right hand of fellowship
was given by Bro. A. E. White. The address was delivered by Rev. J.
Gomer. The Lord’s supper was then celebrated; Brothers Gomer and
Jackson presided. It was a solemn scene. The Doxology was sung,
and the benediction pronounced by A. P. Miller. The meeting was
one long to be remembered. One more stronghold is now erected in
this land of night to tear down the powers of darkness. We have all
reason to thank God for His blessings thus far. A better day is
dawning for these benighted, long-neglected sons of Africa.

Brother Gomer says that more laborers (colored) are wanted in his
mission. We, too, in a work so vast, can but ask God to prepare
such as are needed for a work so difficult.

We ask the prayers of all lovers of mankind that the work
begun here may not only succeed, but that its influence may be
far-reaching.

                             REV. FLOYD SNELSON, _Moderator_.
                             REV. A. P. MILLER, _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LATE INDIAN WAR AND CHRISTIANITY.

REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH, WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had another Indian war, and, as usual, there has been a
cry in favor of turning the Indians over to the War Department.
There are some, however, of us who will persist in seeing something
favorable to Christianity and the present policy even in this war,
and we think we have our reasons for it.

I do not propose, at present, to thoroughly discuss the causes
of the war, for I am not well enough acquainted with them to do
so intelligently. Some will lay the blame on Government, some
on a Christian policy, and some on the Indians. Perhaps all may
have to bear a part. Although I believe that the Government
has often treated the Indians wrongfully, yet a long course of
observation has convinced me that the Indians are not all saints,
and when the Government is often crooked, either intentionally or
unintentionally, and two crooked sticks come together, there is
almost always sure to be trouble.

The published statements of General Crook, who is not supposed to
be very sentimental in his feelings toward the Indians, and who was
at the Fort Hall Agency at the beginning of the war, implicates the
Government severely.

A residence of nearly three years in Idaho, 1871–1874, in the
very region of the war, led me to believe that very little was
energetically done for Christianizing those Indians. This has
been true at some Agencies. Their annual reports show that while
the Government opened wide the doors for Christian work, when
the present policy was adopted, and said, “We will give you
opportunity, encouragement and aid, if you will only send the
Indians missionaries,” yet that Christians have failed to take hold
of the work as they ought to have done. If this was true of the
Indians engaged in the late war, Christians may have to bear a part
of the blame.

Notwithstanding all this, some laurels have been added by the
late war to the Christian work which has been done among the
Indians. One “who wishes to be understood” has written a letter
in which he speaks very harshly against the Christian workers on
the Yakama Reservation, where Father Wilbur, of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, has been successfully laboring for sixteen
years. He says: “The present reservation system is a failure in
every respect. We, who daily come in contact with the Indians,
cannot be made to believe that prayer-books, praying generals,
and Methodist preachers, (or any other preachers,) are a good
safeguard against the tomahawk and the scalping-knife; and the
pseudo-philanthropists, the Christian-mongers of the East, who
are paying thousands to send missionaries among these barbarians,
would do us a favor if they would keep them away; and if the U.
S. Government would be less influenced in its conduct toward the
Indians by the advocates of Christianity, our wives and children
might be annually spared the sight of murdered husbands and
fathers. So far we have been loyal, while Indians, with passes
from Wilbur and other Agents, have been on the war-path. We have
reliable information that some of the dead Indians found after the
battles near Pendleton had on their persons passes from Wilbur.”

Now it is probably a fact that some of the Umatilla Indians, and
perhaps a few of the Yakamas, were engaged in aiding the enemy.
There are always some renegade Indians connected with each tribe,
as well as white renegades and tramps. As tribes, however, they did
not engage in the war, and comparatively few individuals did.

In the Indian war of 1855–6, before Father Wilbur went among these
same Yakamas, they were the leading spirits, and it was the most
wide-spread war which has ever devastated this coast. If they and
the Umatillas had joined in this war, it would have been far more
terrible than it has been. Inducements were not wanting to lead
them into it. It is said on good authority that two thousand horses
were offered them by the hostiles if they would join them, and yet
they refused. An army officer in command of one of the battles said
that some of those Indians did nobly in aiding our soldiers to gain
the victory.

It may be said that they had too much permanent property in homes
and farms, to allow them to engage in the war; for they knew that
if they should do so, they would certainly in the end lose it all.
This is undoubtedly so; and yet when Father Wilbur went among them
they had none of this kind of property, but only movable property
which they could carry with them even in war, as the Bannocks have
done. It is a fact that Christianity gave them this property.

It may again be said that they were thoroughly whipped in 1855–6
and were afraid to engage in war again. They were thus whipped, and
the remembrance of it may, even now, do them good. But in 1862–3
Gen. Crook, the noted Indian fighter, just as thoroughly thrashed
the Indians in Idaho, in precisely the same region where the late
war was carried on, and the praise of his effectual work is still
in the mouths of the old citizens. This was seven years later than
the Yakama war, and so much fresher in the minds of the Indians.
No, it was evidently Christianity which prevented their joining in
the war.

Gen. Howard, too, has added new laurels to his reputation. It must
be remembered that he is the principal one of our generals who
has not been in favor of the transfer of the Indians to the War
Department. This praying general has prosecuted the war with such
vigor that the strong papers with strong arguments have sustained
him, and almost invariably those who went with him in his rough
marches have defended him, such as newspaper correspondents,
scouts and the like, and the “stay at homes” have been about the
only ones who have found fault. His recent conference with the
Umatilla Indians since the war has shown such firmness, justice and
Christianity as to win for him very many friends among those who
previously opposed him, thus showing again that Christianity is
the way of dealing with the Indians. So Christianity has won its
laurels even in this war.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


“THE CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHRISTIAN CHINESE.”

Its Origin and Organization.

REV. WM. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

Soon after our work among the Chinese began to yield results in
souls apparently converted, I felt the necessity of banding the
converts together for mutual fellowship, for instruction, and for
test-work; for it seemed unwise, considering the difficulties
under which we must labor in determining the genuineness of the
conversions, to bring them at once to baptism and the church.
Yet they must not be left quite outside the fold, and I proposed
to them the organization of _The Chinese Christian Class_, into
which any Chinese might come who, in the judgment of those already
members of the class, had begun to believe in Christ. This class
was to have frequent meetings for prayer and for instruction in the
Bible; its members were to maintain a fraternal watchfulness over
each other, and were to be baptized only when, through a probation
of at least six months, they had proved to be steadfast and true.

This class at first comprised only such Chinese as had been led
to Christ through the work of the Third Congregational Church in
this city, of which I was then the pastor. Afterwards it was found
desirable to receive to membership the Chinese connected with other
congregations, and to enlarge somewhat the scope or design of the
class. It was therefore reorganized under its present name, but
with the same principles and conditions of membership. Some of
the benefits, in the way of mutual aid and protection, which the
heathen Chinese seek to secure through their “Six Companies,” our
Christian Chinese, who have renounced all connection with the “Six
Companies,” gain through this Association. Its rooms are their
places of resort; a sort of home. They have made a little beginning
towards a library of Chinese works, mainly religious, written by
the missionaries. The regulations of this Association, prepared by
the Chinese, without assistance or suggestion, so far as I know,
from any American, have been translated for me into English, and
will be printed in full in our Annual Report. I quote here the 2d,
3d, 6th, and 8th Articles:

“2d. Any one who desires to become a member of this Association
must forsake idolatry and all bad habits, and prove himself to be
a follower of Christ. He must bring references from one or more
members. His name must be brought before the Society a week before
he can be admitted, and he is received upon a vote of two-thirds of
the members. He must himself sign his name, and pay the sum of two
dollars as entrance fee, and twenty-five cents every three months,
this money being used to defray the expenses of the Association. He
is expected to do all he can to bring in new members, and to lead
his countrymen to Christ.”

“3d. The members are expected to take part in the meetings for
worship, giving counsel and encouragement to one another. If any
member does wrong, he is to be kindly entreated and led back to the
right.”

“6th. If any member continue in the violation of the regulations
of the Association, after three successive remonstrances, he must
be expelled from the Association. If he afterwards repent and
desire to come back, he is admitted without an entrance fee; his
admittance depending upon the sincerity of his repentance, as
judged by the members of the Association.”

“8th. If any member desire to go back to China, he must give notice
to the Association one month beforehand. He must not go until he
has paid all his debts here. If he is really obliged to go before
he can pay his debts, he must find some one who will be security
for him.”

There are now four Branch Associations, two in San Francisco, one
in Oakland, and one in Sacramento. Each branch supports itself
and is governed by its own officers. There are three—President,
Vice-President, and Secretary who also acts as Treasurer. The
statistics of these “Branches” are as follows: Oakland, 36 members,
one expelled, five gone to China, 11 baptized; total contributions,
$472.20, of which $117.25 was for Bible and missionary work in
California and China. Sacramento, 14 members; contributions,
$103.80. San Francisco, 82 members, four expelled, two gone to
China, 10 baptized; contributions, $351.00, of which $178.00
were for Bible and missionary work. Bethany (San Francisco), 9
members, 3 baptized; contributions $244.50, of which $71.00 were
for Bible and missionary purposes. There are besides these, 23
members belonging to the Central Association, who on account of
their places of residence are not yet identified with any “Branch,”
so that the total membership is 164. Of these 33 were received
the past year. The total amount contributed for all purposes was
$1,181.50.

Besides this company of 164, there are 30 or more Chinese who have
been converted, as we hope, at Santa Barbara, San Leandro, Stockton
and elsewhere, in connection with our schools; and besides the
contributions above reported, there has been raised at Petaluma,
Stockton and elsewhere, certainly not less than $100. When we
consider the poverty of these young men, the smallness of their
wages, the drafts made upon them for parents and others dependent
upon them in China, then this $1,300 which they have contributed
during the past year for the nurture of their own Christian life,
or for the salvation of others, grows to its true proportions—in
our view, a token of real Christian heroism.

I quote the closing sentences of the statement written for me by
the Secretary of the Association: “No death has occurred during
the past year. Our Heavenly Father has greatly prospered us, for
which we return Him hearty thanks. We are grateful that He has
put into our hearts a desire to have our parents and countrymen
in China brought to a knowledge of the Christian religion. We are
endeavoring to open a Chapel in Chuck Hum, China, and if we only
had means, could open as many as we desire. Most all the letters
that are sent to China members of the Association contain something
about the Christian religion, and urging the people at home to
discard idols and believe in the Saviour.”


OUR LAST MONTH’S WORK,

as I reviewed it in the monthly reports, saddened me, and brought
over me the first big _wave_ of discouragement which I have felt
since I entered on this service. The enrolment and the attendance
were both much less than I expected, and some of our smaller
schools seemed ready to die. I quote from one of these reports as
an example: “You will see that the average is very low, and I am
afraid it will be still lower. The boys seem to have lost their
interest in the school, and I am afraid that I am losing mine. It
is very discouraging to me, after doing a hard day’s work (for I am
working very hard just now), to walk three-fourths of a mile and
then have but one or two come to the school. Thank God there are
one or two faithful ones.” * * * “Now, Mr. Pond, I have laid the
case before you, and I ask your prayers in behalf of this little
school struggling to keep alive, and for the teacher also, that he
may not weary in well-doing, but that God will help him bear this
cross and try to save, at least, one soul.” To receive letter after
letter like that, while it draws out one’s love and prayer for the
writer, sets one also to asking, “Where is the Lord,” and what will
become of our work at this rate? But before the reports were all
in, news came that _six_, at least, during the month, had forsaken
their idols and appeared to have become disciples of Christ, and we
“thanked God and took courage.” Brethren, pray for us.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR NOVEMBER, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $163.74.

    Belfast. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         $3.00
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which
      $25.55 _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._)
      $51.97.—Second Cong. Sab. Sch. $20, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                71.97
    Castine. Mrs. Lucy S. Adams. $10. (ad’l) to
      const. REV. LEWIS J. THOMAS, L. M.—W. H. W.,
      50c.                                                    10.50
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            19.07
    Hallowell. Mrs. Flagg, $10; H. K. Baker, $5;
      _for Printing Press, Talladega, Ala._
      (Incorrectly ack. in Dec. number.)
    Searsport. First Cong. Soc.                               25.00
    Thomaston. “Matt. vi. 3”                                  10.00
    Wells. B. Maxwell                                         15.00
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                          9.20


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $217.75.

    Amherst. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          9.00
    Candia Village. Jona. Martin                               5.00
    Concord. Ladies of North Ch., bbl. of C.
    Exeter. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $27.—“Friends” in Second Cong. Ch. $12, _for
      a Teacher_                                              39.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               7.37
    Keene. Mrs. Wm. W.                                         0.50
    Kensington. “Friends” _for N. H. Memorial
      Inst., Wilmington, N. C._                                6.70
    Milford. Peter and Cynthia S. Burns, $30;
      First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $23                            53.00
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which $27.
      _for Wilmington Memorial Inst._) $31.41;
      Proceeds of 16th Annual Fair, held by
      Children of Cong. Ch. $12                               43.41
    Plainfield. Mrs. Hannah Stevens, _for N. H.
      Memorial Inst., Wilmington, N. C._ and to
      const. TENNY K. PAGE, L. M.                             30.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.16
    Thornton’s Ferry. Individuals, by Mrs. H. N.
      Eaton                                                    4.00
    Warner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.61


  VERMONT, $244.22

    Burlington. M. C. Torrey                                   5.00
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. JOSEPH
      S. SHAW, L. M.                                          37.60
    Chelsea. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.00
    Newbury. P. W. Ladd                                        5.00
    Norwich. Mrs. S. J. Kellogg                                2.00
    Ripton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                27.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Mr. and Mrs. E. D. Blodgett,
      to const. REV. WILLIAM P. BENNETT, L. M.                30.00
    Stowe. Cong. Ch. to const. ALBERT H. CHENEY,
      L. M.                                                   43.43
    Tunbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              2.59
    West Enosburgh. Henry Fassett                              5.00
    West Fairlee. Cong. Ch. $12; “A Friend” $1                13.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch. and Society                           10.00
    West Westminster. Cong. Ch.                               12.45
    Windham. Cong. Ch. 12.54; Rev. D. N. Goodrich,
      $2                                                      14.54
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       19.61


  MASSACHUSETTS, $4,329.83.

    Andover. Mrs. Jonathan Poor, $15.50.—“A
      Friend,” $4.00, _for Straight U._                       19.50
    Berkley. Cong. Ch.                                        25.68
    Boston. Shawmut Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($25 _of
      which for Wilmington, N. C._)                          654.51
    Boston. —— —— $15.00; “A Friend,” 75 c.; S. D.
      Smith, 2 organs, val. $200                              15.75
    Boston Highlands. Immanuel Ch. Sab. School                20.11
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. Pilgrim
      Cong. Ch., $30.00, to const. Mrs. W. A.
      WARD, L. M.; Prospect St. Cong. Sab. School,
      $12.34                                                  42.34
    Brimfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., bbl. of C.
    Brookline. E. H. C.                                        2.00
    Danvers Centre. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Straight
      U._                                                     25.00
    Dorchester. “A Friend,”                                    1.00
    Easthampton. Payson Cong. Sab. Sch.                       50.00
    Enfield. Edward Smith                                    200.00
    Fitchburgh. Cal. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      158.00
    Fitchburgh. J. A. Conn, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                   110.00
    Foxborough. Cong. Sab. Sch. $5.40; W. P. P.,
      50c.                                                     5.90
    Framingham. Ladies of Plym. Ch., 2 bbls. of C.
    Georgetown. Sab. Sch. Class in Memorial Ch.               10.00
    Globe Village. Evan. Ch.                                  34.76
    Harvard. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $27.75; Carrie S.
      Dixon, $10, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._               37.75
    Harwich. Ladies of Cong. Ch. 2 bbls. of C.
      _for Marion, Ala._
    Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                              48.34
    Holden. Mrs. J. T.                                         0.50
    Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch. _in part_               340.48
    Lawrence. Central Cong. Sab. Sch. _for
      Straight U._                                            10.00
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Leominster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            23.25
    Lexington. Hancock Cong. Church                           12.43
    Littleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., bbl. of C.
    Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch. (F. F. Battles)                50.00
    Lunenburg. “Friend.”                                       5.00
    Lynnfield Centre. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                         0.25
    Malden. W. A. Wilde, $25, _for bell, Atlanta,
      Ga._; H. R. B. $1                                       26.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      GEO. F. KERN and MISS AUGUSTA P. ADAMS, L.
      M.’s                                                    60.00
    Milford. Con. Sab. Sch. _for Chinese M._                  19.00
    Millbury. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. half bbl. of
      bedding, _for Atlanta U._
    Myricksville Precinct. Cong. Sab. Sch.                    20.00
    Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         110.85
    New Bedford. Trin. Cong. Ch.                              49.74
    Newburyport. No. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       28.27
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         140.75
    Norfolk. “Friends” $20, _for Woodbridge, N.
      C._; Cong. Sab. Ch. $8; Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $6.75                                                   34.75
    Northampton. “W.”                                        100.00
    Northbridge. Phebe S. Marsh                                5.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                50.00
    Norwich. Mrs. S. J. Kellogg, pkg. of C.
    Norwood. Mrs. H. N. Fuller                                 5.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          19.50
    Peabody. South Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Straight
      U._                                                     25.00
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Phillipston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. bbl. of C.
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Rockport. John Parsons                                     3.00
    Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Salem. South Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Straight U._            25.00
    Scotland. James M. Leonard                                 2.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Southampton. Cong. Ch. $14; Benj. N. Norton $3            17.00
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           38.55
    Southfield. “Friends,” $1.10 and pkg. S. S.
      books                                                    1.10
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    34.00
    Springfield. Memorial Ch.                                 24.48
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             41.25
    Taunton. Winslow Ch. and Soc.                             40.81
    Truro. Rev. E. W. N.                                       1.00
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Mission Assn., 3 bbls.
      of C., _one of which for Atlanta U._
    Whitinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       1,158.50
    Winchendon. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.
      $9.64; Geo. Cummings, $10                               19.64
    Winchester. Stephen Cutter                                 5.00
    West Newton. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    35.11
    Worcester. Union Ch., $60.62; Old So. Cong.
      Ch., $54.36                                            114.98


  RHODE ISLAND, $198.95.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  73.95
    Providence. “A Friend,” $100; Josiah Chapin,
      $25                                                    125.00


  CONNECTICUT, $893.73.

    Ansonia. Cong. Ch.                                        32.00
    Ashford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.00
    Avon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 120.00
    Black Rock. Mrs. J. P. Britten                             5.00
    Colchester. Rev. S. G. Willard _for Straight
      U._                                                     20.00
    East Haddam. C. Higgins                                    5.00
    East Woodstock. H. C.                                      0.25
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.74
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch.                               28.00
    Georgetown. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
    Glastenbury. Cong. Ch.                                   150.00
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   15.46
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        25.00
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch. $86.50; Windsor
      Ave. Cong. Ch. $27.60.—Mrs. Chas. F. Howard,
      $25, _for Howard U._                                   139.10
    Kensington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                1.00
    Lebanon. First Ch. and South Soc. $18; Betsy
      Metcalf, $10                                            28.00
    Meriden. Julius W. Yale                                    5.00
    Milford. Rev. Geo. H. Griffin, $5; Albert
      Baldwin, $5; Lucy B. Miles, $10, _for
      Printing Press, Talladega, Ala._
      (incorrectly ack. in Dec. number.)
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.30
    New Hartford. First Cong. Sab. Sch., John
      Richard’s Bible Class, $5; Rev. F. H. Adams’
      Bible Class, $5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             10.00
    New Haven. College St. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
    North Granby. First Cong. Ch.                              5.35
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                  36.86
    Plantsville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    Stamford. First Cong. Ch.                                 26.52
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      20.15
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.00
    West Meriden. H. C.                                        1.00
    Wethersfield. Horace Savage                                2.00
    Winchendon. Coll. by I. A. Bronson                        15.00
    Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                                 17.00
    ——. “A Friend,”                                           50.00


  NEW YORK, $877.45.

    Adams Basin. L. D.                                         1.00
    Brooklyn. J. Davenport                                    50.00
    Buffalo. W. G. Bancroft                                  200.00
    Clyde. ESTATE of T. Grimshaw, by A. Traver, Ex.          100.00
    Crown Point. Second Cong. Ch.                              6.00
    Derby. Mrs. J. B.                                          1.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              27.66
    Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                         0.25
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.00
    Ithaca. Mrs. H. Selby and others                           1.50
    Lockport. H. W. Nichols                                    5.00
    Madison. G. H. H.                                          0.51
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  26.13
    New York. Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Dodge, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._, $200; E. S., 40c             200.40
    Norwich. “A Friend,” $20; Mrs. R. A. B. $1                21.00
    Nunda. Four Ladies of Presb. Ch., bbl. of C.
      and $1 _for Freight_                                     1.00
    Oriskany. A. Halsey, Mrs. L. B. Porter, and
      Rev. S. F. Porter, $5 ea.                               15.00
    Paris. Val. Pierce $12, Mrs. Pierce $5                    17.00
    Penn Yan. Chas. C. Sheppard                              150.00
    Randolph. MRS. DEMARIUS SHELDON, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Ch.                           10.00
    ——. “A Friend,”                                            5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $71.

    Boonton. Mrs. W. G. L.                                     1.00
    Montclair. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Hampton Inst._                                          70.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $31.00.

    Centre Road. J. A. Scovel                                  5.00
    Newcastle. Mrs. J. W.                                      1.00
    Pittsburgh. Third Presb. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              25.00


  OHIO, $144.80.

    Berea. First Cong. Ch.                                     2.50
    Brownhelm. Cong. Ch.                                      16.80
    Cleveland. M. H. B.                                        0.50
    East Cleveland. Mrs. Mary Walkden                          2.00
    Edinburg. Cong. Ch.                                       19.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Lenox. Balance Subscription, _for Tougaloo
      Inst._, by Nelson French                                 4.50
    Mechanicstown. S. M.                                       1.00
    Medina. Cong. Ch. and So., bal. to const. W.
      F. ECCLESTON and T. E. ROWE, L. M’s.—50 cts.
      additional for _Tougaloo U._                            15.50
    Nelson. Dea. Harvey Pike                                   5.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
    Twinsburgh. L. W. and R. F. Green                          4.00
    Wellington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      50.00


  INDIANA, $5.00.

    Kokoma. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00


  ILLINOIS, $112.91.

    Chicago. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                                5.00
    Delavan. R. Houghton                                       8.00
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                       42.03
    Galesburg. ESTATE Warren C. Willard, by Prof.
      T. R. Willard                                           14.00
    Huntley. Rev. D. C.                                        1.00
    Kewanee. Mrs. C. E. Chapin, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Nora. G. W. Warner                                        10.00
    Rantoul. Cong. Ch.                                         2.88
    Rockford. Mrs. Penfield, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Princeton. Mrs. J. T. Wells                               15.00


  MICHIGAN, $497.19.

    Ann Arbor. Dea. Sylvester Morris                           5.00
    Cross Village. Mrs. A. A. C.                               0.50
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch.                                 293.56
    East Riverton. Mrs. J. Barnes                             10.00
    Hudson. Individuals                                        3.50
    Hillsdale. J. W. Ford                                      2.00
    Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett                                1.50
    Kalamazoo. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $5.19;
      Friends, $3.30                                           8.49
    Lodi. Eli Benton                                          40.00
    Olivet. Wm. J. Hickok, $10 _for Camp Nelson_,
      $5 _for Emerson Inst._, $5 _for Indian M._
      and $5 _for Chinese M._                                 25.00
    Niles. Dr. James Lewis                                     5.00
    Port Huron. First Cong. Ch.                               34.00
    Romeo. Cong. Ch.                                          35.42
    Saint Clair. Cong. Ch.                                    22.22
    Vienna. Union Cong. Ch.                                   11.00


  IOWA, $183.48.

    Anamosa. Cong. Ch.                                        13.83
    Castalia. W. H. Baker and family, to const.
      MRS. HANNAH WILLIAMS, L. M.                             35.00
    Davenport. Capt. A. E. Adams, _for
      Scholarship, Talladega C._                              50.00
    Elk River. Cong. Ch.                                       3.00
    Iowa Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      8.00
    Maquoketa. Missionary Soc. of Cong. Ch.                   20.04
    Monona. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
    Monticello. Children’s Band                                0.20
    Riceville. Girls’ Miss. Soc.                              10.90
    Stacyville. Cong. Ch.                                     14.21
    Traer. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                 10.00
    Waterloo. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                              12.30


  WISCONSIN, $29.68.

    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., bale of C. _for
      Montgomery, Ala._
    Geneva Lake. W. H. H.                                      0.50
    Fort Atkinson. Cong. Ch.                                  15.18
    Waupun. Cong. Soc.                                        14.00


  KANSAS, $3.50.

    Russell. S. H. Falley                                      2.50
    Solomon City. M. W. E.                                     1.00


  MINNESOTA, $90.33.

    Lake City. Sab. Sch. and Friends, _for
      Straight U._                                            41.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 19.33
    Hawley. Adna Colburn, Sr., $20; Adna Colburn,
      Jr., $10                                                30.00


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $22.96.

    S’kokomish. Cong. Ch. of Christ                           18.10
    White River. Cong. Ch.                                     4.86


  NEBRASKA, $5.00.

    Silver. Melinda Bowen                                      5.00


  MISSOURI. $4.00.

    Warrensburg. Rent                                          4.00


  MARYLAND, $280.00.

    Baltimore. Rev. Geo. Morris, $200 _for a
      Teacher_, and $80 _for a Student, Fisk U._             280.00


  GEORGIA, $230.66.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University                              113.00
    Brunswick. School Children, by S. B. Morse,
      _for Mendi M._                                           1.17
    Savannah. Beach Inst.                                    115.60
    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., _for Mendi M._                     0.89


  NORTH CAROLINA, $28.76.

    Newbern. C. E. W.                                          0.50
    Raleigh. Washington Sch.                                  25.50
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      2.76


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $262.66.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  262.66


  CALIFORNIA, $40.00.

    Oakville. A. A. Bancroft                                  40.00


  CANADA, $15.04.

    Toronto. Mrs. J. Thom ($5 _of which for Cal.
      Chinese M._)                                            15.04
                                                           ————————
      Total                                                8,983.64
    Total from Oct. 1st to Nov. 30th                     $15,835.30

                                                H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                    _Ass’t Treas._


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Amherst, N. H. L. and L. K. Melendy                     1000.00
    East Woodstock, Conn. Rev. E. H. Pratt                     1.00
    New Britain, Conn. Mrs. Norman Hart                       25.00
    Wilton, Conn. Rev. S. J. M. Merwin                        50.00
    Wilton, Conn. Miranda B. Merwin                           25.00
    Andover, Mass. Free Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    13.00
    Florence, Mass. “A. L. W.”                               500.00
    Foxborough, Mass. A. L. Payson                             1.00
    Malden, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         159.55
    Lakeville, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. CAROLINE L. WARD, L. M.                            34.11
    Pittsfield, Mass. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                   5.00
    Scotland, Mass. “A Friend.”                                2.00
    West Barnstable, Mass. Rev. B. Paine                       5.00
    Albany, N. Y. Mrs. M. M. Learned                          25.00
    Clifton Springs, N. Y. Mrs. Andrew Pierce                 25.00
    Fairport, N. Y. Mrs. J. E. Howard                         25.00
    Fairport, N. Y. Mrs. Garry Brooks                         25.00
    New York, N. Y. ——                                        25.00
    Penn Yan, N. Y. Mrs. D. B. Prosser                        25.00
    Rochester, N. Y. Gen. A. W. Riley                         25.00
    Sacketts Harbor, N. Y. Mrs. Anar H. Barnes                30.00
    Centre Road, Penn. J. A. Scovel                            5.00
    Belpre, Ohio. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    Fort Recovery, Ohio. M. W. Diggs                           5.00
    Paddys Run, Ohio. Sarah Wilkin                             5.00
    Painsville, Ohio. Mrs. C. C. Beardslee                     4.00
    Oberlin, Ohio. Pres. J. H. Fairchild                      10.00
    Michigan City, Ind. Correction. J. C. Haddock,
      $5. (Nov. number) should read Mrs. Clara W.
      Peck, $5.
    Buda, Ill. J. B. Stuart                                   10.00
    Chicago, Ill. Prof. G. N. Boardman                         5.00
    Geneseo, Ill. P. H. Taylor                                 5.00
    Providence, Ill. Correction. Mrs. H. B.
      Gulliver, $6. (Nov. number) should read “A
      few Friends,” $6.
    Wethersfield, Ill. Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Kellogg              5.00
    Alamo, Mich. Julius Hackley                               20.00
    Broadhead, Wis. Mrs. W. W. Matter                          3.50
    Milwaukee, Wis. Mrs. James Baker                           5.00
    Patch Grove, Wis. M. A. Garsich                            1.00
    Whitewater, Wis. Mrs. R. Coburn                            1.00
    Natal, South Africa. Mrs. Abbie T. Wilder                 10.00
                                                           ————————
      Total                                                2,125.16
    Previously acknowledged in Oct. receipts               4,659.04
                                                           ————————
      Total                                                6,784.20


  FOR TILLOTSON NORMAL AND COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Wells, Me. Mrs. B. A. Maxwell                             15.00
    East Hartford, Conn. H. L. Goodwin                        50.00
    Hartford, Conn. Mrs. John Olmstead                        50.00
    Hebron, Conn. B. A. Bissell                                5.00
    Hebron, Conn. Dea. Jasper Porter                           5.00
    Sing Sing, N. Y. Mrs. Harriet M. Cole, to
      const. CORNELIA M. COLE, L. M.                          30.00
    Syracuse, N. Y. Mrs. Sarah T. Salisbury                   50.00
    Oberlin, Ohio. Mrs. C. C. Wheat                            5.00
    Olivet, Mich. Wm. B. Palmer                              200.00
    ——. Individuals                                            5.00
                                                             ——————
      Total                                                  415.00
    Previously acknowledged in Oct. receipts                 190.00
                                                             ——————
      Total                                                  605.00


  FOR YELLOW FEVER FUND.

    Thetford, Vt. Sarah J. Rugg                                2.00
    Portland, Conn. First Cong. Ch.                           41.92
    Andover, Mass. Chapel Ch. and Soc. $64.55 and
      Sab. Sch. $15                                           79.55
    Troy, N. Y. “Little Mary and Margaret Cushman
      and Mamma.”                                              1.00
    Orwell, N. Y. “A few Friends in Cong. Ch.,” by
      Rev. F. N. Greeley                                      12.00
    Orange, N. J. Trinity Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                 10.00
    Tabor, Iowa. Cong. Ch.                                     6.40
                                                             ——————
                                                             152.87
    Previously acknowledged in Oct. receipts                 154.17
                                                             ——————
      Total                                                  307.04


  ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Norwood, Mass. ESTATE of Samuel Morrill, by
      Edward H. Morrill, Ex.                                 500.00

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va. 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2;
Ga., 12; Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 13; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2;
Texas, 5. _Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 66.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11. _Other
Schools_, 18. Total 37.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen,
231; among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 17; in Africa, 14.
Total, 279. STUDENTS—In Theology, 88; Law, 17; in College
Course, 106; in other studies, 7,018. Total, 7,229. Scholars,
taught by former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000.
INDIANS under the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with
the growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational
institutions, to accommodate the increasing numbers of students;
MEETING HOUSES, for the new churches we are organizing;
MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here
and missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




PLEASE READ THIS AND THINK ABOUT IT.


_The “American Missionary” is printed and circulated for the
information of its constituency, and to keep alive their practical
interest in the work of the Association._

_It costs money to prepare and send to its readers so large an
edition as we find necessary._

THE SUBSCRIPTION PRICE IS ONLY FIFTY CENTS A YEAR.

_A large number of its readers come within the classes who are
entitled to it free._

_If others who desire to read it will send 50 cents to pay for
their Magazine, beside their gifts for the missionary work, it will
not only cease to be in any sense an expense to the treasury, but a
source of revenue._

_Is the request below, then, too great a favor to ask?_

       *       *       *       *       *

PLEASE COPY THIS FORM AND MAIL IT.

                                                _January 1st, 1879._

  _H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., Ass’t Treasurer,
                  56 Reade Street, New York._

_Enclosed, please find Fifty Cents, subscription for_ THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY, _for the year 1879_.

_Send the same to the following address_:

    _Signed with your NAME_,

          _Your TOWN_,

              _Your COUNTY_,

                  _And STATE (in full)_.

       *       *       *       *       *


                 [Illustration: New-York Tribune.]

               _Postage Free in the United States._

  DAILY TRIBUNE, 1 year                                    $10.00
  SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE, 1 year                                3.00
      Five copies, 1 year, to one Post Office               14.00
      Ten copies, 1 year, to one Post Office, and
        one free copy                                       28.00
  WEEKLY TRIBUNE.—One copy, 1 year                           2.00
  WEEKLY TRIBUNE.—Five copies, 1 year,                       8.25
  WEEKLY TRIBUNE.—Ten copies, 1 year                        14.00
  WEEKLY TRIBUNE.—Twenty copies, 1 year                     25.00

Any number of copies above 20 at the same rate. Additions to clubs
may be made at any time. Remit by P. O. order or in registered
letter.

             PREMIUMS TO FRIENDS SENDING LOCAL CLUBS:

FOR A CLUB OF 5 WEEKLIES.—Any five TRIBUNE NOVELS.

FOR A CLUB OF 10 WEEKLIES.—An extra copy of THE WEEKLY, _or_ a copy
of the Greeley Memorial volume, in cloth, _or_ any eight of the THE
TRIBUNES Novels.

FOR A CLUB OF 20 WEEKLIES.—THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE, _or_ one extra
WEEKLY _and_ either Mr. Greeley’s “Political Economy,” _or_ “What I
Know of Farming” ($1.50 each at retail).

FOR A CLUB OF 30 WEEKLIES.—THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE, _and_ any eight
of THE TRIBUNE Novels; _or_ Mr. Greeley’s “Recollections of a Busy
Life,” in sheep ($2.50 at retail), _and_ the same Novels.

FOR A CLUB OF 50 WEEKLIES.—THE DAILY TRIBUNE one year, _and_ either
of the above mentioned books, _or_ the series of TRIBUNE Novels.

[One Semi-Weekly will count as two Weeklies in the above. Double
numbers of THE TRIBUNE Novels count as two.]

Instead of any five TRIBUNE Novels, we will send, if preferred,
pamphlet copies, in good type, of THE TRIBUNE’S report of _The
Prophetic Conference_, and THE TRIBUNE’S full exposure of _The
Cipher Telegrams_. The same, in sheet-form, in place of any three
TRIBUNE Novels.


                       UNEXAMPLED PREMIUMS.


                           GET THE BEST.


           Webster’s Great Unabridged Quarto Dictionary.

 The Latest and Best ($12) Edition, containing 3,000 Illustrations
                        and Colored Plates,

        SENT TO ANY ONE REMITTING, PRIOR TO APRIL 1, 1879,

  $10 for a single five years’ subscription, in advance, _or_ $16
  for eight 1-year subscriptions to THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE.

  $15 for a single five-years’ subscription, in advance, _or_ $30
  for ten one-year subscriptions to THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE.

  $30 for a single three-years’ subscription, in advance, to THE
  DAILY TRIBUNE.


                     THE GREATEST PREMIUM YET.

                     A $210 Estey Organ. Free.

THE TRIBUNE makes an offer to churches, musical societies and
others, more amazing than anything yet done in the history of
newspaper premiums. For 200 subscriptions from one Post Office, or
its immediate vicinity, to THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE, at the lowest club
rate ($1.25 each), we will send, postage paid, the 200 papers,
addressed to individual subscribers, for one year, and will send
also to the church or person forwarding the club, the $210 Estey
Organ, confessedly the best in the market—style 501, double reed,
seven stops, viz., diapason, melodia, viola, vox jubilante,
tremolo, 1 forte and 11 forte. Thus, for 200 subscriptions to THE
WEEKLY TRIBUNE at the lowest club rate, the club receives $250
in newspapers, and $210 in the finest organ of its size made in
America.

    Address,

                                    _THE TRIBUNE, New York City_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       =A. S. BARNES & CO.=

                         PUBLISH THE ONLY

                     SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and enlarged.
Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For Samples
(loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.


                         =LYMAN ABBOTT’S=

                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=,
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.

                             EDITED BY

          Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev. E. S. LORENZ.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church Prayer Meetings.=


      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.

                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.


                  A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,

                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,

             59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                  66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment,

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.


They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders.

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                    $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

          C. Y. WEMPLE,
                  Vice-President.

          J. L. HALSEY,
                  Secretary.

          S. N. STEBBINS,
                  Actuary.

          H. Y. WEMPLE,
          H. B. STOKES,
                  Assistant Secretaries.


                 *       *       *       *       *

                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.,


Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

[Illustration]

                         Founded in 1832.


                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.

                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,

                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                 *       *       *       *       *

                          THE CELEBRATED

                              GERMAN

                           STUDENT LAMP.

                      _Complete, only $4.69._

                          ALSO THE FAMOUS

                              VIENNA

                              COFFEE

                               POT.

                            ALL SIZES.


                          [Illustration]

                         Imported only by

                          E. D. BASSFORD,

                         HOUSE-FURNISHING

                             HARDWARE,

                           CHINA, GLASS,

                       CUTLERY, SILVERWARE,

                       And COOKING UTENSILS.

                   1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16 & 17

                   Cooper Institute, N. Y. City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN SABBATH SCHOOL, OR SOCIAL OR
FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth, 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,

                                             758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   Theological and S. S. Books.

Immense stock. Good and cheap. Special attention given to books for
Students. Books for Agents. =The Old and New Bible Looking-Glass,=
(with =280= Beautiful Emblem Engravings,) written by DRS. CROSBY,
GILLET, CHEEVER, PUNSHON. It has received the best indorsements.
Now ready, on the “Clark” plan, the Nichol Edition of the
Expository Lectures of the Puritan Divines—the English price,
$3.75; our price, post-paid, $1.50. Send for particulars.

                              N. TIBBALS & SONS, 37 Park Row, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

Manufacture a superior quality of Bells.

Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.

☞Illustrated Catalogues sent free.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid =$340= ORGANS for =$100=. =$300= for =$90=. =$275= for
=$80=. =$200= for =$70=. =$190= for =$65=, and =$160= for =$55=.
PIANOS—=$900= Piano Forte for =$225=. =$800= for =$200=. =$750=
for =$185=. =$700= for =$165=. =$600= for =$135=, =cash=, not used
a year, in perfect order. Great Bargains. Unrivaled Instruments.
Unequaled Prices. Send for Catalogue. =HORACE WATERS & SONS,=

                                 40 East 14th Street, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                                THE

                      MIDDLETOWN PLATE CO.’S

                               FINE

                        Electro-Plated Ware

               Excels in BEAUTY OF DESIGN, HARDNESS
                    OF METAL, QUALITY OF SILVER
                        DEPOSITED UPON IT.

                    Factory: Middletown, Conn.

                            SALESROOM:

                     13 JOHN STREET, NEW YORK.

                       FOR SALE EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                           SCROLL SAWS.

=Rogers; Lester; Fleetwood; Dexter;= &c., at manufacturers’ prices.

Wood; Saws; Designs; Tools and Material.

Send 6 c. postage for large catalogue.

=Flower Stands; Automatic Fountains; Ferneries;= &c., &c.

Send 10 cents postage for large catalogue.

                         G. WEBSTER PECK,

                    110 Chambers St., New York.

         _Please state where you saw this advertisement._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           E. & O. WARD

        Give personal attention to the sale of all kinds of

                      PRODUCE ON COMMISSION,

                   No. 279 Washington St., N. Y.

      (Est’d 1845.) Ref., _Irving National Bank_, N. Y. City.


                 *       *       *       *       *

                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                       The Laundry,
                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        Crampton Brothers,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        THE INDEPENDENT.


   Well and Favorably Known the World Over as the BEST Religious
 Weekly Newspaper. It retains all its most desirable features and
                          adds new ones.

                   _AMONG ITS CONTRIBUTORS ARE:_

      SAMUEL T. SPEAR, D.D.,
      Pres. T. D. WOOLSEY, D.D., LL.D.,
      Pres. NOAH PORTER, D.D., LL.D.,
      JOS. P. THOMPSON, D.D., LL.D.,
      R. S. STORRS, D.D., LL.D.,
      THEODORE L. CUYLER, D.D.,
      REV. JOSEPH COOK,
      LOUISA M. ALCOTT,
      Pres. S. C. BARTLETT, D.D., LL.D.,
      Prof. GEORGE P. FISCHER, D.D.,
      WM. LLOYD GARRISON,
      ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS,
      WILLIAM M. TAYLOR, D.D.,
      Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN,
      “GAIL HAMILTON,”
      STEPHEN H. TYNG, JR., D.D.,
      Rev. WM. M. BAKER,
      PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D.,
      C. S. ROBINSON, D.D.,
      “H. H.,”
      Rev. THOMAS K. BEECHER,
      Rev. GEORGE F. PENTECOST,
      Pres. J. F. HURST, D.D.,
      ROSE TERRY COOKE,
      Prof. TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D.D.,
      RAY PALMER, D.D.,
      NEAL DOW,
      J. T. TROWBRIDGE,
      Rev. HENRY C. TRUMBULL,
      MARY CLEMMER,
      Pres. JOHN BASCOM,
      Pres. JAMES F. TUTTLE,
      Chan. HOWARD CROSBY, D.D.,
      Rev. S. W. DUFFIELD,
      Prof. C. M. MEAD,
      Prof. W. C. WILKINSON,
      Prof. L. H. ATWATER, D.D., LL.D.,
      J. M. BUCKLEY, D.D.,
      Prof. SIMON NEWCOMB, LL.D.,
      Prof. ASA GRAY, LL.D.,
      Prof. JOHN A. PAINE,
      DANIEL CURRY, D.D.,
      Rev. NEWMAN HALL,
      Prof. NORMAN FOX.

                         COOK’S LECTURES.

These famous Lectures, delivered in Boston every Monday, by the
Rev. Joseph Cook, will be published in full, together with the
introductory remarks.

            EX-PRES’T THEODORE D. WOOLSEY, D.D., LL.D.,

will contribute 20 to 30 articles on Socialism and Communism, the
most important questions of the day.

                              SERMONS

by eminent clergymen in all parts of the country will continue to
be printed.


                             PREMIUMS.

We offer Rev. Joseph Cook’s valuable new volumes, entitled
“BIOLOGY,” “TRANSCENDENTALISM,” “ORTHODOXY,” “CONSCIENCE,”
“HEREDITY,” and “MARRIAGE,” embodying in a revised and corrected
form, the author’s previous remarkable Monday Lectures. They are
published in handsome book form by Houghton, Osgood & Co., of
Boston. We will mail a copy of any one volume, postpaid, to any
subscriber to THE INDEPENDENT who remits us $3 for a year, in
advance; or any subscriber may remit $5.50 and we will send him THE
INDEPENDENT for two years, in advance, and two volumes, postpaid;
or any three volumes, postpaid, to any one subscriber who remits
$8.00 for three years, in advance.


                      WORCESTER’S UNABRIDGED

                   Pictorial Quarto Dictionary.

Bound in Sheep, 1854 pages, over 1000 Illustrations, Issue of 1878.

                       RETAIL PRICE, $10.00.

We will send this _Dictionary_ to any person who will send us the
names of _Three New Subscribers and Nine Dollars;_ or who will, on
renewing his own subscription, in advance, send us _Two New Names_
additional and $9.00; or who will renew his own subscription for
three years, in advance, and send us $9.00; or for a new subscriber
for three years and $9.00.

“Worcester” is now regarded as the standard authority, and is
so recommended by Bryant, Longfellow, Whittier, Sumner, Holmes,
Irving, Winthrop, Agassiz, Marsh, Henry, Everett, Mann, Stephens,
Quincy, Felton, Hilliard, Memminger, and the majority of our
most distinguished scholars, and is besides recognized by the
departments of our National Government. It is also adopted by many
of the Boards of Public Instruction.

The great Unabridged _Dictionary_ will be delivered at our office,
or in Philadelphia, free, or be sent by express or otherwise, as
may be ordered, from Philadelphia, at the expense of the subscriber.

The subscriber under this offer will not be entitled to any other
Premium.


          Subscription Price, $3.00 per annum in Advance,

including any one of the following Premiums:

Any one volume of the _Household Edition of Charles Dickens’
Works_, bound in cloth, with 16 Illustrations each, by Sol Eytinge.

Moody and Sankey’s _Gospel Hymns and Sacred Songs No. 2_.

_Lincoln and his Cabinet; or, First Reading of the Emancipation
Proclamation._ Fine large Steel Engraving. By Ritchie. Size 26×36.

_Authors of the United States._ Fine large Steel Engraving. 44
Portraits. Size 24×38½. By Ritchie.

_Charles Sumner._ Fine Steel Engraving. Ritchie.

_Grant or Wilson._ Fine Steel Engravings. By Ritchie.

_Edwin M. Stanton._ Fine Steel Engraving. By Ritchie.

_The Inner Life of Abraham Lincoln._ By Frank B. Carpenter. Bound
in cloth. 360 pages.

          Subscription Price, $3.00 per annum in Advance.

☞ Specimen copies sent free. Address,

                                              THE INDEPENDENT,
  P. O. Box 2787,                                     New York City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT SUI GENERIS]

                          MASON & HAMLIN
                          CABINET ORGANS,
                          WINNERS OF THE
                          ONLY GOLD MEDAL
            AWARDED TO AMERICAN MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AT
                      Paris Exposition, 1878;
  _the highest distinction in the power of the Judges to confer_.

                            PARIS, 1878

                        Two Highest Medals.

                         =SWEDEN=,   1878
                         =PHILADA=,  1876
                         =SANTIAGO=,  ’75
                         =VIENNA=,   1873
                         =PARIS=,    1867.

                             AT EVERY
                              WORLD’S
                            EXPOSITION
                           FOR 12 YEARS
                    They have been awarded the
                          HIGHEST HONORS

At the =Paris Exposition, 1878=, they are awarded the GOLD MEDAL,
the highest recompense at the disposal of the jury; also the BRONZE
MEDAL, the highest distinction for excellent workmanship. They have
also received the GRAND GOLD MEDAL OF SWEDEN AND NORWAY, 1878. =No
other American Organs ever attained highest award at ANY World’s
Exposition.= Sold for cash, or payments by installments. _Latest_
CATALOGUES, with newest styles, prices, etc., free.

       MASON HAMLIN ORGAN CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


            1832.       MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.       1878.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           Table Cutlery

                   _Of every Description, with_

    Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory, Celluloid, Pearl and
                      Silver-plated Handles.

                       The Celluloid Handle,

(of which we are the exclusive makers), is the equal of Ivory in
beauty, when new, and surpasses it in durability and appearance in
use.

              POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS.

         All goods bearing our NAME are fully guaranteed.

                       MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.,

                    49 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:
  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]

                 *       *       *       *       *


                         New York Witness

                           PUBLICATIONS.


                        THE DAILY WITNESS.


The subscription for the DAILY WITNESS, post-paid, by mail, is
five dollars a year, or one dollar for ten weeks, 60 numbers. It
contains full and excellent Prices Current and Financial Reports.

Specimen copies are sent free on application.

N. B.—To Ministers and Missionaries of all denominations the
subscription will be four dollars a year, or one dollar a quarter.


                        THE WEEKLY WITNESS.

The following is the latest of many encouraging letters from
subscribers of all classes, including Ministers, Missionaries and
Merchants:

  “Mr. Editor: I take a great interest in and work hard for the
  WITNESS, but hitherto have not dared to hope that I could write
  anything worthy a place in your columns. I have no hesitation
  in saying that I consider the WITNESS the best family newspaper
  in America, and just my ideal of what a paper should be as an
  educator of the people. I have done and am doing all in my power
  to increase its circulation, and am happy to say I have succeeded
  in gaining many permanent subscribers in the town where I reside,
  as well as in other towns and Canada. I have sent it gratuitously
  to some who could not afford to take it, and as a gift to
  friends, and seldom destroy my own copy, but hand it to neighbors
  who do not take it. Besides this I pray earnestly and constantly
  for its success, and relief from its embarrassments. I purpose
  still to continue to send you in as many subscribers as possible,
  and to recommend it on all suitable occasions. My husband likes
  it very much too, and has, during the past week, changed the
  Weekly for the Daily.

                                                “INTERESTED READER.”

           Specimen copies will be sent on application.

The price of the WEEKLY WITNESS by mail, including postage,
is $1.50. Any one remitting $6 can have five copies addressed
separately. The price to Ministers and Missionaries is $1.20 a
year, or $1 for ten months. The paper stops when the subscription
expires.


                         SABBATH READING.

Each number contains a first-class sermon by some celebrated
preacher, and much excellent Religious, Missionary and Temperance
reading matter besides, with no mixture of advertisements, news or
editorials. It is calculated to give interesting and instructive
reading matter for the Lord’s Day. Eight pages, weekly; fifty cents
a year, post-paid. Send it to your friends in the country. It is
equally suitable for all parties, denominations and parts of the
Union.

  Address,

                           JOHN DOUGALL,
              Witness Office, No. 7 Frankfort Street,
                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      THE THIRTY-THIRD VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY,

                               1879.

We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the increasing
appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the year now past, and
purpose to spare no effort to make its pages of still greater value
to those interested in the work which it records.

Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for 1879?

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under the editorial supervision of Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, aided
by the steady contributions of our intelligent missionaries
and teachers in all parts of the field, and with occasional
communications from careful observers and thinkers elsewhere,
the “AMERICAN MISSIONARY” furnishes a vivid and reliable picture
of the work going forward among the Indians, the Chinamen on the
Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as Citizens in the South and as
missionaries in Africa.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it and
assist in its circulation. Begin with the new year.

Subscription, =Fifty Cents a year, in advance=. =One Hundred
copies, to one address=, for distribution in Churches or to clubs
of subscribers, for $30, with the added privilege of a Life
Membership to such person as shall be designated. The Magazine will
be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons indicated on
page 27.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                         H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t Treas.,
                                          56 Reade Street, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                                 J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                          56 Reade Street, New York.

                 *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

                 *       *       *       *       *

D. H. GILDERSLEEVE & CO., Printers, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Ditto marks in tables were replaced with the text they represent in
order to facilitate alignment.

The page number in the Table of Contents entry for RETURN OF REV.
FLOYD SNELSON was corrected.

Punctuation and spelling were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. Inconsistent hyphenation was retained
as there are numerous authors. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

“Protestanism” changed to “Protestantism” on page 9. (Protestantism
in the South)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 01, JANUARY 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.