VOL. XXXII.                                            No. 3.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                           MARCH, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                    65
    PAYING THE DEBT                                               66
    NEGROLOGY                                                     67
    BILLS IN CONGRESS                                             68
    EDUCATION AMONG THE FREEDMEN                                  69
    WHAT CAN THE WOMEN DO?—SCHOOL ITEMS                           70
    NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES—TEACHERS’ ASSOCIATION—NEGRO NOTES      71
    CHINESE NOTES                                                 72
    POETRY. “No Room in the Inn”                                  74


  THE FREEDMEN.

    GEORGIA: Atlanta University                                   75
    GEORGIA MACON: Devotion to Study—Conversions to Christ        78
    ALABAMA: Breaking Ground for New Emerson Institute
      Building. Prof. T. N. Chase                                 78
    TENNESSEE: A Debt Extinguisher—The Happiest Girl in the
      Land. Rev. T. Cutler                                        79


  THE INDIANS.

    THE INDIAN COMMISSIONERS                                      80


  THE CHINESE.

    ADDRESS BY FUNG AFFOO                                         81


  AFRICA.

    THE MENDI MISSION                                             83


  COMMUNICATIONS.

    EDUCATION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE. Rev. J. E. Rankin, D. D.     84
    FROM A LIFE MEMBER.—SLAVE AND FREE LABOR COTTON. From the
      N. Y. _Herald_                                              85


  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                             86


  RECEIPTS                                                        87


  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                                    92

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              A. Anderson, Printer, 28 Frankfort St.




                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 Reade Street, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THATCHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    AUGUSTUS E. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.
Drafts or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his
order as _Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

       *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXII.      MARCH, 1878.         No. 3.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *

By the brief extracts, given on another page, from recent letters
of our African missionaries, it appears that they were at last
accounts in good health and heart, and hard at work re-organizing
the church and schools, repairing buildings, and laying foundations
for future work. The death of Rev. Barnabas Root had left the
mission without a minister, so that its higher work had been
greatly interrupted. To keep the numbers good, and the working
force equal to the necessities of the case, it has seemed both
to those recently sent out, and to the Executive Committee, that
there should be a speedy addition to the Missionary band. It has
been the experience of other organizations as well as our own,
that missionary work suffers by nothing more than by having too
few workers in a place. We hope, therefore, before this number of
our Magazine reaches its readers, that two more good men, with
their wives, will be on their way to join the Mendi Mission. Albert
Miller and Andrew Jackson have offered themselves, in response
to a general call read at the Fisk University by Prof. Spence.
The former is a preacher who has nearly completed the collegiate
course, the latter a teacher just finishing the normal course, and
each will be accompanied by a good wife, able to sing and teach:
(one of them was formerly with the Jubilee Singers.)

Thus strengthened by the addition of these four “fellow-helpers
in the gospel,” we look for good tidings from month to month from
Africa, and have less fear that the force already on the field will
over-work themselves in that warm and trying climate.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Charles H. Howard, of the _Advance_, owing to a recent
attack of pneumonia, will, under the advice of his physician, spend
the remainder of the winter, and the spring months, at the South.
It was natural for General Howard, from his former connection with
the American Missionary Association as its Western Secretary, to
take a special interest in its work at the South. He has planned,
with our hearty cooperation, to visit a number of the institutions
and churches under our charge, and to inform himself and the
readers of the _Advance_ as to the condition and progress of our
work among the freedmen. The Association heartily welcomes all
such friendly observation and criticism. General Howard is now
at Savannah, Ga., and, after a trip to Florida, will return to
visit our institutions farther West in the spring. He will publish
letters on the condition of Southern society, and the colored
population especially, with whose uplifting he feels the warmest
sympathy.


PAYING THE DEBT.

We are rejoiced to be able to report cheering progress in the
payment of our debt. Our last statement, in the December number of
the MISSIONARY, announced the payment of $30,416, thus bringing
the debt down from $93,232.99 in 1876, to $62,816.90, as reported
at the Annual Meeting in 1877. It also gave a list of pledges of
$5,000, reducing the balance to $57,816.90. Pledges and payments
have been made since that date, which reduce the amount to a little
below $50,000.

The spirit manifested by our friends in this movement, may be
gathered from extracts from the letters we have received. A liberal
friend in New England writes: “I have thought for a long time of
your Society, and of its just call upon me for aid, additional to
what I do when I send you our church collection. * * I will soon
send you my check for $1,000” [it has been received] “for your
debt, and I will add another thousand during 1878, conditioned upon
the total wiping out of the debt in 1878.”

A friend in Hartford, Ct. says: “I have from time to time received
reports of the doings and wants of your Association with much
interest. You may count me in as one of twenty-five, for a thousand
dollars for liquidating your debt, and I hope the full number may
soon appear.”

Another Connecticut friend writes: “After getting through with the
very busy month, and inspecting the balance sheets, I conclude to
anticipate a little on the strength of my hopes, and promise you
five hundred dollars toward the debt. I wish I could see my way
clear to do more.”

A gentleman in Springfield, Mass., whose “Unabridged” contributions
we have often had occasion to acknowledge, sends us his check for
$500. “A worshipper at Indian Orchard,” remits $500.

One of our liberal and constant patrons at the West, tells his
experience thus: “I could not see where the funds were to come
from to aid you, but yesterday, to my great joy, the inclosed
three hundred dollars dropped into my hands, and as a faithful and
favored steward, I take great pleasure in handing it over to you,
to aid in extinguishing the debt of the Association.”

Many expressions of regret come to us from those whose hearts are
with us in this effort, but whose means will not permit them just
now to help. We wish to express our earnest hope that an effort,
so well begun, will not be suffered to fail. It will be seen that
some of the pledges are made on condition that the whole sum be
raised in a specified time—an additional reason for promptness
on the part of those who desire to aid in the movement. We have
avoided thus far, the expense of collecting agents, and we trust
that the friends of the Association will continue to forward their
contributions, and thus save us from any such outlay. It will be a
triumph of economy, as well as of liberality.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. Peter J. Gulick, a veteran missionary of the A. B. C. F.
M., died at Kobe, Japan, Dec. 8th, 1877. We record his death
with affectionate regret, remembering his annual contributions
sent to us for many years, accompanied with expressions of his
deep interest, in the uplifting to Christian citizenship of the
destitute and despised people of his native land.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Council Fire_ is the title of a new Monthly Journal, of 16
pages, devoted to the history, character, social life, religious
traditions, government, current legends, etc., of the American
Indian, including also discussions of our relations to him as a
people and a Government. The fact that it is under the editorial
management of Col. A. B. Meacham, formerly Indian Superintendent
and Peace Commissioner, is a guarantee of its character and value.
It gives the current history of Indian affairs in all parts of the
country.


NEGROLOGY.[A]

The political calm in the Southern States has apparently given
leisure for a somewhat wide discussion of the negro: what he is
in himself, and what he may be in the State. It is largely a
discussion by Southern men, and from a more or less distinctively
Southern standpoint.

_Mr. Stetson_ gives a series of answers to questions, representing
the negro as he is, morally, socially and politically: the sum of
it all being, what might be anticipated for a race of tropical
origin, held for generations in slavery, and suddenly endowed
with political equality. Sensual and emotional by nature, lazy
and thievish by training, clannish and easily misled as a voter,
his salvation will depend on his receiving education, but not by
a forcing process, and on his coming gradually to the independent
exercise of his civil rights.

_The South Carolinian_ gives an apparently frank representation of
the situation as it appears to the native people of that State.
The present shows more honesty and less crime, a renewed interest
of the whites, and the banishment of the blacks from politics. No
party will be tolerated “which aggressively, and in real earnest,
advocates negro rights.” He says: “The whites regard the negro as
an inferior animal, admirably adapted to work and to wait, and look
on him, ‘in his proper place,’ with a curious mixture of amusement,
contempt and affection. It is when he aspires to participate in
politics, or otherwise claim privileges, that their hatred becomes
intense.” In regard to Education, he writes: “There is great
prejudice in this State against free schools for any color; nor
have the airs put on by colored-school children contributed to
remove it. Policy, however, and past promises will probably impel
the maintenance of a free-school system for some time, at least,
but on a less extensive scale. It is proper to add that some
cultured Southerners are in favor of educating and elevating the
negro, as the best way to solve our race difficulties. But it is
doubtful if their views will prevail against inherited prejudice.”

But _The Louisianian_ takes stronger ground. The Southern question
germinated when a slave was first introduced into the American
colonies. The institution of slavery made all the difference;
giving rise in the South to a “domineering and proscriptive
aristocracy,” with regard to all of the African race, and putting
all whites—poor or rich, ignorant or educated—on a footing of
equality. “There was a nobility in the white skin, more sacred
and more respected than the one derived from the letters patent
of kings;” more even, apparently, than that based on intelligence
or virtue. Slavery made of the Southern planters, “high barons
in reality, although not in name.” In the North and West, on
the contrary, there was a democracy politically, but a social
aristocracy, not recognizing the equality of the white skin. The
writer says: “The aristocrats of the South were the real ones;
those of the North were spurious. The Southern question used to be,
that of the maintenance of this supremacy over the whole land by
these real aristocrats.”

Now “mediocrity is enthroned,” and the Southern question is the
free negro question; a reversal has been made—the body politic
has had its feet up and its head down. The author seems to see
nothing but the race question: the law of animal life, where the
strong destroy the weak, is the highest law he can think of for
its solution; where a weak race comes in contact with a stronger,
it must merge into it, or “subserve its interests and prejudices,”
or be wiped out of existence, and Providence so orders it. “There
will never be peace and prosperity in the Southern States, as long
as Caucasian supremacy shall be opposed there;” but, “we intend to
control the negro vote by superior intelligence, by persuasion, and
not by violence.”

Equal opportunity for education should, he thinks, be given to
the blacks; but they should be discouraged from all “aspirations
and efforts which will end in disappointment,” [and this is the
sentiment, also, of so earnest a worker as Col. Preston of Va.];
“and hasten a more active and deadly struggle.”

It will be a surprise, we doubt not, and a disappointment to many
of our Northern friends, to find that such views, especially
those of the admirably-written article in the _North American
Review_, still constitute the substratum of thought among the
cultivated classes of the Southern States. For what such men as
this accomplished writer think in their bed-chambers, finds very
different and much grosser expression among men of coarser fibre
and ruder touch. We do remember that the last two writers quoted,
are from the two longest and most sorely troubled States, where
sentiment is probably more extreme than elsewhere in the South; and
we hope, indeed, to some extent we know, that there are many of the
natives of these States, who are not represented by these views,
but who have freed themselves from the dominion of the old ideas of
race-rule and caste prejudice. But we are glad to see these free
discussions, and from these varying standpoints.

We are pleased to see that education is still not absolutely
denied in them, though the motives for its acquirement are largely
taken away. But we suggest to our co-workers in this field that,
even though the various States in which these freedmen live, are,
and have been, extending the advantages of their public schools
to children of the blacks, yet, with such sentiments deep-seated
in the minds of the educated, and so the influential class, this
provision is uncertain, and may be at any time diminished or
withdrawn. The substantial foundation for the permanent and patient
work of the education of the negro, must be in the minds and hearts
of those who believe in his manhood and in his education, for some
sufficient use.

In regard to the general question, we believe it a law of God that,
as intellectual attainment and moral character are in themselves
of far more consequence than complexion or race, those who are
equal in these higher spheres easily overlook the differences in
things below. If we understand it at all, the Christian idea is
not that the strong should destroy the weak, but “laboring, should
support” them. The noblest sight on earth is when a superior race,
or family, or individual—we care not which—reaches down to an
inferior race, or family, or individual, to lift them up toilfully
and patiently to its own higher level. The aristocracy of Christ’s
kingdom is an aristocracy of service. And, in its accomplished
peace, the lion does not eat the lamb, but they lie down together.
It may be worth our while to practice a little here.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] “The Southern Negro as He Is”: a Pamphlet, by George R.
Stetson, Boston, Mass. “The Result in South Carolina”: _Atlantic
Monthly_, by a South Carolinian. “The Southern Question”: _North
American Review_, by Charles Gayarré, of Louisiana.

       *       *       *       *       *

—A variety of bills have been introduced into Congress affecting
the interests of the red man. One to organize a territorial
government, to secure land to individuals, to missions and to
Church societies, the residue of land to be forfeited to the United
States. Another granting right of way to two railroads, and still
another for “a military and post-road bisecting the territory from
North to South”; taking for it a strip five miles wide, some 300
to 1,000 square miles. Our large army could certainly travel it
without elbowing one another. Another still is arranged, to make
Indians having an organized government citizens by wholesale.

Unfortunately, most, if not all, these bills indicate by their
origin, as well as by their contents, that they are in the interest
of those ambitious to get possession of the lands set apart by
treaty to the Indians, and that they involve an utter disregard of
the plighted faith and the sworn promises of the nation.


EDUCATION AMONG THE FREEDMEN.

Under this title appears a valuable article in the _Methodist
Quarterly Review_, for January, by S. G. Arnold, Esq., of
Washington, D. C. As an early testimony to the capacity of the
African race, he cites a letter written by Thomas Jefferson in
1791, to Benjamin Banneker, a free negro of Maryland, who had
shown remarkable inventive and constructive genius, and acquired a
thorough astronomical knowledge. Mr. Jefferson says:

  “Nobody wishes more than I do to see such proofs as you exhibit,
  that nature has given to our black brethren talents equal to
  those of the other colors of men, and that the appearance of the
  want of them, is owing only to the degraded condition of their
  existence, both in Africa and America. * * * * I have taken the
  liberty to send your Almanac to M. de Condorset, Secretary of the
  Academy of Sciences at Paris, and member of the Philanthropic
  Society, because I consider it a document to which your whole
  color has a right, for their justification against the doubts
  which have been entertained of them.”

The writer then gives a graphic picture of the active efforts
of the Christian world, to educate and enlighten this needy and
neglected class, as soon as the Emancipation Act had given access
to them. From 1863 to 1866, the work in the Freedmen’s camps around
Washington was, perhaps, the most conspicuous of all; so that in
this latter year, 42 regular day-schools, with 71 teachers, were
caring for 3,930 pupils. These were sustained from New England
and the Middle States, and by Baptist, Methodist, Presbyterian,
Friends, Congregational, and various undenominational agencies.

Then came the era of the Freedmen’s Bureau, which expended some
thirteen millions of dollars, and the free-school law for the
District of Columbia. The history of the Normal school, established
with much self-denying effort, and against great obstacles, by
Miss Mytilla Miner, is given quite at length, and a full and
appreciative sketch of the beginning and development of the work
of the A. M. A. The story of Fisk University and the work of the
Jubilee Singers is told at length. We quote from the closing
paragraphs of Mr. Arnold, this impressive comparison:

  “At the Declaration of Independence, in 1776, the whole
  population of the United States was not very different in point
  of numbers, from that of the colored population now residing in
  the Southern States. The country had then been settled for more
  than 200 years, and there were large interests of production and
  commerce and government, which would seem to demand very liberal
  provisions for higher institutions of learning. But it may be
  doubted whether the advantages for education were not inferior
  to those now possessed by the colored population of the South,
  after a probation in freedom of scarcely more than a dozen years.
  The only colleges which appeared to have been in existence at
  that time are in existence still, and can be told by the number
  of your fingers. We have seen that there are now in the South,
  for the benefit of the negro, between 30 and 40 institutions
  for higher education, with an annual catalogue of nearly 5,000
  students; and although they do not, as yet, graduate annually
  through all the higher departments of learning as many scholars
  as were graduated from the 10 colleges that were in operation
  prior to the Revolutionary War, because the training is not for
  scholarship, but for special work, it seems probable that the
  educational power is greater and exerts a wider influence.

  “But whether this is so or not, the result of these brief years
  of Christian work must be regarded as a phenomenon in the history
  of the world. It is often said of the movements of our time that
  they are only history repeating itself; but if there is anything
  in history like this generous outpouring of effort and means to
  redeem a great mass of human merchandise, and lift it up out of
  its squalor and wretchedness to the level of our common Christian
  manhood, we exhort the friends of history to produce it.”

We gladly avail ourselves of this opportunity, to recognize the
generous appreciation of our work which we have always received
from our Methodist friends—indeed, some of them are “ourselves”—not
the least valuable indication of which is the cordial and kindly
tone of the article from which we have quoted above from their
leading Review.


WHAT CAN THE WOMEN DO?

We are gratified with the evidence which is coming to us from
various quarters, of an increasing interest in our Southern work
on the part of our Christian women. A letter from Rhode Island
inquires the cost of supporting a female missionary to work among
the colored women of the South in their homes, after the plan
mentioned in the January MISSIONARY. Another letter from Vermont
asks, more generally, What can the women do? How can they best help
the work by money and by goods? A word comes even from a missionary
in Constantinople, endorsing Caucasian women’s work for Negro women
in America.

In reply to such questions, we are happy to give all the light
we can. A lady missionary, to devote herself to the work named
above, can be sustained for from $350 to $450 a year, according to
location; or, a lady teacher in one of our established schools,
for $250. A student’s scholarship is from $70 to $80. We are,
of course, glad to accept money for such special purposes, and
to use it as we are instructed by the donors. One of the most
pressing needs just now, in which we are sure of sympathy from the
house-keeperly instincts of our good sisters, is that of bedding
and table-linen for our Educational institutions. We hear from the
matron of Tougaloo University, that the press of students is so
great that she has used her last quilt, and may have to take up
carpets to cover the students by night. Others are nearly as badly
off. Perhaps the women of the North can do no better thing than to
supply this want for the remainder of this winter, and more fully
for another year.

We have no fear that we shall for a long time lack specialties of
wants and pressing needs, which will appeal to all who have an ear
to hear, and a heart to sympathize. Meanwhile, the great work goes
on in all its length and breadth, in which the Christian women of
the land may well join forces with the Christian men, as they have
always done, and do their part to save and elevate a needy race.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE SCHOOLS.

TALLADEGA, ALA.—“There are five Sunday-school prayer-meetings every
Sabbath afternoon, in which much feeling is manifested. In these
meetings four have expressed the hope of a new life. Others are
much interested.”

TOUGALOO, MISS.—“There is considerable religious interest. Several
are inquiring, and a few profess conversion. We are running over
with students. We have put up a bed in the north recitation-room of
the primary building, and shall probably have to arrange another
bed in the same room before this week closes. We know of others
that are coming next week, and so on, and what are we going to do
with them? We have concluded to purchase lumber at once and put up
_barracks_ for twenty students, for the prospect is that we shall
have that many more young men. We can accommodate six or eight
young women in the Peoria room. The erection of barracks will
involve an outlay of some three hundred dollars; but the lumber
will all come in play when we build the new chapel, which we shall
be obliged to have before the sessions of the next year begin. If
the school continues to prosper we shall probably commence another
year with a hundred boarders.”

NASHVILLE, TENN.—“We have a good school this year; about 270 in
all. We hold a half-hour extra meeting in the boarding department.
Some inquirers. About twenty conversions last term.”

ATLANTA, GA.—“School is full. We have more pupils than for several
years before. There is some religious interest, though not so much
as we wish. Our purpose and hope is to make you a big contribution
toward the debt, by not asking you for any aid this year.”


NEWS FROM THE CHURCHES.

MARION, ALA.—“We had an interesting day, yesterday, in our church.
It was Communion. Four girls from twelve to sixteen years old,
and one young man of twenty years, were received on profession.
A Female Prayer-meeting has been commenced at the ‘Home,’ and
promises well. The Teacher’s Meeting is also held in our parlor
every Friday night. Our evening meetings are well attended. We
enjoy singing the ‘Gospel Hymns.’ The people almost all sing, and
are not afraid to hear their own voices. Last evening seven or
eight of the brethren took part, and one woman felt constrained to
say a few words. Perfect harmony and good-feeling seem to prevail
in the church, and the prospects for the coming year are quite
encouraging.”

MACON, GA.—“Our church is greatly blessed in connection with the
Week of Prayer. Daily meetings have been held for three weeks, and
the interest continues good. Several conversions have cheered our
hearts.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We have been favored with a copy of the “_Minutes of the
South-western Georgia Teachers’ Association (colored), held at
Howard Normal School, December 1, 1877._”

The graduates and students of Atlanta University seem to be the
leading spirits in this Association. The exercises were very much
like those of similar associations or conventions, though without
the set speeches of old wheel-horses, which are of doubtful
advantage.

That parliamentary gymnastics were not entirely ignored is evident
from the following quotation: “It was moved that the roll be
called, for the purpose of members paying their dues. Thereupon
quite a discussion arose, when the previous question was called
for; the previous question was seconded, but the main question was
lost.”

The report says of the address of the President: “He very
graphically described the field in which we are to do the work that
is to be done, and how it is to be done. He said that he felt sure
that ‘the Great Disburser of Human Events’ held something good
in store for the Negro. Teachers, you are the salt of the race;
lose not your savor, but keep pushing on in this grand cause of
education, and the heights may yet be reached in our day.”

The Committee on the Educational Condition of South-western Georgia
gives the reins to its tropical imagination for a moment, when it
says: “We are exceedingly sorry to find our people in some places
_sleeping on Poverty’s bedstead, covered with the blanket of
Ignorance_.”

Their statement that, in the eight counties reported, the
public-school fund pays only from thirty-three and one-third to
eighty cents a month per pupil, and that for three months only,
would seem to indicate that the public-school system of Georgia
is not very expensive or uniform in its operation. But it is
to be hoped that this little plant, so cautiously set by the
poverty-stricken farmer, may have a steady growth into a large and
symmetrical tree.

We are glad to note the enterprise of our colored friends in
sustaining and directing for themselves this Howard Normal School,
and in holding these educational meetings, and we recognize in it
one of the cheering results of our work.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEGRO NOTES.

HOME.

—A colored gentleman of high standing and great influence—a
life-long resident of Philadelphia—was invited by Mrs. Hayes to “be
seated and talk on the political situation,” when the following
conversation took place: “It is very quiet now at the South, we
learn?” “Yes, madam; it is the quietness of death to the colored
people. My son is in jail for the crime of aiding in carrying the
State of South Carolina for the President.”

—Senator Blaine, in a speech at Hot Springs, Ark., put the Southern
question aptly thus: “Perfect peace in the South will everywhere
follow perfect justice. There is no man in the country who desires
strife for the sake of strife, but there will always be strife so
long as there is wrong.”

—There is a quaint, straightforward way of putting things sometimes
that strikes right at the root of things, an art which our colored
friends of the South seem especially to understand. And here is
what was sung recently at one of their meetings in Jacksonville:

    If you see Peter asleep at de gate,
    Kase de night befo’ he was up so late,
    You needn’t ’spect, with your load ob sin,
    Dat you’ll slip past him and steal right in:
    De angels always acts on de squar’;
    Dey know you here, an’ dey’ll know you dar.

Such singing would not be in order in our churches. But, after all,
isn’t there a bit of truth right here, and may not these lines be
reflected on with considerable profit?

—A colored man, who very sensibly consulted President Hayes, before
migrating to San Domingo, received a letter in reply, from which
the following is extracted: “I have given some consideration to
your question as to the emigration of colored people from Florida
to San Domingo. I am not well informed as to the advantages offered
by San Domingo to immigrants, but my impression is that your people
should not be hasty in deciding to leave this country. The mere
difference in climate is a very serious objection to removal. The
first generation, in all such removals, suffer greatly. It is my
opinion, also, that the evils which now affect you are likely
steadily, and I hope rapidly, to diminish. My advice is, therefore,
against the proposed emigration.”


FOREIGN.

—Stanley’s African expedition cost $115,000, and he discovered
15,000,000 uncovered Africans. The Worcester _Press_ says six
heathen for five cents is very reasonable.

—The missionaries of the Church Missionary Society to Lake Victoria
Nyanza have been cordially received by King Mtesa. When the passage
was read in the Society’s letter, in which a reference is made
to our Lord, the king ordered a salute to be fired, which was
explained to be for joy at the mention of the name of Jesus. The
king wished especially to know if the missionaries had brought the
book—the Bible. He has himself since acted as interpreter to his
people at the Sunday services.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHINESE NOTES.

—It is not often that the report of a minority of one is invested
with so much importance or interest as that found, in an unfinished
condition, among the papers of the late Senator Morton. We give a
very brief synopsis of its main points:

A cardinal principle in our government is its openness to
immigrants from all parts of the world; it is not limited in its
statement by color, character or creed. While the Oriental nations
have come on to our ground, it is proposed that we should go
back to that which they have abandoned, and for the same reasons
which they have given up—interference with trade and labor, and
corruption of morals and religion.

The security of our nation depends not on material wealth nor
general intelligence, but in devotion to the doctrines upon which
the government was founded, “And the profound conviction in the
minds of the people that the rights of man are not conferred
by constitutions or written enactments, which may be altered
or abolished, but are God-given to every human being born into
the world, and cannot be violated by constitutions, enactments,
or governments, without trampling upon natural and inalienable
rights.” Growing out of these doctrines is the policy of free
immigration, which we are at liberty to regulate, but not
proscribe, as we may lay down the conditions of citizenship, but
not consistently forbid it. Having given political rights to the
negro, it is inconsistent to renew race prejudices, and exclude
the Asiatics on the ground of color, civilization and religion.
These are the actual grounds of the prejudice. But the question
is not one of naturalization, but of permission to come into our
country to work, to trade, and to acquire property, though the
senator deemed it impossible that they should be protected, save
as they should be allowed to become citizens, to vote and to be
represented in the government. He refers to the fact that the
Chinese take ship from a British port, and that our dealing in
regard to their importation must be with the English Government. He
brings important testimony to demonstrate the value of their labor
in the construction of railroads and in the harvesting of crops.
In these especially, by their freedom from combinations to control
the price of labor, and as having brought wages to a level, which,
though still higher than in other States, makes it possible for
Californian manufacturers to compete with those of other States
and countries. But for Chinese labor, he says, California would
not have more than one-half or two-thirds of her present white
population; it is indispensable to farming operations; their labor
is as free as any other.

The majority report, in its concluding paragraphs, says that
the question that now arises on the Pacific Coast will probably
have to be met upon the banks of the Mississippi, and, perhaps,
on the Ohio and Hudson. It is a standing menace to republican
institutions and Christian civilization. Free institutions, founded
upon free schools and intelligence, can only be maintained when
based on intelligent and adequately paid labor. Adequate wages
are needed to give self-respect to the laborer, and the means of
education to his children. Family life is a great safeguard to
our political institutions. Chinese immigration involves sordid
wages, no public schools, and the absence of the family. They show
few of the characteristics of a desirable population, and many to
be deprecated by any patriot. This problem is too important to
be treated with indifference. Congress should solve it, having
due regard to any rights already accrued under existing treaties,
and to humanity; but it must be solved, in the judgment of the
committee, unless our Pacific possessions are to be ultimately
given over to a race alien in all its tendencies, which will
make of it practically provinces of China, rather than States of
the Union. The committee recommend that measures be taken by the
Executive, looking toward a modification of the existing treaty
with China, confining it to strictly commercial purposes, and that
Congress legislate to restrain the great influx of Asiatics to this
country.

—The San Francisco “Workingmen” (?) have, under the lead of
professional agitators, become more than ever threatening and
incendiary in their language. It was given out that the Chinese
passengers of the steamer Tokio would be attacked on their
arrival. At this point the authorities interfered. The mayor
appointed special police, and the two ringleaders were arrested
for conspiracy and misdemeanor, and put under heavy bail. General
McComb ordered the entire military force of the city to assemble at
the armories, and General McDowell gave assurance that the United
States troops would come to their aid if required. Under these
conditions the city scum ceased coming to the surface, but settled
quickly to the bottom, where it belongs.

—Mr. Luttrell, a democratic member from California, has moved in
the House to amend the Steamboat Bill, so as to provide that no
American vessel shall employ, in any capacity whatever, a Chinese
or Mongolian.

—Treasury statistics show arrivals from China of 160,979 up to
1875. In 1875 the arrivals were 19,033; but in 1876 the immigration
fell off to 16,879, owing to the April disturbance in that year
in California. For the first quarter of 1877 the number was only
965, but it soon began to rise again, and on June 31 the total
immigration was figured at 284,547.

—The figures of the Custom House in San Francisco have been
collated to show that, out of a total of $6,692,000 paid for duties
on imports of foreign goods introduced during the past year, the
Chinese merchants paid $1,756,505, or over twenty-five per cent.
During the same time the Chinese paid for rent and water privileges
$223,000; for fire insurance, $96,000, and for marine insurance,
$86,000; they also paid $100,000 in taxes into the city treasury.

—In 1875, of 7,643 arrests for drunkenness, not one was a Chinaman;
of 3,263 paupers admitted to the almshouse, only six were Chinamen;
of 83 murderers hanged during the last year in the United States
only one was a Chinaman.

—Our antipathy is balanced to some extent by the appetite of Peru,
which has 60,000 Chinamen now within its borders, and so eagerly
desires more that an agent of the Peruvian Government is visiting
San Francisco with inducements to divert Chinese immigration to
that country.

       *       *       *       *       *


NO ROOM IN THE INN.

REV. A. K. SPENCE, FISK UNIVERSITY.

The occasion of the accompanying lines was this: While President
Hayes’ Peace Policy was being applauded through the land, a young
colored student, on his way to Fisk University, was detained
overnight at a station, as the trains did not make connection. A
hotel was near by, but he could not gain admission. He asked the
privilege of remaining in the depot, but that was not granted; so
he spent the whole night in the open air, pacing up and down to
keep warm and pass the time away.

Ought there not to be in every hotel some comfortable place where a
colored man can get food and shelter?

    The weary stars went slowly westward to their rest,
    And others from the east climbed up the zenith’s crest,
    And chill winds smote him, shivering in the gloomy night.
    Turning his wistful gaze to catch the morning light,
    There, wrapped in sleep, on couches soft and warm,
    The slumberers dream sweet dreams, nor think of fear or harm.
    What has he done, with guilty hand and soul of sin,
    That thus he stalks about, nor seeks the cheerful inn?

    His brow is dark, and dark the night, and dark his soul—
    A tripple sea of gloom, whose waters o’er him roll!
    And faith in man and God is low within his breast;
    With many a bitter thought his heart is sore oppressed.
    Like outlawed villain, stealing from the sight of men,
    He crouches down, as if to sleep, nor slumbers then!
    Athwart the darkness to his darker soul within,
    The tantalizing light comes from the inn!

    But yesterday, huzzas came from a million throats,
    ’Mid cannon’s boom and beat of drum and bugle’s notes,
    And banners waved, and flowers were scattered by the fair,
    And songs of peace and joy were in the quivering air;
    And brothers, long estranged, clasped brothers once again,
    And swore eternal peace and equal rights to men—
    For him, though wrapped in clean attire, but sable skin,
    No hospitable room is offered at the inn!

    Oh, brothers of this mighty land, from South to North,
    Grasp hands of greeting, pour your pæans forth!
    And ne’er by brother’s hand may brother’s blood be shed,
    With burning towns and trampled fields and mangled dead!
    Forget the past, nor let it rankle in your breast;
    Rejoice together of one glorious land possessed!
    But, oh! forget not him who, not for any sin,
    But for the thing God made him, is debarred the inn!

    Oh, peaceful President of this great land, to thee
    All thanks for thy good words for old fraternity!
    Thy name shall be inscribed in gold on history’s page,
    And read by countless multitudes from age to age,
    If thou shalt teach a people, long in strife and feud,
    To dwell in unity and seek each other’s good;
    From prejudice of section, creed and race shalt win,
    So all of every name and hue shall share the inn!

    Oh, brother of the sable brow, my brother, mine,
    The night is dark and long, and yet the sun shall shine;
    Patience be thine, and God-like charity and love,
    And eye of faith and hope that looks to One above.
    For scorn give benediction, and for insult prayer;
    And go to Bethlehem’s manger, and remember there
    Another was like thee, who, sinless, bore our sin!
    And there shall yet be room for Christ, and thee, within the inn!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.


Atlanta University.


ITS ORGANIZATION.

REV. E. A. WARE, PRESIDENT.

The first term of Atlanta University began, under its charter
granted in 1867, in Oct., 1869. The highest class, at that time,
was the junior preparatory. By a natural and steady growth, there
has come to be a regular college department, from which two
classes, (nine students), have been graduated, and in which there
are now twenty-four students; a scientific department, with four;
a preparatory, with 37; a higher normal, from which have graduated
five classes, (twenty-four students), and which numbers at present
68; and a lower normal, with 62 students. The higher normal begins
with the usual high-school studies, and continues four years. The
lower normal includes the grammar-school studies, and the first
two years of the higher normal course. Instruction in theology was
given, until the State aid was granted to the school; it has since
been discontinued. The home and family feature of the school is
made prominent. A lady has charge of the young men’s building, and,
so far as possible, takes the place of mother, making the house a
_home_, instead of a college barrack. The refining, elevating, and
restraining influence of this family life is incalculable.

Every effort is put forth to make the Sabbath a power. The usual
church service is held in the morning, Sunday-school in the
afternoon, and prayer-meeting at night. The monthly missionary
concert is observed. The contributions at this meeting, for
the nine school months, amount to about fifty dollars. The
church prayer-meeting is held on Wednesday evening; the school
prayer-meeting for all the students on Friday afternoon. At this
meeting, the school makes weekly offerings, by the envelope
plan, toward the payment of the debt of the American Missionary
Association.

The workers this year, including Pastor, Treasurer, Steward,
Housekeeper and Matron, number twelve. Among them are
representatives of Yale, Harvard, Amherst and Oberlin.

The institution owns sixty acres of land, about one mile from the
centre of the city. That part of it occupied by the buildings,
commands an extended view in all directions. The buildings are
two plain, four-storied, brick dormitories, one for boys, the
other for girls. These also afford rooms for teachers, and the
basement and first floor of the boys’ building give space for
chapel, schoolrooms, library and reading-room. Many of these
rooms are entirely unfit for these uses, and are much needed for
sleeping rooms. By an hour’s work each day, the students care for
the buildings, cultivate the grounds, cut the wood, and do the
house-work, except the cooking.

The Graves Library contains about four thousand volumes, and
has an endowment of five thousand dollars. The library and
reading-room are thoroughly used. Excepting for the library, the
school has no endowment, but depends for support on the American
Missionary Association, and the State of Georgia, which latter has
appropriated to it $8,000 annually.

The name “University,” when adopted in 1867, signified nothing,
save as a prophecy. As such it was adopted. It foretold the
capacity of those, for whom the school was especially founded, to
advance in education, till they should need the advantages of a
full university course. It foretold the willingness of the friends
of humanity to furnish these advantages. There is no longer any
doubt of the complete fulfillment of the first prophecy, provided
the second can be speedily accomplished.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITS WORK.

REV. C. W. FRANCIS.

To prepare teachers for the education of the children of more than
half a million of poor and illiterate people is, and must remain,
the chief work of the school. The ability to read and write is the
smallest of the needs of the people, old and young, among whom
such teachers are called to labor. They must teach the elements of
morals and religion, of social and domestic life, must supply the
forces which are to shape and guide the people from serfdom up to
an intelligent, Christian citizenship. The course pursued in this
school consists essentially in separating the pupils by means of a
family school from all old associations and habits, and subjecting
them for months and years to a strong and watchful discipline, in
surrounding them with the most earnest and aggressive religious
influences, in giving them the best mental training and furnishing
which the time and facilities will allow, thus to stamp upon them
new characteristics, and mould them so that they will represent and
teach the best Christian culture and civilization. That they may
resist the strong influences pulling them down on every hand, they
need to be thoroughly fixed and set in character before leaving
school. Such a complete transformation of character and life as
is aimed at here, requires time and the constant exercise of the
highest skill and patience. It is no ordinary education which is
sought, but a special and peculiar training for a high and holy
missionary work.

The demand for teachers from this school is continually greater
than the supply. In the last catalogue were the names of 214
pupils, and of these, more than 150 are known to have engaged in
teaching during the year. In the previous year, out of 240, more
than 175 were at work in the same way. And this number includes
nearly every person in school whose age and attainments gave him
even the smallest fitness for the work. The school term lasts nine
months, and there is but one vacation, including the three summer
months. It is the practice of the pupils to pass directly from
school to their work in teaching, and many have done so for a
number of years, without going home or having a rest. They have in
day-schools an average attendance of thirty-five or forty; and as
most have night-schools, and nearly all organize Sabbath-schools
and temperance societies, it is not unreasonable to estimate that
more than 10,000 people are every season reached and instructed by
the present pupils of this school, while a still larger number are
under the instruction of former pupils. They, for the most part,
find their own places, collect the pupils, secure a building—either
a church, shed or cabin, or, in lack of these, build a log-house or
bush-arbor; and so, all through the hot months, the work goes on
from year to year. The seed is widely scattered, but it is not lost.

This school bears a very close relation to the special church work
of the Association as well as to the general religious welfare of
the whole people. A large majority of the pupils become Christians
before leaving school, and only one or two have been graduated
without giving evidence of Christian character. There has been
special religious interest every year in the history of the school.
One missionary to Africa and several ministers in active service,
caught their inspiration here.


ITS INFLUENCE.

REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD.

The varied and powerful influence of Atlanta University is seldom
adequately estimated by the casual reader. Situated almost exactly
midway between the Ohio and Mississippi rivers on the one hand, and
the Atlantic and Gulf coast on the other, it has an unsurpassed
opportunity for reaching the colored people of the South. Over most
of this large territory there is no other institution of so high a
grade, the nearest neighbors doing a similar work being Fisk and
Straight Universities at Nashville and New Orleans respectively. It
is especially fortunate in having no sectarian rivals to disturb
the harmony with which it is now doing a broad Christian work for
all denominations.

The first and most direct influence of the institution is, of
course, upon its students. An observing visitor, listening to
a recitation, or attending any gathering of the students, can,
without much difficulty, distinguish the recent comers from the
older pupils. In modes of thought and expression, and in the
general bearing, the contrast is usually quite marked. These,
however, are only superficial indications of the deeper change that
is commonly wrought in the entire character. Frivolity is toned
down, carelessness corrected, punctuality secured, a respect for
the rugged virtues as well as the amenities of life stimulated,
and, in many cases, a sober and abiding religious earnestness
developed.

The influence of the institution thus imparted to its students, is
next felt by the thousands of younger scholars whom the students
gather into their schools. So, too, the Sunday-schools and Churches
with which they are connected, and the entire communities in which
they move, receive a quickening impulse from their presence. “There
are three of us in that Sunday-school, _all with the University
ideas_,” was the significant remark of a graduate now teaching in a
large Southern city.

Finally, the influence of Atlanta University upon the Southern
white people themselves has been a marked one. They have repeatedly
and handsomely acknowledged that the success of its instruction has
convinced them that the colored race can receive a high degree of
culture. The demonstration of this fact has an important bearing
upon the whole subject of public education. Not only the colored
people, but the white people of all classes, especially the poorer
classes, will receive great benefit from the quickening of public
sentiment, produced by the success of this institution. The last
official report on Atlanta University, by the Board of Visitors
appointed by the Governor, contains an emphatic recognition of its
very great influence, present and prospective. These are some of
the sentences from that report: “The Board are constrained to say
that the mental training was very satisfactory.” “No school in
Georgia ever had such a field, and its social as well as political
power may become immense.” “The pupils of that school will be
the moulders of their race in the State,” etc., etc. These are the
statements of influential white men in Georgia. Do the people of
the North realize how true they are?

       *       *       *       *       *


Devotion to Study—Conversions to Christ.

REV. M. O. HARRINGTON, MACON.

Many cases of interest come to notice in connection with our
school, showing the eager thirst for knowledge which these colored
people have. One incident to-day illustrates this. A young man,
twenty-two years of age, who has been connected with the school for
a few weeks, was obliged to go home a few days since, to attend to
matters of business. So anxious was he not to lose his position in
his class, that he started at 2.15 in the morning and walked about
forty miles, reaching Macon at 5 P.M. and this in the severest N.
E. rain-storm of the season. It makes our hearts sad to know of
many who would gladly come to our school, but cannot find boarding
places in town.

The young man mentioned above has since found Christ to be his
Saviour. Rejoice with us! God is visiting us with His Spirit. The
Church is quickened to newness of life, and sinners are converted.
We observed the Week of Prayer; have continued the meetings every
night this week. Some of our strongest and best young men were the
first to start in the new life. All is quiet, but deep and earnest.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Breaking Ground for the New Emerson Institute Building.

PROF. T. N. CHASE.

On the 26th of December, ground was broken for the new Emerson
Institute building at Mobile, with appropriate services. A portion
of Scripture was read, and brief addresses were made by Rev. Mr.
Ash, pastor of the Congregational Church; Rev. Mr. Owens, Baptist;
Rev. Mr. Taylor, Methodist; Mr. Koons, principal of the school; and
Prof. Chase, of Atlanta University. Led by Miss Stevenson, Miss
Lord, a former teacher, and Miss Sawyer, of Talladega College,
the pupils of the school sang “Hold the Fort,” “Thank God for our
Country,” “Labor On,” etc., and Rev. Mr. Davis led in prayer.

In the remarks, Mr. Ash spoke of education in its relation to the
individual, to society, to government, and to the Church. Mr.
Owens said that ignorance was our greatest enemy, and that the
building which was to be erected might be regarded as a fort, from
which guns were to be aimed at this inveterate foe, and exhorted
the people to sustain the teachers who were leading them in their
intellectual and moral warfare. Mr. Koons made a few statements
concerning the school, saying that its aim was not to advance
the interests of any political party or religious sect, but to
develop character and cultivate the minds and hearts of the people.
Mr. Taylor said he had been taught that the negro could not be
educated—that his brains lay in his heels, etc.; but he was glad to
see proof to the contrary in the speeches that had just been made
by Mr. Ash and Mr. Owens. Mr. Chase alluded to the burning of the
old Institute, the causes of delay in rebuilding, the fact that the
school was needed now, and the probability that it always would be.

At the conclusion of these addresses, the old men, headed by Mr.
Taylor, claimed the privilege of removing the first earth; others
followed, without regard to age, color, sex or sect.

The new lot is more accessible to the colored population than the
old one. It is known as Holley’s Garden, and has been a favorite
resort for picnic parties. On account of the great depreciation
in real-estate, the property, containing over two acres, and
having on it a house that will serve as a home for the teachers
and accommodate a few girls as boarders, and covered with nearly a
hundred large shade trees, mostly live-oak, has been purchased for
the small sum of $2,800.

The new building is to be sixty-four feet long and fifty-four
in greatest width, and will accommodate 250 pupils, under five
teachers. Many of the bricks from the old building can be used,
since they were not injured by an excess of water at the time of
the fire.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

A Debt Extinguisher—The Happiest Girl in the Land.

REV. TEMPLE CUTLER, CHATTANOOGA.

On my return from the campaign in New England, I found the church
in a much better condition than I feared it might be. Except in the
falling off in the weekly offering, I could see no change. They had
been ministered to regularly on Sunday evenings, during my absence,
by Rev. J. C. Irwin, the pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church.

I was glad to find that a good degree of enthusiasm had been
awakened among them to assist in paying the debt of the A. M.
A. The Church had held a fair during my absence, at which they
realized about $20, which they had forwarded to you. The Band
of Hope had sent about the same amount. Then the band decided
to celebrate the anniversary of their freedom on the first of
January—Emancipation-Day—with a festival, the proceeds of which
should be appropriated to the debt. All the colored people, without
regard to church connection, were invited to be present and
contribute to this object. It was quite a success. The exercises
consisted of speaking, essays and songs, and were very creditable
to the performers. The singing was from the Hampton Cabin Songs,
some of which were new to this section. Among the speeches was one
on the emancipation of the blacks, another on the work of the A.
M. A. in the South, which were well delivered. One essay was on a
contrast between the slave and the freeman. Dr. Lawrence and wife,
who were here on a lecturing tour on temperance, were present. The
doctor made a short address, full of wit and good counsel. The
evening closed with a social entertainment. The proceeds, I think,
were about $30, which you have probably received ere this.

The hearty interest manifested by all the colored people in the
payment of your debt is encouraging. If the wealthier people would
do as much in proportion as these poor people do, your debt would
not long be a burden. The Sabbath-school has caught the fever, and,
last Sunday, the proposition was made to send you all the money in
the treasury (about $15); but, on further consideration, it was
thought best to wait until we see how we shall pay for our lesson
papers. You will probably get the $15, however. I hear from other
Churches that a similar effort is being made among them.

In addition to this, I am happy to say that the Week of Prayer
was observed, the meetings well attended, and the spirit of the
meetings excellent. Prayers were made for husbands and children
that are already answered, in a conviction on the part of those
prayed for that they must give attention to the things they hear.

One of our most promising girls, who went to Tougaloo, Miss., a
few weeks ago, writes me that she has found the Saviour, and is so
happy. Let me mention another fact that has interested us here in
our home exceedingly. One of our girls has been very anxious to
get an education. Just before I went North, she asked me to see if
I could not find somebody who would help her. One friend gave me
$5, and that was all. Her heart was very sad when I told her that
I did not succeed in getting enough, but I encouraged her with
the assurance that if it was the Lord’s will that she should go,
He would open the way yet. In a few days I received a letter from
an old friend, whom I had not heard from for years, but who had
accidentally seen my name as connected with this work, in which was
a post-office order for $20. I put this with my $5, and told Jennie
she had better start; we would take this as an earnest of the whole
amount ($60) needed to finish the year. We are curious to know the
result of this venture. One thing we know, and that is, where to
find the happiest girl in the land.




THE INDIANS.

[_From the New York Tribune._]

THE INDIAN COMMISSIONERS.

Annual Meeting—Missionary Co-operation—Interview with the President.


The Board of Indian Commissioners met in this city January 10th,
to receive the annual reports of the several religious bodies
to which, under the policy adopted by President Grant some
years ago, the selection of agents and other field employés of
the Indian service has been confided, and to make up their own
annual report. Representatives from the Presbyterian Foreign and
Domestic Missionary Boards, the Baptist Home Mission Society,
the several Yearly Meetings of Friends, the American Board, the
American Missionary Association, and the Unitarian Association,
were present. A report was received from the Episcopal Board. The
Methodist and Roman Catholic Boards sent no reports, and several of
the smaller denominations having agents also failed to present a
statement of their work.

These annual conferences of the Board of Commissioners and
the representatives of the different religious denominations,
unofficial as they are, have been of great benefit to the
official administration of Indian affairs, and, at some critical
periods, have helped to save the peace policy from disaster. The
Conference this year has been unusually interesting, in view
of the disposition lately manifested to transfer the control
of Indian affairs to the War Department, and of a new class of
questions respecting the Indians themselves, which assume practical
importance in view of their rapid progress toward civilization.

It appears that the religious sentiment of the country, as
represented by those who control and direct its efforts to civilize
and Christianize the Indians, is unanimously opposed to a change
in the present general policy toward the Indian, in the mode of
its administration; and many weighty facts and reasons are brought
to the support of this opposition. The new questions brought into
view, affecting the Indians themselves, are specified in the
following address to the Board of Indian Commissioners, adopted by
the representatives of the religious societies, and presented this
morning:

  “This Convention would respectfully express its deep interest
  in certain recommendations, in relation to the welfare of the
  Indians, which received the approval of similar conventions held
  in former years, but which have not yet gained their rightful
  place in the action of the Government. Among these are:

  “_First_—The extension of law over all the Indians, so as to
  provide for the safety of property and of human life.

  “_Second_—Legal provision for the common-school education of
  Indian children by the General Government, until such education
  shall be provided by the several States in which they reside.

  “_Third_—Definite regulations to secure to Indians the possession
  of land in fee and in severalty in all practicable cases by
  titles properly guarded.

  “The Convention regards these three things as of the greatest
  importance, indeed, as essential to the civilization of the
  Indians, and as calling for the action of Congress without longer
  delay. Further, the Convention would express grave doubts as to
  the wisdom of removing Indian tribes to the Indian Territory,
  or to larger reservations, in cases in which the Indians are in
  a good measure prepared to abandon their tribal relationship,
  and to enter on civilized life. They should, at the least, have
  the option of remaining where they are subject to the conditions
  of citizenship, before they are compelled to remove to distant
  places, at the great hardship and suffering, and loss of health
  and life, which such enforced removal always involves. At
  the same time, this Convention is deeply impressed with the
  importance of all wise measures that look to early self-support
  of the Indians as citizens of our common country.

  “The Convention would close this address with thanks to Almighty
  God for the progress that has been made under the humane policy
  of the last few years, and for the evident advance of many of
  the Indians in civilization and the knowledge of the Christian
  religion.”

It is understood that the Board of Commissioners will appoint a
committee to carry out these views as far as possible, by securing
necessary legislation by Congress.

The following day the Convention, accompanied by the Board of
Commissioners, called on President Hayes by appointment. They were
presented to the President by General Clinton B. Fisk; and the Rev.
Drs. Lowrie, Clark, Strieby and Cutting, and Mr. Tatham, presented
their views briefly. Dr. Clark submitted a paper showing the
progress made under the present policy since 1868, claiming that it
was greater than that made in the fifteen years that preceded its
adoption. The President responded briefly, expressing his hearty
sympathy with all efforts to civilize and Christianize the Indians,
and his gratification at the progress that has been made, and
indicated practical methods to secure the additional legislation
desired. He did not seem to share the apprehensions of his visitors
respecting the early transfer of the management of Indian affairs
to the War Department. Mrs. Hayes, General Cox, former Secretary
of the Interior under President Grant when the Peace Policy was
adopted, and the Hon. Henry S. Lane, of Indiana, a member of the
Board of Indian Commissioners when it was first constituted, were
attentive and interested listeners, and took an active part in the
pleasant informal conversation that ensued. Following are some of
the items of Dr. Clark’s statement:

                                           1868.      1877.
  Houses occupied by Indians               7,476      22,199
  Number of Indian schools                   111         330
  Number of teachers                         134         437
  Scholars                                 4,713      11,515
  Acres of land cultivated by Indians     54,207     292,550
  Bushels wheat raised                   126,117     688,278
  Bushels corn raised                    467,363   4,656,952
  Bushels oats and barley raised          43,976     349,247
  Bushels vegetables raised              236,926     556,975
  Tons of hay                             16,216     148,473
  Horses and mules owned by Indians       43,960     216,286
  Cattle owned by Indians                 42,874     217,883
  Swine owned by Indians                  29,890     121,358
  Sheep owned by Indians                   2,683     587,444

In addition to these comparisons are the following figures:

  Number of Indians in U. S. about       278,000
  Wear citizens’ dress                   112,903
  Houses built last year                   1,103
  Money expended for education          $337,379
  Indians who can read                    40,397
  Learned to read last year                1,206
  Church buildings on reservations           207
  Indians, Church members, about          28,000
  Male Indians engaged in labor           34,632

(Five tribes in the Indian Territory are not included in these
figures.)

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Moor, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. W. E.
Ijams, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, E. P. Sanford,
Esq., H. W. Severance, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS BY FUNG AFFOO.

The following address was delivered at the last Annual Meeting
of the California Chinese Mission by Mr. Fung Affoo, one of our
missionary helpers. It was listened to with much interest, and
at my request, Affoo has furnished it for publication in the
MISSIONARY.

                                                    W. C. POND.

“CHRISTIAN FRIENDS: I was asked to make an address here this
evening, but I have not much to say. I do not know your language
well enough. I have only a few words to say about the Chinese Young
Men’s Christian Association, of which I have been a member about
three years. This Association was organized not quite four years
ago. There are other Chinese Christian Societies besides this one,
in San Francisco and elsewhere in this State. This Association
has now a membership of 131; about three-fourths of the members
were gathered in during the last two years. It has given us great
encouragement, seeing that the work of this Association has been
thus far so successful through the help of God. But I am afraid
that some people would say that, while so much has been done for
the cause of Christianizing Chinese, only so little of the work
has been accomplished in return. But if they really knew the
difficulties and temptations in the way of our people becoming
Christians, they would say otherwise.

“By being a member of the Association for three years, I have
known what their difficulties are. I will tell you a little of
it; perhaps it will illustrate to you some of their principal
difficulties. As the rule of our Association requires that ‘any one
who desires to become a member of this Association must forsake
idolatry and all bad habits, and prove himself to be a follower
of Christ,’ so, when he is a member, he must do accordingly; and
when he does that, his friends and relations will turn their
backs on him, and will have nothing to do with him. That makes
it very unpleasant, and he feels the loss of their friendship
very much; because it is a general thing among our people in this
country that, when a Chinaman first comes here from China, he is a
dependent on his friends and relatives, who provide him food and
shelter, and then find him employment until he has earned some
money; then he pays them back what seems to him right. He feels
it is his duty to respect and follow their advice, because of
their kindness to him when he was a stranger. So, when he becomes
a Christian, he not only feels he has lost those friends, but,
perhaps, sometimes gets a good whipping from his relatives also.
That not only prevents some from becoming Christians, but four or
five of our members have turned back under these circumstances.

“But we make it one of our principal duties to make each one feel
that he has found some better friends in the Association than those
he has lost by becoming a Christian. Not long ago a young man
became a Christian, and his friends, not satisfied with abusing
and jeering at him, wrote a false report to his parents in China,
telling them that their son in California not only had forsaken his
old religion and the worshipping of his ancestors, but also had
cut off his long queue and dressed in foreigner’s clothes. When
they received this news, they wept and made many inquiries, and
worshipped all the gods they knew of, praying them to use their
spiritual power to turn their son back to be a Chinaman again, so
that, when they die, they will have some one to take care of their
bones and feed their ghosts. When the young man heard of this, he
wrote home to them, telling them it was true that he had become a
Christian, but it was not true that he had cut his queue and wore
the foreigner’s clothing, and said that he was a Chinaman still; he
would honor them just the same, and perhaps more. And he has not
heard from them speaking on this subject ever since. Now, friends,
such things as I have said often occur, but most of our members are
firm. When once they have become Christians, they will stick to it,
though they have so many hardships to bear.

“They often encounter some hard questions about Christianity from
their heathen friends, such questions as, ‘If Jesus was the Son
of God and a good man, why did the people kill him on the cross?
People would never kill a good man that way.’ ‘You say, being
baptized with a little water pour on your head, and your sins are
no more. I can take the water and pour on my head, or wash me all
over fifty times a day!’ ‘You say God created heaven and earth and
man, and has power over everything; why He lets the devil live and
lead the people to go astray, and, when the people die, He will
condemn their souls and send them to hell?’ etc., etc. If they
cannot answer these questions, they will ask their teachers or
search the Scriptures to see what answer they can get from them—not
only that those questions may be answered but in hopes that their
heathen friends may be led to become Christians, also.

“We feel we are weak and few in number, but we trust God, and lean
on His strong arm, that He will carry us through. We know that He
has been very good to us, and has given so many kind friends to
help us along; and we hope, through His goodness, that all our
people will soon know that Jesus is the only Saviour of the world.”

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MENDI MISSION.


The Church and the Sunday-School.

REV. FLOYD SNELSON, GOOD HOPE STATION.

We had our First Communion yesterday. It was a great day in the
church. All were in high spirits. We received one new convert, and
others are seeking the way of life. We observed the Week of Prayer
with the Church Mission Society, holding our meetings with each
other alternately through the week, beginning with us to-night. We
have a splendid Sabbath-school, and are doing all that we can to
make it better.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Day-School—The Christmas Entertainment—Knives and Forks.

BENJAMIN JAMES, M. D.

We have about sixty or more scholars, and, I tell you, to instruct
them in the way they teach schools in America is difficult; indeed,
more so than you have any idea of. With every attempt you make
to teach them in that way, you become more and more discouraged.
Our Sabbath-school is too large for the number of teachers at
present engaged, but we hope to remedy this soon. We gave them,
Thursday night, a Christmas entertainment. Mrs. Snelson cooked the
food, which was partly furnished by the members of the church,
and the remainder by ourselves. I was appointed to decorate the
chapel, and, I must say, to these people’s credit, that I never
had so many hands under my control in my life; and, as evergreen
after evergreen was placed in position, the laborers increased.
We not only had fruits, but poultry, vegetables, cakes, pies,
candies, raisins, and music. There were many strangers, such as
the Commander of the Port (a white man, with more decorations of
honor on his chest than in the ephod of a Jewish high-priest), the
Collector of the Port (white), the Catechist of the Established
Church (colored), seven merchants (two white and five colored),
the Postmaster (colored), Custom House officers in abundance (all
colored), military officials of all grades, from a captain to
a corporal. The church people, boatmen, and servants, were all
present. Several tables were set; but, I am sorry to say, that when
the laborers’ (such as carpenters and field hands) time came to sit
and to sup, the best had been consumed.

I sat opposite a boat’s crew, and they began to laugh; as they
would use the knife, then the spoon (large), after that the fork,
such laughing after the use of each of these pieces of cutlery I
have never witnessed before. I began to inquire of the waiter, an
interpreter, what they were so much amused at, and he informed
me that they were laughing at their use of the knives, forks
and spoons. The spoons did not hold enough, they said; the food
rolled off the knife in their unsteady hands, and the fork was
like putting water in a fish-net instead of a calabash. Every day
since that, when they eat dinner, they laugh about those pieces of
cutlery.

During Christmas-Day, services were had in the chapel; they were
begun at 5 o’clock, and continued until daylight. At 10 o’clock,
there was preaching to the prisoners through an interpreter. On
Thursday, at the banquet, we had singing and addresses to the day
and Sabbath-schools, for they both were invited. The girls were
marched from the chapel two by two, as were also the boys. This
was another new feature, and they were well pleased with it.

I have had an extensive medical practice here and at Avery, and
have so much to do in this way, that I am compelled to ask you to
give me written instructions whom to attend, and how to proceed.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMMUNICATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *


EDUCATION OF THE COLORED PEOPLE.

REV. J. E. RANKIN. D. D.

  The following paragraphs are from the paper read by Dr. Rankin at
  the anniversary at Syracuse. It was intended that it should be
  printed with the proceedings, but, by accident, it was not left
  in the hands of the committee. We hope to publish it in full in a
  series of documents which we have in preparation.

  After valuable historical statements, and a vivid picture of the
  needs, and of the progress already made, among other good things,
  the Doctor says:

The southern portions of this country cannot always remain blind
to the truth that their _material prosperity_ depends upon the
employment of _educated labor_. Sociologists claim that an educated
laborer will produce twenty-five per cent. more than an uneducated
one. If a colored man is worth $100 a year without an education,
he is worth twenty-five per cent. more with one. The thrift of New
England has been largely dependent upon the common-school houses
there. Give a man education enough to transact ordinary business,
to enable him to keep his accounts in writing, to improve his mind
daily by reading, to understand the institutions of his country, to
have an insight into the laws which shall govern him in relation
to his neighbors and his God, to know his rights and his duties,
and he is twenty-five per cent. better as a _producer_ than he
was before. The necessity of keeping the colored man ignorant, of
keeping out discussions relating to human rights, involved the
other necessity of keeping a population unintelligent, unthinking
and, so far forth, unproductive, as appeared in the very implements
employed for tilling the soil.

The southern portions of this country cannot long remain oblivious
of the fact that the _illiterate_ class are largely the _criminal_
class; that ignorance fosters crime. In New England only seven
per cent. of the population—and these almost entirely of foreign
birth—are illiterate. Eighty per cent. of all the crime committed,
is by these illiterate persons. It really comes to this: “Which
is the wisest outlay of public money—that put into schools and
school-houses, or that put into almshouses and jails?”

It is not merely intelligence which prevents crime. It is the
early formation of habits of industry. It is the pre-occupation
of the mind, so that it does not become the devil’s workshop. And
when one considers a late slave population, free but without the
training which freedom especially requires, inheriting all the evil
tendencies which slavery engenders; and then, on the other hand, a
white population, largely dependent for support upon the labor of
others, indolent from habit or from pride, and largely inheriting
analogous tendencies—it is easy to see that here is a state of
things especially favorable to crime.

I know that these are _material_ considerations, that they are upon
a low plane of working, and very unlike those which actuated our
New England fathers, with whom the school-house was collateral to
the Church, and the spelling-book to the Bible. This of our fathers
is the higher plane of effort occupied by the American Missionary
Association. Political economists and statesmen can perceive the
material bearings of this subject, and, little by little, as light
spreads, the Southern States will be compelled for those reasons
to see that their people have facilities for education, will
comprehend the truth that school-houses and school-teachers add
to the value of acres—as the President lately said at Nashville.
Meanwhile, this Association, through its Normal Schools and
Universities, is training up colored teachers and preachers to
labor, as leaders, among their own people, as school systems shall
be founded and maintained by law.

It is not enough that the different States of the South adopt a
liberal system of public schools. Where, among colored people,
shall suitable teachers be found? This race, like every other,
must work out its own salvation. Favored ones must mount high, and
reach down a helping hand to those below them. It cannot depend
wholly upon white teachers. Oh, if there could rise up from among
them gifted men and women, who were willing to devote themselves
to _their own race_, to different classes of their own race, just
for the sake of lifting them up from degradation! This is the aim
of these institutions of the American Missionary Association—to
train up the better, the choicer minds among colored youth, for the
work of teaching and preaching; so that they may be eager to devote
themselves to the mental and moral uplifting of their own race!
If this “land that was desolate is yet to become like the garden
of Eden”; if the thrift and industry of the more favored portions
of this land are yet to be seen in all portions, I believe that
no one agency will have been more instrumental in this, than the
institutions of learning early established for the colored people!

At this time, the American Missionary Association limits its sphere
to schools of the higher class. If it can train the _teachers_;
if it can mould the minds and kindle the hearts of those who are
soon to mould the minds and kindle the hearts of the thousands of
colored children and youth, who are to be the colored men and women
of the future, it could not have a higher mission; it could not do
better, whether for the country or for the human race.

Brethren, this is no longer a _Southern_ question—a question which
the South must be left to solve for themselves. We must help them,
as involved in the destiny which they work out for us, as well as
for themselves. For, if this millstone of ignorance be not taken
from their necks, we go down with them into the depths of the sea!

       *       *       *       *       *


FROM A LIFE MEMBER.

I am glad you have returned to the old form of Magazine. Although
a Life Member, and thus entitled to receive it without pay, yet I
am glad to inclose fifty cents for it, and most earnestly hope each
and every one who receives the Magazine will do the same promptly,
and _thus increase the income of the A. M. A. twelve thousand and
five hundred dollars_.

    Yours sincerely,
                                                      A LIFE MEMBER.

       *       *       *       *       *


(_From the N. Y. Herald._)

SLAVE AND FREE LABOR COTTON.

Twelve crops of cotton have been raised by free labor, and the
comparison of the returns with an equal number of crops before the
war shows some interesting results. The period of free labor may
properly be divided into two portions—the first, including four
years, during which the crops of 1865 to 1868, both inclusive,
were made, and in which the labor system was greatly disorganized;
the second, including eight years—1869 to 1877—when free labor was
fairly well organized. If we divide the twelve crops preceding the
war in the same manner, we shall get the following results:

      FIRST PERIOD—FOUR YEARS.

                                                  _Bales._
  Crops of 1849–’50 to 1852–’53, inclusive      10,729,874
  Add consumption of the South, not then
    included in the commercial crop
    statement                                      500,810
                                                ----------
    Total (slave)                               11,230,684
  Crops of 1865–’66 to 1868–’69, inclusive
    (free)                                       9,246,793
                                                ----------
    Excess of slave crop over free               1,983,891


      SECOND PERIOD—EIGHT YEARS.

  Crops of 1869–’70 to 1876–’77, inclusive,
    being eight years of organized free
    labor                                       31,570,212
  Crops of 1853–’54 to 1860–’61, inclusive,
    being eight years of slave labor
    immediately preceding the war               27,535,949
  Add Southern consumption then
    excluded from commercial crop
    statement, but included since
    the war                           1,261,892–28,797,841
                                                ----------
    Excess of free labor                         2,772,371

In the last eight years free labor has, therefore, overtaken the
palmiest days of slavery, and has produced two and three-quarter
million bales more cotton. This crop is now more free from the
encumbrance of debt than ever before, and with it has been raised
a supply of food far greater than slavery ever compassed.

Without entering into minute statistics, it is safe to say that the
money value of the thirty-one and a half million bales of cotton
produced in the last eight years has been over two thousand million
dollars in gold, and that over two-thirds of this value has been
exported.

Texas, which seems to be the true land of the cotton farmer, has
made the greatest relative progress, now producing double the crop
of cotton that she made before the war. During the last cotton
year, on less than half of one per cent. of her area, or on less
than half an acre in a hundred, she produced a quantity of cotton
equal to one-half the entire consumption of the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


(_From the Southern Sentinel, Talladega College._)

A YOUNG TEACHER’S STORY.

I fully realized last April, for the first time, that I had begun
a missionary life, when I was helped into a covered wagon, where
there was not room enough to sit up straight for the supplies. I
had a dizzy headache before I had gone three miles; the smell of
bacon, cheese, tobacco, and whiskey was enough to make _any one_
sick. I was wishing that the driver would take some of the things
out of the wagon so I could sit more comfortably, when he stopped
and took in four sacks of guano—my condition can be imagined better
than described. I thought the Lord called some one else, and I had
answered. When I got out, the man asked me which was the best—a
proud walk or poor ride. I only thanked him for his kindness, and
said nothing about which was best.

Some say, time flies; it seemed to me that time had lost its wings.
At last the much-wished-for Tuesday appeared, beautiful and bright.
Just as I sat down to breakfast, I heard some one ask if the
school-mistress was in. As I had no appetite whatever, I excused
myself from the table, and went to the door to see what was wanted.
There were boys and girls of all sizes, with their buckets, books,
and slates, all ready for school. We were soon on our way to the
school-house; the walk was very pleasant through the piny woods.
The school-house was in a very pretty place; a few steps from the
door was a nice spring of water, and a large cave. We sang “What
shall the harvest be,” then prayed. It was quite difficult to get
their names. I asked one little girl her name; she said “Maggie.” I
asked her “Maggie what;” she said “Maggie nothing.” There was one
little girl in school that I thought never would get acquainted
with me. I asked her one day why she didn’t study her lesson; she
said she was wondering what kind of a woman I was. I asked her
what kind of a woman did she think I was; she said I looked like a
white woman to her. [_The writer is a dark person._] I told her she
might lay aside her books for ten minutes and take a good look at
me, so that she might be thoroughly convinced as to what kind of
a woman I was. I then asked her what she thought; but she thought
just the same. The weather was so warm, and the days so long, that
the children could scarcely keep awake. I would let them go to the
spring and bathe their faces, so they might keep awake longer.

In the evening, four or five little children came and offered to
carry my books and bucket home, for the school-house had neither
door nor window, hence it was not safe to leave them there. I gave
each one something to carry, but they became quite troublesome.
Lucy would say, Mary had carried them twice, and she only once; so
I thought that it would be best to provide myself with a desk. This
I did by moving a plank from the floor and putting them all under
the house. That was no trouble whatever, for sometimes, while
walking the floor, the next thing I would know I would be under it.

Whenever I went under, I expected to be snake-bitten before I could
get out. One day, one of the scholars let her pencil fall through
the crack of the floor, and asked me to let her get it. As I had
cautioned them about looking for snakes before putting their hands
under, I said nothing to her about it. Just as she reached down to
get the pencil, she fell back and screamed. I had not the power to
move for a few minutes, I was so sure she was snake-bitten.

I looked under the floor, and there was the _largest rattlesnake I
ever saw_. We all got sticks and poles ready for a battle. I was
captain, so you may be sure which side whipped. The snake appeared
to be very angry; he made one strike, and I threw down my pole and
ran, and told the children to kill it if they could,—but they all
followed me. I was real glad whenever any of the children had to be
kept in, for I did not like to stay in the room alone.

I walked two miles and a half every Sabbath, and sometimes through
the rain. If it rained hard while we were there, we would have
to get in one corner of the room to keep dry. We should be real
earnest if we would accomplish much good. I did everything that
was in my power, and felt that the Lord was with me and blessed my
efforts.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JANUARY, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $692.38.

    Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. $70; T. U. C. $1                71.00
    Bath. Winter St. Ch. and Soc.                             39.72
    Brownsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           18.41
    Castine. Rev. Alfred E. Ives                               2.00
    Garland. Cong. Ch.                                         7.50
    Machias. Centre St. Sab. Sch. $25; Ladies’
      Prayer-Meeting $5.75, to const. MRS. WM. C.
      HOLWAY, L. M.; “A Friend” $3                            33.75
    Monson. R. W. Emerson                                     21.00
    North Yarmouth. Samuel H. Sweetser, to const.
      MISS LUCRETIA H. SWEETSER, L. M.                        30.00
    Orono. “A Friend”                                          5.00
    Otisfield. Mrs. Susan Lovell $5; S. M. $1                  6.00
    Oxford. Mary A. Ellis                                      2.00
    Portland. BEQUEST of Mrs. Samuel Tyler, by
      Sarah A. Breslin                                       400.00
    Portland. Edward Gould                                    12.00
    Searsport. S. Thurston                                    10.00
    Sheepscot Bridge. Amos Flye                               20.00
    South Freeport. Horatio Ilsley                             2.00
    Winthrop. I. N. M.                                         1.00
    York. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  11.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $424.27.

    Amherst. Miss C. M. Boylston                               2.00
    Antrim. “A Friend”                                       100.00
    Chester. C.S.G.                                            0.25
    Colebrook. H. A.                                           1.00
    Concord. W. H. Pitman $2, _for Cal. Chinese
      M._—Mrs. C. L. Gerould $2; Mrs. Cooper
      Clark, bbl. of C.                                        4.00
    Cornish. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                          12.10
    Dover. Cong. Ch. (ad’l) $7; E. J. L. $1.00                 8.00
    Farmington. First Cong. Ch.                               14.50
    Fisherville. “Mrs. M. C. A.”                              10.00
    Fitzwilliam. Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Hill                      5.00
    Hancock. E. W.                                             1.00
    Harrisville. Darius Farwell                                2.00
    Keene. Dea. E. Rand and Mrs. M. Townes $5 ea.;
      Second Cong. Ch. (ad’l) $1.40; Mrs. I. H.
      Gates $5; Miss S. E. H. 50c.                            16.90
    Lyme. S. W. Balch                                          5.00
    Meriden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.83
    Mount Vernon. Mrs. C. W. Smith $5; J. A.
      Stowell $5                                              10.00
    Nashua. Individuals                                        1.10
    New Ipswich. N. F. D. $1; J. W. C. 50c.                    1.50
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.60
    North Hampton. E. Gove                                    10.00
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $23.50; Mrs. M. B.
      Pratt $10                                               33.50
    Orfordville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.00
    Pembroke. “A Friend”                                      20.00
    Plainfield. Mrs. Hannah Stevens, to const.
      REV. E. H. RICHARDSON, D. D., L. M.                     32.00
    Rindge. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.20
    Short Falls. Rev. I. W. C.                                 0.50
    Thornton’s Ferry. Ladies, by Mrs. Harriet N.
      Eaton                                                    2.25
    Temple. Mrs. W. K. $1; J. K. 50c.                          1.50
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               21.04
    Wilton. A. B. C.                                           0.50
    Wolfboro. Mrs. Anne S. Banfield, to const.
      RICHARD BANFIELD and ANNE FISKE BANFIELD, L.
      M.’s                                                    61.00


  VERMONT, $466.90.

    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($30 of
      which to const. MRS. F. C. WHITE, L. M.)                77.25
    Burlington. ESTATE of Mrs. R. S. Nichols, by
      B. S. Nichols                                          100.00
    Burlington. “A Friend” $30, to const. MISS
      ANNA E. CODEY, L. M.; N. S. H. $1; J. P. 50c.           31.50
    Castleton. Individuals                                     1.00
    Chester. G. H. C.                                          0.50
    East Hardwick. Ladies’ Soc., bbl. of C. and
      $3, by Mrs. H. W. Stevens, Sec.; Mrs. L. W.
      J. and Mrs. S. H. P. $1                                  4.00
    Fayetteville. Cong. Sab. Sch. $7; Asa Kidder $5           12.00
    Manchester. L. D. C.                                       0.50
    Newbury. ESTATE of Mrs. Mary A. Abbott, by
      George Leslie                                          100.00
    Plainfield. C. S.                                          0.26
    Pomfret. Seth Conant                                       2.00
    Pittsford. Cong. Soc.                                     50.00
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $33.34;
      J. H. B. 50c.                                           33.84
    Waitsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $23.38; “Miss
      A. T.” $5                                               28.38
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                            12.42
    West Glover. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                     2.50
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.00
    Williamstown. R. D. N.                                     0.50
    Winchester. “A Friend of Missions”                         2.25
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                       3.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,460.55.

    Amherst. L. S. Nash $2—Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $2
      and bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._                  4.00
    Andover. Peter Smith                                     500.00
    Andover. Free Ch. $55.35 and bbl. of
      dry-goods, _for Ind. Sch., Talladega C._—“A
      Friend” $4; H. C. $1; Miss S. E. J. 50c.; E.
      J. P. 25c.                                              61.10
    Auburn. “A Friend,” to const. JOHN DAVIS, L. M.           30.00
    Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $133.45;
      “Friend” $20                                           153.45
    Beverly. Dane St. Ch. and Soc.                            46.00
    Billerica. Dea. H. B. S.                                   0.50
    Boston. Walnut Ave. Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $128.28; Mrs. Emily P. Eayrs $30, to const.
      MISS EVELINE HOLCOMB. L. M.; C. G. Currier
      of Old South Ch. $25; Phillips Ch., “A. F.
      P.” $20; Central Ch. $10; Rev. Chas. Nichols
      $5; Mrs. B. P. 50c.                                    218.78
    Boston Highlands. E. E. B.                                 0.50
    Boxford. Mrs. Elizabeth Sayward, _for Ind.
      Sch. Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Brockton. Joseph Hewitt $5.—Mrs. B. Sanford,
      $2, _for a Student, Fisk U._                             7.00
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                           79.19
    Campello. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 30.17
    Cambridgeport. Geo. F. Kendall $5; G. B. C.
      50c.; A. A. P. 50c.                                      6.00
    Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                        74.21
    Chelsea. Friends 2 bbls. of C; Mrs. P. N. P.
      50c.                                                     0.50
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.00
    Chicopee. Third Ch. $39.20; Second Ch. 15c.               39.35
    Dalton. Mrs. Z. M. Crane                                 100.00
    Danvers. C. W. L.                                          0.50
    East Braintree. Miss R. A. F.                              0.50
    East Hampton. Payson Sab. Sch. $100; First Ch.
      and Sab. Sch. by W. H. Wright, $37.50                  137.50
    East Somerville. E. Stone $200; Franklin St.
      Ch. and Soc. $75.15                                    275.15
    East Weymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            10.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)
      $26.54; Young People’s Miss. Circle $20.05
      and 2 bbls of C.; Mrs. S. N. Briggs $10;
      Mrs. Maria Fay $5                                       61.59
    Freetown. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $13.45; “A
      Friend” $10                                             23.45
    Gardner. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (_of which $8 for
      Female Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._)                 76.72
    Granby. Mrs. John Church’s S. S. Class $18,
      and Mrs. R. H. Davis’ Class $12, _for Cal.
      Chinese M._, and to const. REV. R. HENRY
      DAVIS, L. M.—Cong. Sab. Sch. $10.43                     40.43
    Great Barrington. Mrs. L. M. Chapin                        5.00
    Greenfield. Mrs. R. C. H.                                  0.50
    Gilbertville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             26.80
    Gloucester. Evan. Ch. and Soc.                           102.25
    Grafton. A. W.                                             0.25
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            91.26
    Greenwich. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                12.00
    Groton. Elizabeth Farnsworth $20; Union Ch.
      and Soc. $8.13                                          28.13
    Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which $1
      _for C. M. Building in Cal._)                           11.70
    Hanover Centre. Mary A. Smith                              4.00
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc. $123.65;
      Mrs. S. C. 50c.; C. C. 50c.                            124.65
    Hingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.50
    Holbrook. Mrs. C. S. Holbrook and daughter,
      bbl. of C.
    Hollister. A. W. F. M.                                     1.00
    Holyoke. Second Ch.                                       15.00
    Hopkinton. D. S.                                           0.27
    Hubbardston. Sarah M. Ware                                10.00
    Hyde Park. Mrs. C. L. Foote and Charles P.
      Foote $5 ea.                                            10.00
    Ipswich. South Ch. and Soc. $26; Ladies’
      Prayer Meeting $5; Linebrook Ch. and Soc. $5            36.00
    Lancaster. Dea. L. R.                                      0.50
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.50
    Loudville. Mrs. W. S. R.                                   1.00
    Lowell. Eliot Ch. and Soc. $47.10; E. M. Buss
      $5; High St. Ch. and Soc. 3.83—Friends, bbl.
      of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._                          55.93
    Lynn. Josiah Richardson                                    3.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          69.75
    Medfield. Mrs. F. D. E.                                    1.50
    Methuen. W. M. $1; A. P. C. 50c.                           1.50
    Milford. Mrs. B. Haywood                                   1.75
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        61.51
    Monson. “Ladies” $8;—Miss E. A. W. $1, _for
      Midway Ch., Ga._                                         9.00
    Montville. Sylvester Jones                                 2.00
    Newbury. First Ch. and Soc. $8.50; E. G. P.
      50c.                                                     9.00
    Newburyport. Mrs. J. P. Cleaveland, a hhd. of
      C., _for Ind. Sch., Talladega C._—S. N. B.
      50c.                                                     0.50
    Newton. Freedman’s Aid Sew. Cir., by Ellen D.
      Jackson, $70. _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._—E. D. J. 50c.                                       70.50
    North Adams. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           32.15
    North Amherst. H. S. $1; W. L. R. 50c.                     1.50
    North Cambridge. _For Postage_                             0.10
    Northborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $23.09; Mrs.
      A. E. D. F. 50c.                                        23.59
    North Hadley. Mrs. E. B.                                   1.00
    North Leominster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      13.16
    North Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.64
    Norton. Mrs. E. B. Wheaton                                 5.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $35; and Sab.
      Sch. $15.67                                             50.67
    Peabody. T. S.                                             0.50
    Phillipston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           19.10
    Pittsfield. Asaph D. Foot                                 20.00
    Reading. Amos Temple                                     100.00
    Rochdale. S. P. $1; Mrs. R. W. 25c.                        1.25
    Salem. J. H. T.                                            0.60
    Sandwich. Mrs. E. W. Wells $5; H. H. Nye $2                7.00
    Scotland. Rev. Isaac Dunham                               10.00
    Southampton. Mrs. J. B. L.                                 0.50
    South Abington. Freedman’s Aid Soc. 2 bbls. of
      C., _for Tougaloo U._—N. N. 50c.                         0.50
    South Attleborough. Mrs. Harriet L. Draper,
      bbl. of C.
    South Boston. Phillip’s Ch.                               77.36
    South Weymouth. Second Ch. and Soc.                       48.00
    South Wilbraham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        5.00
    Springfield. Memorial Ch. $74.29; First Ch.
      $62.56; Mrs. J. D. L. $1                               137.85
    Sterling. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        40.00
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $19.50; Mrs. A.
      H. $1                                                   20.50
    Stoughton. Mrs. B. E. Capen                                2.00
    Sutton. J. W. M.                                           0.50
    Taunton. R. Luscombe                                       2.00
    Topsfield. Mrs. R. C. Towne and Friends, bbl.
      of C.
    Uxbridge. Willard Judson                                   2.00
    West Andover. Sab. Sch.                                   20.00
    Westborough. Rev. J. W. B.                                 0.50
    West Boylston. C. T. W.                                    0.50
    Westfield. Mrs. C. A. J.                                   1.00
    West Foxborough. J. M. P.                                  0.50
    West Medford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $15; “A
      Friend” $2                                              17.00
    West Medway. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              23.96
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $6.85; J. C.
      Carr $2                                                  8.85
    West Newton. ESTATE of Hadassah Stevens ($200
      _of which for Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._)             800.00
    West Stockbridge Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              11.38
    Weymouth. ESTATE of Abby C. Pratt                        582.30
    Whateley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               2.66
    Whitinsville. Executors, ESTATE E. W. Fletcher           200.00
    Whitinsville. Cong. Sab. Sch. $37; Cong. Ch.
      (ad’l) $5; Rev. J. R. Thurston $30; S. A. D.
      50c.                                                    72.50
    Williamstown. Miss Emily Beckwith                         10.00
    Winchendon. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $12.09; “A
      Friend” $10                                             22.09
    Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               138.50
    Worcester. Union Sab. Sch. $100; Plymouth Ch.,
      S. A. Pratt $25; M. W. 50c; Ladies’ Benev.
      Soc. of Plymouth Ch., by Mrs. C. M. Draper,
      Sec., 2 bbls. of C.                                    125.50
    Worthington. Mrs. M. S. Randall                            2.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $79.82.

    Bristol. Mrs. R. R.                                        1.00
    Newport. D. B. F.                                          0.50
    Peace Dale. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch. $49.82;
      Elmwood Cong. Ch. and Soc. $7.50; M. E. L.
      50c; L. M. W. 50c                                       58.32


  CONNECTICUT, $3,332.95.

    Ansonia. “M. R. B.”                                        1.00
    Cheshire. “A Friend”                                      39.00
    Colchester. Mrs. M. J. G.                                  0.50
    Collinsville. “Friends” $100, _for Ag. Dept.,
      Talladega C._; Mrs. N. A. Bently $5, _for
      Ind. Sch., Talladega C._;                              105.00
    Cornwall. Miss H. D. C.                                    0.60
    Cornwall Bridge. Geo. H. Swift                            10.00
    Bantam Falls. Eliada Kilbourn                              5.00
    Bethlehem. H. B.                                           1.00
    Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                                      9.85
    Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                     18.00
    Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch. $76.70; J. G. D.
      $1; V. C. and J. B. $1                                  78.70
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. $169.77, to const. FRANCIS
      O. LEWIS, ELLEN S. COOK, MRS N. L. BREWSTER,
      MRS. S. P. NEWELL and MRS. FRANK ATWOOD, L.
      M’S.—Ladies’ Home Miss. Ass’n $75, for _Ind.
      Sch., Talladega C._                                    244.77
    Burnside. Miss E. S.                                       1.00
    Danbury. E. B.                                             0.50
    Eastford. Cong. Ch.                                        7.64
    East Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                  60.00
    East Hampton. “Young People” $100, _for Ag.
      Dept., Talladega C._; Talladega Miss. Soc.
      $12, _for Ind. Sch., Talladega C._                     112.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                    158.43
    Glastonbury. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.
      $200; G. M. J. 60c                                     200.60
    Greenwich. Geo. A. Palmer $30; Israel Peck
      $5.50                                                   35.50
    Greton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.20
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch. $153.56; Mrs.
      Mary C. Bemis $30.—Mrs. F. P. H. Wood and
      Mrs. Geo. C. Perkins $20, _for Ind. Sch.,
      Talladega C._; Miss L. A. Bigelow $3, _for
      Ind. Sch. Talladega C._ (_freight_).—Mrs.
      John Olmsted $2.50; Mrs J. O. $1                       210.06
    Hebron. L. W. R.                                           0.50
    Litchfield. “L. M.”                                        3.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.25
    Middletown. A. Doolittle $5; H. E. S. $1                   6.00
    Milton. Mrs. Nelson T. Gorhan                              2.50
    Millington. Cong. Ch.                                      2.25
    Mt. Carmel. “A Friend”                                    30.00
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                 4.00
    New Britain. Fred. G. Mead $70; _for Theo.
      Scholarship, Straight U._—South Cong. Ch.
      $44.43; Mrs. Wm H. Smith $30, to const. MISS
      JULIA ANN KELSEY, L. M.—Mrs. Horace Wells
      $20, and Levi S. Wells $10, _for
      Scholarships, Straight U._—“Member South
      Cong. Ch.” $10; Mrs. A. A. 51c                         184.94
    New Haven. Mrs. Julia A. Dickerman $101;
      College St. Ch. $40; Taylor Ch. $6; Henry
      Johnson $5; S. S. T. and Mrs. E $1; C. A. S.
      $1; J. M. 50c; A. L. 51c                               155.01
    New London. Second Cong. Ch. $566.80; M. G. B.
      50c.; “Martha and Mary,” box of books                  567.30
    North Greenwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.31
    North Lyme. H. M.                                          0.50
    Norwalk. Ladies’ Benev. Ass’n of First Cong.
      Ch. $25; Mrs. Wm. B. St. John $3                        28.00
    Norwich. Buckingham Sab. Sch.                             25.00
    Old Lyme. “Three Friends”                                 13.00
    Stanwich. William Brush                                  100.50
    Stonington. R. Town                                        2.00
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Rocky Hill. Rev. Geo. Tillotson, _for Ind.
      Sch. Talladega C._                                      13.50
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               24.60
    Terryville. Dea. R. D. H. Allen $100; Cong.
      Ch. Sab. Sch. $70, _for Ag. Dept., Talladega
      C._                                                    170.00
    Thompsonville. D. P.                                       1.00
    Unionville. Cong. Ch. $30; Rev. J. A. Smith
      $25; Dr. C. L. Beach $10; _for Ag. Dept.
      Talladega C._—Edward Lyman $5                           70.00
    Wapping. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           32.00
    Washington. “A few Friends” $9, by H. S.
      Nettleton; F. A. F. $1                                  10.00
    Waterbury. First Cong. Ch. $150; “A Friend”
      $100                                                   250.00
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. CHARLES
      A. BALDWIN and ARTHUR E. FREEMAN, L. M.’s               60.00
    Weatoque. T. J. W.                                         1.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. $19.13; Mrs. E. C.
      Kimball $5                                              24.13
    West Meriden. E. K. Breckenbridge                         10.00
    West Winsted. Second Cong. S. S., R. E.
      Holmes’ Class                                            4.81
    Winsted. Second Cong. Sab. Sch. $100; C. J.
      Camp $50; J. T. Rockwell $20; Henry Gray
      $20., _for Ag. Dept. Talladega C._                     190.00
    Woodbury. First Cong. Ch. $11.50; C. I. Miner
      $5                                                      16.50
    Yalesville. M. E. B.                                       1.00


  NEW YORK, $794.92.

    Albany. First Cong. Ch.                                   75.00
    Batavia. Mrs. Anna V. S. Fisher                           20.00
    Berkshire. BEQUEST of Mary H. Allen, to const.
      LUCY E. ALLEN, L. M, by James Allen                     30.00
    Binghamton. Mrs. Harriet Halbert                           5.00
    Black Creek. J. S. and M. T. $1 ea                         2.00
    Brooklyn. Miss M. E. Horton $3; Mrs. Rev.
      George Hollis $2                                         5.00
    Canastota. Mr. and Mrs. R. H. Childs                       5.00
    Chestertown. R. C. C.                                      1.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                      5.00
    Coxsackie. Rev. M. Lusk.                                   3.00
    Deansville. “L.”                                           5.00
    Dryden. S. O. C.                                           0.50
    Dutchess Co. “A Friend,” _for Mobile, Ala._               75.00
    East Otto. Mrs. D. T.                                      0.35
    Fulton. J. C. Galispie, Almon Bristol and T.
      W. Chesebro $5 ea.; Dea. S. 50c                         15.50
    Gouverneur. B. R. S. and E. R. B.                          1.00
    Greenport. O. H.                                           0.50
    Homer. B. W. Payne and wife, to const. DEA.
      EBENEZER RANNEY, L. M.                                  30.00
    Hudson. Mrs. D. A. Jones $10; A. S. P. 50c                10.50
    Kiantone. Mrs. E. C. Hall’s Young Ladies’
      Bible Class                                              8.00
    Kinderhook. W. I.                                          0.75
    Lebanon. Thomas Hitchcock, Marvin Day and
      Alfred Seymour $5 ea.; J. H. W. $1                      16.00
    Lockport. Cong. Ch. $32.57; Cong. Sab. Sch.
      $30, to const. MISS FANNIE HAMILTON, L. M.              62.57
    Moira. Mrs. A. Dickinson.                                  1.25
    Morrisville. A. B. DeForest                               50.00
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.67
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  19.09
    New York. Mrs. Hannah Ireland $15—“A Friend”
      $10.50.—Wm. H. Ferrier $5, _for Ind. Sch.,
      Talladega C._—L. W. S. 35c                              30.85
    North Walton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. $8.09;
      Missionary Soc. $19.42                                  27.51
    Orient. Miss K. M. W.                                      0.75
    Penn Yan. W. W. Taylor $5; W. T. $1                        6.00
    Perry Centre. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Belle J.
      Sheldon, Sec.                                           15.50
    Perrysburgh. Rev. Wm. Hall                                18.00
    Pharsalia. “A few Friends,” by Rev. J. Clements            2.00
    Phœnix. Rev. H. P. Bake and family                         5.00
    Rochester. Mrs. A. E. Albright $5; A. H. 55c               5.55
    Sag Harbor. Mrs. A. E. W.                                  0.50
    Sidney Plains. Rev. S. Johnson, bal. to const.
      HON. O. C. WYMAN, L. M.                                  2.00
    Smyrna. Sab. Sch. Missionary Soc. of Cong. Ch.            20.00
    Sodus. D. T.                                               1.00
    Spencerport. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                    18.25
    Syracuse. Rev. J. C. H.                                    0.50
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                     70.00
    Tompkinsville. Mrs. M. S.                                  1.00
    Troy. M. and M. F. C.                                      0.50
    Volney. First Cong. Ch. $1.60, and Sab. Sch.
      $6.18                                                    7.78
    Walton. First Cong. Ch. $62.05.—Chas. S. Fitch
      $5, _for Mendi M._                                      67.05
    Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                                         20.70
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    West Camden. Mrs. A. L. C.                                 1.00
    West Farms. J. A.                                          0.50
    Westford. Mrs. G. R.                                       1.00
    West Greece. S. B. B.                                      0.50
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                        3.30
    Whitestown. James Symonds                                  5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $52.25.

    Bound Brook. Ladies’ Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      freight_                                                 2.75
    Irvington. Mrs. W. H. C.                                   1.00
    Morristown. Individuals                                    1.00
    Newark. Belleville Ave. Cong. Ch. (100
      subscribers _for Mag._) $30; Robert D. Weeks
      $6; David Owen $1, and bundle Song Rolls                37.00
    Newfield. Rev. C. Willey                                  10.00
    Paterson. Mrs. W. F.                                       0.50
    Raritan. Miss S. Provost, package of Papers.


  PENNSYLVANIA, $668.75.

    Centre Road Station. J. A. Scovil                          5.00
    Cherry Ridge. M. D.                                        1.00
    New Athens. A. B. McC.                                     1.00
    Philadelphia. Benjamin Coates                            500.00
    Philadelphia. Rev. Geo. Morris $100, _for a
      Teacher_.—W. P. F., $1.00; Miss M. E. M.
      50c.; Rev. H. L. P. 50c.                               102.00
    Pittsburgh. Third Presb. Ch. _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Pittston. Meth. Prot. Ch.                                  3.65
    Riceville. Cong. Ch.                                       2.85
    Washington. Dr. F. Julius Le Moyne, _for Le
      Moyne Sch._                                             38.25


  OHIO, $427.06.

    Alliance. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                  3.55
    Andover. O. B. Case                                        6.00
    Ashland. John Thompson                                     2.28
    Brighton. Mrs. L. A. Strong                                2.00
    Cleveland. Miss M. J. Weaver                               5.00
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  2.50
    Delta. Mrs. M. B. Tanner                                   2.00
    Dover. Second Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
    Freedom. Cong. Ch.                                         6.65
    Four Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.30
    Hudson. D. Trowbridge                                      3.00
    Germano. J. P.                                             0.50
    Granville. G. P. Bancroft                                  2.00
    Kingsville. Myron Whiting $12.50; Rev. Mr.
      Cummings $10; Mrs. Sarah Cummings $2.50,
      _for Ag. Dept., Talladega C._                           25.00
    Lenox. A. J. Holman                                        5.00
    Marietta. Mrs. E. W. Burgess                               5.00
    Medina. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., _for Ind. Sch.,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Morgan. L. C.                                              0.50
    Moss Run. M. B. F.                                         0.50
    Nelson. Mrs. M. A. Fuller                                  3.00
    North Bloomfield. “Friends,” _for Ag. Dept.,
      Talladega C._                                           62.37
    Norwalk. A. N.                                             1.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. $25.45.—Mrs. Jane
      Miller $10.00, _for Ag. Dept., Talladega
      C._—Mrs. J. S. B. 25c.                                  35.70
    Painesville. Cong. Ch. $36.43 ($2 of which
      from Mrs. Morley, _for Straight U._).—R. and
      R. C. Marshall $15; E. Ames $5.—D. E. Gove
      $1.50, _for Talladega C._                               57.93
    Peru. “Friends,” _for Ag. Dept., Talladega C._            46.50
    Radnor. Edward D. Jones                                    5.00
    Ravenna. Ira B. Cutts $5; S. H. $1                         6.00
    Ripley. Mrs. Mary Tweed                                    2.50
    Ruggles. Mrs. S. T.                                        0.25
    St. Clairsville. Wm. Lee, Sr.                              5.00
    Salem. A. W. A.                                            1.00
    Sandusky. H. C.                                            1.00
    Savannah. W. K.                                            1.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.00
    Springfield. Children’s Mission Circle $17,
      _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._—First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc. $11.28 ($5 of which _for Mendi
      M._)                                                    28.28
    Steubenville. “Friends”                                   35.00
    Sullivan. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Toledo. Mrs. P. G. H.                                      0.50
    Twinsburgh. Cong. Sab. Sch. $4.75; J. R.
      Parmele $2                                               6.75
    West Andover. Mrs. M. S. B.                                1.00
    Wellington. N. D. B. 50c.; C. F. 50c                       1.00
    Xenia. W. S. S.                                            0.50


  INDIANA, $6.50.

    Dublin. H. M.                                              0.50
    Madison. G. W. Southwick                                   5.00
    Newville. A. D.                                            1.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,004.91.

    Chicago. New Eng. Ch. Sab. Sch. $69.36, _for a
      Student, Fisk U._—N. E. Ch. M. C. Coll.
      $11.72; Union Park Cong. Ch. $31.49; Mrs.
      Wm. Balthir $1.50; W. S. 50c.                          114.57
    Collinsville. J. F. Wadsworth and wife                    10.00
    Crete. Sab. Sch., _for freight_                            2.10
    Elgin. First Cong. Ch. $14.20; Mrs. G. B. $1              15.20
    Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ                            58.50
    Galena. Miss Anna Bran                                     2.00
    Geneseo. Mr. and Mrs. C. Perry                            20.00
    Greenview. H. W. W.                                        0.50
    Hamlet. L. C.                                              1.00
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch. $51; Mrs. I. A. T. 60c.; C.
      L. C. 50c.                                              52.10
    Macomb. Rev. G. H. S.                                      1.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. W. Jackson $1.50; Mrs. C.
      I. O. V. $1                                              2.50
    New Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                    15.00
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch.                                       16.70
    Onargo. Mrs. L. C. Foster                                100.00
    Payson. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for a Student_                  20.00
    Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                             37.45
    Rochelle. Mrs. A. C. F.                                    1.00
    Rockford. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Saint Charles. W. B. Lloyd                                 5.00
    Seward. First Cong. Ch.                                   24.02
    Tonica. V. G. Lutz $5; W. B. 50c.                          5.50
    Waukegan. First Cong. Ch.                                  2.37
    Wheaton. “Friends”                                        23.40
    —— “Friends”                                             450.00


  MICHIGAN, $135.38.

    Adair. Henry Topping                                       5.00
    Alamo. J. H.                                               1.00
    Benzonia. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Birmingham. Rev. J. McC.                                   0.50
    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Detroit. “F. M. S.” 60c.; S. Z. 50c.; Mrs. H.
      A. 50c.                                                  1.60
    East Saginaw. Mrs. Mary W. Wilder                          4.00
    Grand Blanc. Cong. Ch. (with $13 ack. in Dec.
      receipts), _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                   20.00
    Grand Rapids. Rev. Geo. A. Pollard                         2.00
    Grass Lake. Joseph Swift $15.50; W. G. R. 25c.            15.75
    Hersey. Cong. Ch.                                          7.57
    Lansing. R. B.                                             0.50
    Newaygo. Rev. J. N. Hicks                                  5.00
    Oakwood. Cong. Ch.                                         6.05
    Olivet. Y. M. C. A. of Cong. Ch. $12.41; P. A.
      Stone $5                                                17.41
    Port Huron. Individuals                                    1.00
    St. Johns. A. J. B.                                        0.50
    St. Joseph. J. S.                                          0.50
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Romeo. Miss T. L. C.                                       0.50
    Union City. Andrew Lucas and family                        5.00
    Vermontville. Mrs. C. M. S.                                1.00
    White Lake. Mr. and Mrs. Robert Garner $20;
      Mrs. W. G. 50c.                                         20.50


  WISCONSIN, $201.37.

    Beloit. Second Cong. Ch. $28.35.—Second Cong.
      Sab. Sch. $12.01, _for a Student, Fisk
      U._—W. P. 50c.                                          40.86
    Fort Atkinson. Mrs. Caroline Smith                         5.00
    Geneva Lake. Presb. Ch.                                   20.00
    Oshkosh. H. S. M.                                          0.50
    Madison. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for a Student_                 25.00
    Menasha. “A Friend” $15; Cong. Ch. $12.31                 27.31
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.67
    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch.                                   28.03
    Raymond. T. Sands $5; C. S. Davis $1                       6.00
    Ripon. Rev. H. W. C.                                       0.50
    Sheboygan. Mrs. L. H. Chase                               10.50
    Union Grove. Dr. A.                                        1.00
    Waukesha. Cong. Ch. $24; V. Tichenor $5.                  29.00


  IOWA, $67.81.

    Burlington. Mrs. Hannah Everall                            5.00
    Carroll. Rev. G. W. P.                                     0.50
    Chester. Ladies’ Missionary Soc., bbl of C.
      and $2, _for freight_                                    2.00
    Clay. Cong. Ch.                                            5.50
    Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                          6.40
    Eldora. “Busy Bees” Cong. Sab. Sch. $10;
      Woman’s Cent. Soc. $4.85                                14.85
    Kellogg. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Lyons. “E. L. H.”                                          2.00
    Muscatine. E. W.                                           0.50
    Monroe. Cong. Ch.                                          3.56
    Seneca. Rev. O. Littlefield and wife.                      7.00
    Sherrills’ Mount. Rev. J. R.                               0.50
    Sioux City. Wm. K. Smith.                                  3.00
    Waltham. Wm. Mason                                        10.00


  KANSAS, $47.38.

    Albany. C. B. S.                                           0.50
    Atchison. Cong. Ch.                                       18.00
    Burlingame. M. S. L.                                       0.25
    Manhattan. Cong. Ch. $16.43; Cong. Sab. Sch.
      (Missionary Gardens) $7.88; Rev. Roswell
      Parker $2.00                                            26.31
    Reno Centre. Cong. Ch.                                     2.32


  MINNESOTA, $113.46.

    Austin. Cong. Ch. $16.08.—Cong. Sab. Sch.
      $8.55, _for a Student_                                  24.63
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      19.60
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 28.33
    Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch. $10, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._—First Cong. Ch. $8.90                18.90
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  12.00


  NEBRASKA, $8.50.

    Fontanelle. By Rev. R. Gaylord                             5.00
    Wayland. Miss S. P. Locke                                  3.50


  CALIFORNIA, $25.

    San Francisco. Mrs. N. Gray                               25.00


  OREGON, $17.10.

    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch.                                    7.50
    The Dalles. Cong. Ch.                                      9.60


  MARYLAND, $20.50.

    Baltimore. W. K. Karson $10; R. K. H. 50c.                10.50
    Federalsburgh. Sarah A. Beals                             10.00


  TENNESSEE, $412.50.

    Chattanooga. Rent $112; Cong. Ch. $29                    141.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   101.85
    Nashville. Fisk University                               169.65


  NORTH CAROLINA, $212.14.

    Raleigh. Public Fund $76.18; Washington Sch.
      $20.38; Cong. Ch. $2.50                                 99.06
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $106.75; Cong. Ch.
      $6.33                                                  113.08


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $186.50.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  186.50


  ALABAMA, $305.05.

    Athens. Trinity Sch.                                      68.50
    Huntsville. Mr. J. H. C.                                   0.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    155.50
    Selma. Cong. Ch. $7.75; First Cong. Ch. $6                13.75
    Talladega. Talladega College                              66.80


  GEORGIA, $107.37.

    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    23.50
    Savannah. Beach Inst.                                     83.87


  LOUISIANA, $107.25.

    New Orleans. Straight University                         107.25


  MISSISSIPPI, $1,067.00.

    Tougaloo. Public Fund                                    988.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                             79.00


  MISSOURI, $5.00.

    Saint Louis. Mrs. P. Chapman                               5.00


  INCOME FUND, $197.32.

    Graves Library, Atlanta University                       150.00
    Avery Fund, _for Mendi Mission_                           47.32


  SCOTLAND, $100.00.

    Kilmarnock. John Stewart, _for a Teacher_                100.00


  CANADA, $4.04.

    Paris. Mrs. N. Hamilton                                    4.04
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $16,751.93


    Total to Dec. 31st, 1877                   $42,305.54
    Of which for Debt                            1,693.02
                                               ——————————

    Total, excluding amount for Debt                      40,612.52
                                                         ——————————
    Total from Oct. 1st to Jan. 31st.                    $57,364.45

                                          H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                    _Ass’t Treas._

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Wentworth, N. H. Ephraim Cook                              5.00
    Andover, Mass. John Smith                                500.00
    Springfield, Mass. “H. M.”                               500.00
    —— Mass. “A Worshipper at Indian Orchard”                500.00
    Oxford, Mass. “S. C. P.”                                 100.00
    Newburyport, Mass. “A Friend”                              5.00
    Hartford, Conn. Erastus Collins                          200.00
    Stanwich, Conn. Wm. Brush                                100.00
    Guilford, Conn. Mrs. Mary G. Chittenden                   20.00
    Chattanooga, Tenn. Band of Hope, No. 1.                   30.00
    Nashville, Tenn. Teachers, Workers and
      Students of Fisk University (ad’l)                       8.00
    Charleston, S. C. Avery Inst., Proceeds of
      Concert                                                 38.60
    Orangeburg S. C. Ladies’ Miss. Assn’n of Cong.
      Ch.                                                      1.00
    Florence, Ala. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Savannah, Ga. First Cong. Ch.                             10.31
    Louisville, Ga. First Cong. Ch.                            0.40
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $2,023.31
    Previously acknowledged, Oct. 1st to Dec. 31st         1,693.02
                                                         ——————————
        Total to Jan’y 31st                               $3,716.33


  FOR TILLOTSON C. AND N. INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Exeter, N. H. Mrs. F. F. Olden                          $100.00
    East Hampton, Mass. Mrs. Emily G. Williston              100.00
    Middletown, Conn. Mrs. Anna H. Phillips.                  22.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                               $222.00


  BUILDING FUND.

    Kewanee, Ill. “A Friend,” _for Emerson Inst.,
      Mobile, Ala._                                          108.00
    Talladega, Ala. Rev. E. P. Lord                           10.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                               $118.00


  GREAT BRITAIN.

    London, Eng. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc. £290        $1,422.45

       *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy
with the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has
devoted its main efforts to preparing the =FREEDMEN= for their
duties as citizens and Christians in America and as missionaries
in Africa. As closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the
caste-persecuted =CHINESE= in America, and to co-operate with
the Government in its humane and Christian policy towards the
=INDIANS=. It has also a mission in =AFRICA=.


STATISTICS.

=CHURCHES=: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 11;
Ky., 5; Tenn., 4; Ala., 12; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 4.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 2. Total, 62.

=INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.=
_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta,
Ga.; Nashville, Tenn., Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and
Austin, Texas, 8; _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala; Memphis, Tenn.; 11; _Other
Schools_, 7. Total, 26.

=TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS=—Among the Freedmen, 209;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 16; in foreign lands, 10.
Total, 252. =STUDENTS=—In Theology, 74; Law, 8; in College Course,
79; in other studies, 5,243. Total, 5,404. Scholars taught by
former pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. =INDIANS= under
the care of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady =INCREASE= of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. =ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS= for our higher educational institutions,
to accomodate the increasing numbers of students; =MEETING HOUSES=,
for the new churches we are organizing; =MORE MINISTERS=, cultured
and pious, for these churches.

3. =HELP FOR YOUNG MEN=, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK   H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON     Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House
  CHICAGO    Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington St.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; To Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in an year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the =AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION= in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
“American Missionary Association,” New York City, to be applied
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States, it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                        FAIRBANKS’ SCALES.

                    THE STANDARD OF THE WORLD:

               FOLLOWING CERTIFICATE HAS JUST BEEN
                   RECEIVED FROM BANGKOK, SIAM.

[Illustration]

                       ENGLISH TRANSLATION.

=THIS IS TO CERTIFY=, _that Fairbanks’ Scales have been used at
H. S. M.’s Custom House for many years, and have given every
satisfaction, especially so far as durability is concerned, as it
is almost a wonder that they are not broken and smashed long ago,
considering the rough usage they are getting on board of boats,
lighters, sailing ships, steamers, on wharves and in warehouses,
where they have to be transported daily, having, for instance,
weighed about five millions of piculs Rice last year, with only
about a dozen scales, and without one accident._

                                                _A. LEYSER_,
                                      _Commissioner of Customs_.

  BANGKOK, NOV. 14TH, 1877.

PRINCIPAL WAREHOUSES:

  FAIRBANKS & CO., 311 Broadway, New York.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., Baltimore, Md.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., New Orleans.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., Buffalo, N. Y.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., Albany, N. Y.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., 403 St. Paul’s St., Montreal.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., London, Eng.
  FAIRBANKS, BROWN & CO., Boston, Mass.
  FAIRBANKS & EWING, Philadelphia, Pa.
  FAIRBANKS, MORSE & CO., Chicago.
  FAIRBANKS, MORSE & CO., Cincinnati, O.
  FAIRBANKS, MORSE & CO., Cleveland, O.
  FAIRBANKS, MORSE & CO., Pittsburgh.
  FAIRBANKS, MORSE & CO., Louisville, Ky.
  FAIRBANKS & CO., St. Louis, Mo.
  FAIRBANKS & HUTCHINSON, San Francisco, Cal.

    Manufacturers, E. & T. FAIRBANKS & CO., St. Johnsbury, Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      TO CHRISTIAN FAMILIES.

I respectfully invite the patronage of families for the NEW YORK
WEEKLY WITNESS, a paper specially adapted to interest them. It
has a very full synopsis of the news of the week, with the daily
comments thereon of the leading New York Dailies. It has also
very full and reliable market and financial reports, got up for
it with great care. It has many columns of family reading of the
most interesting character; and a Home Department, containing three
columns of letters from its lady readers, and one column of letters
from the children. It has a report of every day’s Fulton Street
Prayer-Meeting, which has been kept up from its first number, and
occasional Sermons by celebrated preachers. It has departments
for Agriculture, the Sunday-school Lesson, Temperance and general
correspondence, much of which is from the West and South, setting
forth the advantages of different States and Territories for
immigrants. The WITNESS is thoroughly evangelical, and a strenuous
advocate of total abstinence from intoxicating drinks and tobacco.
It is entirely independent of party or sect—aiming only to promote
the best interests of the people for time and eternity. To this
end it advocates Christian missions, Sabbath observance, and every
good cause. The WEEKLY WITNESS has attained the unparalleled
circulation, for a religious journal, of 85,000, and aims at a
much larger circulation. The price is only $1.50 a year, or 50
cents for four months, payable in advance, and the paper stops when
subscription expires. On 1st January, 1878, it began its seventh
year, in which I hope the circulation will be doubled. Specimen
copies will be sent free on application.

  _Witness Office, No. 7 Frankfort St., N. Y._         JOHN DOUGALL


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     1878. THE ADVANCE. 1878.

A Congregational and family religious paper, devoted to
Evangelistic, Missionary and Denominational Work. Every
Congregational family needs the ADVANCE for 1878.

(1.) It teaches the doctrines and polity generally approved by our
churches. (2.) It is published at Chicago, on the border of the
great Home Missionary field, and contains fresh discussion and
full intelligence of that work. (3.) Its Washington Editor, Rev.
W. W. Patton, D. D., President of Howard University, represents
the Church and Educational Work at the South, as well as other
topics of National and Political Importance. (4.) Its New York
Editor, Rev. R. B. Howard, is thoroughly advised of all important
Religious and Denominational movements at the East. (5.) Gen. O. O.
Howard writes from the Pacific Coast. He is now engaged on sketches
of his recent campaign against the Nez Perces Indians. (6.) We
publish the popular Sermons of Rev. T. DeWitt Talmage regularly.
(7.) Joseph Cook’s celebrated Boston Lectures appear every week.
(8.) A serial story by Pansy and Faye Huntington; a Children’s
page and occasional short stories by excellent authors, are among
our attractions. (9.) K. A. Burnell, the lay preacher, sends us
weekly notes of his preaching tour “Round the World.” He is now in
Asia. Our two thousand ministerial subscribers show what pastors
think of the paper. Its news of Western Churches is more full and
fresh than contained in any other paper. We send the ADVANCE one
year for $3.00; to ministers at $2.20. To old subscribers we will
send the ADVANCE and this Magazine one year for $3.40; to new
subscribers, remitting direct, for $3.10. =WEBSTER’S DICTIONARIES=
can be procured by getting two or more subscribers. For terms of
this offer see ADVANCE. Our “Illustrated Bible Studies” for S. S.
Teachers is but 50 cents a year to companies of ten. Our “Lesson
Leaves” for 1878 will be put at three-quarters of a cent each; a
hundred copies per month for $9.00.

                        C. H. HOWARD & CO.,

     _Chicago, 151 Fifth Ave._      _New York, 245 Broadway._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Boots and Professional Manuals.


                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish


Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.


Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

“A wonderful volume it truly is.”—_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”—_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._


Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait, 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.


Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.


Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Acts, $1.75; others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.”—_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._

                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               Boynton’s Celebrated Lightning Saws.

                [Illustration: PAT. MARCH 28 1876.]

                DOUBLE-EDGED UNIVERSAL PRUNING SAW.

     [Illustration: E. M. BOYNTON’S DOUBLE EDGED PRUNING SAW]

Handle is provided with holes to permit of attaching it to the pole
with the use of bolts. Sizes 14, 16, 18 and 20 inches. Prices,
14 and 16-in., 75c; 18 to 20-in., $1., by express. Cross-cut and
one-man Saws. 70c. per ft. =E. M. BOYNTON=. Manufact’r of all kinds
of First-class Saws, Saw sets, &c., and Sole Prop’r and Man’f’r of
the genuine pat’d Lightning Saws, 80 Beekman St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     The Ives Patent Lamp Co.

            Would call the attention of their friends
                   generally to their NEW STORE,

                  105 CHAMBERS ST., near Church,

To which they have just removed. They have many inducements to
offer, and many new styles to show.

                        Ives’s Patent Lamps

            Can be lighted, filled and trimmed without
                 removing globe, shade or chimney.

Sole Manufacturers of BLACKMEN’S PATENT REFLECTOR BASES. Most
perfectly adapted for use in Churches and Stores. Burns without
chimney. No smoke. No smell. Also sole agents for the AMERICAN
BURNER. The best in the market, and adapted to the Reflector Bases.

                     THE IVES PATENT LAMP CO.,
                              =105 Chambers,= near Church St., N. Y.
  _Call or send for Circular._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      IMPORTANT TO CLERGYMEN:

               A Time-Saving and Labor-Saving Book,

                         _Of Great Value_

                 TO PREACHERS AND BIBLE SCHOLARS.

                          JUST PUBLISHED,

                        HOMILETICAL INDEX:

                          A HAND-BOOK OF

       TEXTS, THEMES, AND AUTHORS, FOR THE USE OF PREACHERS
                   AND BIBLE SCHOLARS GENERALLY.

     _Embracing Twenty Thousand Citations of Scripture Texts,
                and of Discourses Founded Thereon,
                   Under a Twofold Arrangement._

I.—TEXTUAL.

In which all the principal Texts of Scripture, together with the
various Themes they have suggested, are quoted and set forth in the
order of the Sacred Canon, from Genesis to Revelation; to which is
added a list of passages cited from the Old Testament in the New.

II.—TOPICAL.

In which Bible Themes, with reference to Texts and Authors, are
classified and arranged in ALPHABETICAL ORDER, forming at once a
_Key_ to Homiletical Literature in general, and a complete Topical
Index of the Scriptures on a New Plan, with valuable Appendices.

                    By J. H. PETTINGELL, A. M.,

                      _With an Introduction_,

                      BY GEO. E. DAY, D. D.,

           PROFESSOR OF BIBLICAL THEOLOGY, YALE COLLEGE.


THE HOMILETICAL INDEX is undenominational, citing and referring to
the published discourses and writings of the best preachers and
commentators of all ages and of every name.

It is a work of great research, unique in its character, and so
admirably arranged as to bring within the compass of 320 octavo
pages the cream of hundreds of volumes, and to transform every
Biblical scholar’s library, and our larger public libraries, into
one complete Homiletical Commentary, that can be easily handled,
while it refers him, at once, to what any one of some thousands of
leading divines have said or written upon any particular passage of
Scripture.

Its object and plan are very heartily commended by many of our
representative men of different denominations, who have had the
opportunity of inspecting, in advance, specimen pages. Four
Appendices, containing much valuable matter, have since been added,
and it is believed that the whole volume now complete, will fully
justify their favorable anticipation.

          _One Octavo Volume of 320 Pages. Price $3.00._

      Interleaved edition, for the convenience of those who
        may wish to enter new works as they are published,
          and their own discourses, 50 cents additional.

                FOR SALE BY BOOKSELLERS GENERALLY.

Sent, postage paid, to any address on receipt of the price. Address

  D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers, 549 and 551 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

               59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment.

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.


They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable Transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         THE INDEPENDENT.

                         In Its 30th Year.

            Well and Favorably Known the World Over as
               the BEST Religious Weekly Newspaper.
                It Retains all its Most Desirable
                   Features, and adds New Ones.

                         Cook’s Lectures.

These famous Lectures, delivered in Boston every Monday, by
the Rev. Joseph Cook, are published in full, together with the
introductory remarks.

                             PREMIUMS!

We offer Rev. Joseph Cook’s valuable new volumes, entitled
“BIOLOGY,” “TRANSCENDENTALISM,” and “ORTHODOXY,” embodying in a
revised and corrected form, the author’s last winter’s remarkable
Monday Lectures. They are published in handsome book form, with
colored illustrations, by James R. Osgood & Co., of Boston. We will
mail a copy of either volume, postpaid, to every subscriber to
THE INDEPENDENT who remits us =$3= for a year in advance; or any
subscriber may remit =$5.50=, and we will send him The Independent
for two years, in advance, and any two volumes, postpaid; or for
=$8=, we will send him THE INDEPENDENT for three years, in advance,
and all the volumes, postpaid.

                       AN ASTONISHING OFFER!

Worcester’s Dictionary, (Price $10), bound in Library Sheep,
1854 pages, over =1,000= wood-cuts, given away FREE, for =3= New
Subscribers and =$9=.

Subscription Price $3 per Annum in advance.

☞ Specimen copies (giving full descriptions of other very valuable
Premiums) sent free.

    Address                               =THE INDEPENDENT=,
  P. O. Box 2787.                                   =New York City=.

☞ Cut out this advertisement, as it will not appear again.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850,

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS,

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

      C. Y. WEMPLE,
              _Vice-President_.

      J. L. HALSEY,
              _Secretary_.

      S. N. STEBBINS,
              _Actuary_.

      H. Y. WEMPLE,
      H. B. STOKES,
              _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE

                          MUTUAL BENEFIT

                        LIFE INSURANCE CO.

                           NEWARK, N. J.

                 Incorporated 1845. Purely Mutual.

                     ASSETS, JANUARY 1, 1877.

                          $32,260,324.75.

                    LEWIS C. GROVER, PRESIDENT.

            JAS. B. PEARSON, _Vice-President_.

                          EDWARD A. STRONG, _Secretary_.

            BENJ. C. MILLER, _Treasurer_.

                                B. J. MILLER, _Actuary_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       FULLER, WARREN & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          STOVES, RANGES,

                 Furnaces, Fire-Place Heaters, &c.

         THE LARGEST ASSORTMENT AND VARIETY IN THE MARKET.

                        EXCLUSIVE MAKERS OF

                 _P. P. Stewart’s Famous Stoves_.

We continue to make a discount of twenty-five per cent. from our
prices on these well-known Cooking and Parlor Stoves, to Clergymen
and College Professors. Orders and letters in response to this
notice, addressed to our New York house, will receive prompt
attention. ☞ Special terms to _=Clergymen=_ on all our Goods. ☜

Send for Catalogues and Circulars to

                                        FULLER, WARREN & CO.
                                            236 Water St., New York.

    TROY.                  CHICAGO.                       CLEVELAND.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           COOPERS’ BEST

                      STATIONARY AND PORTABLE

                           Steam Engines

                    Circular Saw Mills,

                         French Burr Grist Mills,

                          Mill Machinery

                           AND SUPPLIES,

                   Millwrights and Contractors.

                          CIRCULARS FREE.

                         Cooper M’f’g Co.

            State what is
                Wanted.                 Mt. Vernon, Ohio.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Morton’s Gold Pens.

                       ALSO EVERY VARIETY OF

                  _GOLD, SILVER, CELLULOID, PEARL
                       AND IVORY PENCILS AND
                            PEN CASES_.

These Goods have stood the test of nearly thirty years, and no
pains or expense is spared to maintain their character as the best
Goods in the market.

                THE TRADE SUPPLIED AT LOWEST TERMS.

☞ Where these Goods are not found on sale, they can be ordered
directly from MORTON by mail.

                     No. 25 Maiden Lane, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY, N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE THIRTY-SECOND VOLUME OF

                                THE

                       American Missionary,

                      ENLARGED AND IMPROVED.


                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

Besides giving news from the Institutions and Churches aided by the
Association among the Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the
Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa,
it will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, and shall be glad to increase
the number indefinitely, knowing from experience that to be
informed of our work is to sympathize with, and desire to aid it.

The Subscription Price will be, as formerly, =Fifty Cents a Year,
in Advance=. We also offer to send =One Hundred copies to one
address=, for distribution in Churches or to clubs of subscribers,
for $30., with the added privilege of a Life Membership to
such person as shall be designated. The Magazine will be sent
gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons indicated on Page 92.
Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                   H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t. Treas.,
                                          56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine will henceforth be devoted to
the interests of Advertisers, to whom our low rates and large
circulation give its pages special value. Our readers are of the
best and most enterprising in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitute them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department,
and solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to
advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                                  J. H. DENISON, 56 Reade St., N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            LESTER SAW.

  The New Lester Saw is Made of Iron, with all the working parts
    of Steel, and Contains all known Improvements to this Date.

[Illustration]

It is handsomely painted red and green, with red stripes, and
presents a beautiful appearance. Those parts which are not painted
are either polished or japanned. We warrant the Saw to be just as
herein stated, and we know it will give entire satisfaction, being
a more expensive machine than those which we formerly sold for $25.

It consists of—

FIRST.—A =SCROLL-SAW=, with Tilting-Table for inlaid work; arms 18
inches in the clear; clamps which will hold saws of any length or
width, and face them in four different directions; cutting lumber
from one-sixteenth to one inch in thickness; speed, 1,000 strokes
per minute.

SECOND.—A =CIRCULAR-SAW=, two and one-half inches in diameter,
which will cut lumber one-half inch and less; with an iron table,
four by five inches.

THIRD.—A =DRILLING ATTACHMENT=, with six Stubbs’s Steel Drills, of
various sizes, for wood or iron work.

FOURTH.—An =EMERY WHEEL=, with wide and narrow rim.

FIFTH.—A =TURNING-LATHE=, with iron ways and rest, steel centres,
and three best steel turning tools; length of ways, 15 inches;
distance between centres, 9 inches; swing, 3 inches; length of
slide-rest, 4½ inches; number of revolutions per minute, 7,000.

Also, with each machine, six Saw-Blades, a Wrench, Screw-Driver,
extra Belt, and two sheets of Designs, with a nice box for the
small tools, and a box for the whole machine. It is taken apart
when shipped, and packed in a box, but the working parts are all
left in place, and the frame is put together again by a single bolt.


              PRICE FOR EVERYTHING ABOVE NAMED $8.00.

       The Same, without the Lathe and Circular-Saw, $6.00.

When desired, we furnish with the Lathe a very nice Drill-Chuck,
for working metal, and a Tail-Stock, with a screw centre, for $2
extra.

No Saw will be sent C. O. D. The machine alone weighs 47 lbs., and,
with the box, 70 lbs. The express charges on one machine are about
$2 for 1,000 miles, and about half as much by fast freight. Two
machines by freight go at about the same price as one. Money may be
sent by mail, by Post-Office Order, registered letter, or draft on
New York. For sale by dealers at same price, with the addition of a
reasonable amount for freight.

_We also keep a full stock of Tools and Supplies in the
Bracket-Sawing line._

          MILLER’S FALLS CO., 74 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


“breath” changed to “breadth” on page 70. (its length and breadth)

“puting” changed to “putting” on page 87. (before putting their
hands under)

Missing zeros added to the amount column in the Sidney Plains entry
on page 89.

“Taladega” changed to “Talladega” in the Pittsburgh entry on page
90.

“freinds” changed to “friends” on page 94. (the attention of their
friends)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 03, MARCH, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.