VOL. XXXIII.                                            NO. 5.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            MAY, 1879.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                   129
    THE LAND—ITS WEALTH AND ITS WANT                             130
    WAR OR MISSIONS                                              132
    THE NEGRO HEGIRA                                             133
    WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN—CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH        135
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                         137
    GENERAL NOTES                                                138

  THE FREEDMEN.

    TOUR INTO THE SOUTHWEST: Rev. J. E. Roy, D. D.               140
    GEORGIA, ATLANTA—Lady Missionary Needed                      143
    ALABAMA, MONTGOMERY—Tenantry, Promising Field, &c.: Rev.
      F. Bascom, D. D.                                           143
    ALABAMA, MOBILE—Emerson Institute: Rev. D. L. Hickok         145
             MARION—Revival of Education; Rev. Geo. E. Hill      146
    LOUISIANA—Straight University: Prof. J. K. Cole              147
    TEXAS—CORPUS CHRISTI—Revival                                 148
    TENNESSEE—Yellow Fever Fund                                  149

  AFRICA.

    NATIVE PREACHERS—ADVANCE CALLED, &c.                         150

  THE CHINESE.

    SOME POINTS ON THE CHINESE QUESTION: Rev. W. C. Pond         151

  RECEIPTS                                                       153

  CONSTITUTION                                                   157

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS &c.                                    158

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK.

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. Tobey, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Hon. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, Ll. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. Strieby, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.
    EDGAR KETCHUM. ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LUSTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries above; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

should be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Ass’t Treasurer, No. 56 Reade
Street, New York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West
Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXIII.     MAY, 1879.         No. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

We wish to remind our readers that the offer of Mr. Arthington,
as it has come under our consideration by the report of the
Foreign Committee, and as it has been put before them by its
publication in the MISSIONARY for April, is still commended to
their consideration, and open to acceptance or declinature, as they
may decide. We are well aware that such great things are not to be
lightly or suddenly decided. It is a subject which demands careful
weighing, and all the light which may be gained from earthly
as well as from heavenly sources. The first offer was not made
suddenly or unadvisedly. Dr. O. H. White, of the Freedmen’s Aid
Society of England, writes us that he conversed with Mr. Arthington
about it more than a year ago, who said then, “_I will think of it,
and you pray earnestly that Robert Arthington may be led to a right
decision._” We can say nothing better now. Do you, friends, think
about it, and we will pray earnestly that you may be led to a right
decision.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have just received from the estate of the late Charles Avery, of
Pittsburgh, Pa., $12,000 as an endowment, the interest to be used
in the work of African evangelization. As the money has just come
to hand as we are going to press, there has been no opportunity for
action on the part of the Executive Committee as to its specific
appropriation. It may be deemed advisable to use it in furtherance
of the mission proposed to us by Mr. Arthington, of Leeds, England.

In behalf of Africa and her descendants on two continents, we
cannot forbear another tribute to the memory of Mr. Avery, and to
his executors who have so faithfully carried out his benevolent
wishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. W. H. Willcox, of Reading, Mass., and his brother, Rev. G.
B. Willcox, D.D., of Stamford, Conn., have returned from a tour
among our institutions of the South, in which they have been
accompanied by District Secretary Pike. It is with no small degree
of pleasure that we record their great satisfaction in what they
saw and their hearty approval of the work, and the proof they have
given of their sincerity in it. It is well known that Mr. Willcox
has been acting in behalf of Mrs. Daniel P. Stone, of Malden,
Mass., in the distribution of a large fund among the educational
institutions of our land. As a result of his observation of the
work done at Atlanta and Fisk Universities, he has appropriated
one hundred thousand dollars to be divided equally between these
two institutions. This affords aid, which is greatly needed, for
the enlargement of the work at these most important places. It
will go into buildings and other permanent equipment. We devoutly
wish that men and women who have money to give would go and do
likewise,—visit our institutions for the education of the Freedmen,
see the work which is being done, and the work which needs to
be done, and then act in the light they have gained from actual
observation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. B. C. Church, of Goliad, Texas, who has been long and
faithfully occupied in our service, needs a _buggy_, not for
pleasure-driving, we assure our readers, but that he may be able
to visit not only his immediate field, but the new station at
Flatonia, as often as may be needed for the supervision of that
new and promising work. He says “the running part will do, and a
second-hand one at that.” Surely that is a modest request. Is there
not some one of our readers who has such a vehicle to spare for the
Lord’s work, _top and all_?

       *       *       *       *       *

Two months ago, among our _Items from the Field_ was a plea,
condensed into less than two lines, for an organ for the church at
Orangeburg, S. C. A few days after, Mr. S. T. Gordon generously
offered to give us the needed instrument, and it is now helping
“the service of song in the house of the Lord” in that place.
The pastor writes: “We have received that invaluable gift, the
cabinet organ donated by Mr. S. T. Gordon in aid of the day and
Sunday-school and church work in this field. For this goodness
the children, the congregation and ourselves unite in sending
Mr. Gordon and the A. M. A. ten thousand grateful thanks. And we
beseech the Lord to abundantly reward this labor of love. It will
afford us very great aid indeed.” It is encouraging to receive such
prompt responses to wants thus simply made known. We are emboldened
to call attention to a similar petition for an organ, in the letter
from Corpus Christi, Texas. What other generous and prompt friend
will be moved to answer, “_Here it is?_”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LAND—ITS WEALTH AND ITS WANT.

Among the explorers of the eastern part of Equatorial Africa no
other has given us so full descriptions of the land, its wants and
woes, and its brilliant possibilities, as Sir Samuel Baker. And he,
too, in his “Ismailia,” traverses largely the territory suggested
for our occupation by Mr. Arthington. The following paragraphs are
from his description of the natural scenery, and of the beauty and
fertility of the land on the east side of the Nile above and below
Fatiko. Is this not a pleasing picture of a portion of our proposed
field?

“I reveled in this lovely country. The fine park-like trees were
clumped in dark-green masses here and there. The tall dolape-palms
(Borassus Ethiopicus) were scattered about the plain, sometimes
singly, at others growing in considerable numbers. High and bold
rocks, near and distant mountains, the richest plain imaginable in
the foreground, with the clear Un-y-Amé flowing now in a shallow
stream between its lofty banks, and the grand old Nile upon our
right, all combined to form a landscape that produced a paradise.
The air was delightful. There was an elasticity of spirit, the
result of a pure atmosphere, that made one feel happy in spite of
many anxieties. My legs felt like steel as we strode along before
the horses, with rifle on shoulder, into the magnificent valley,
in which the mountains we had descended seemed to have taken
root. The country was full of game. Antelopes in great numbers,
and in some variety, started from their repose in this beautiful
wilderness, and having for a few moments regarded the strange
sights of horses, and soldiers in scarlet uniform, they first
trotted and then cantered far away. The graceful leucotis stood in
herds upon the river’s bank, and was the last to retreat. * * * * *
Magnificent trees (acacias), whose thick, dark foliage drooped near
the ground, were grouped in clumps, springing from the crevices
between huge blocks of granite. Brooks of the purest water rippled
over the time-worn channels, cut through granite plateaux, and as
we halted to drink at the tempting stream, the water tasted as cold
as though from a European spring. The entire country on our left
was a succession of the most beautiful rocky undulations and deep,
verdant glades, at the bottom of which flowed perennial streams.
The banks of these rivulets were richly clothed with ornamental
timber, the rich foliage contrasting strongly with the dark gray
blocks of granite, resembling the ruins of ancient towers.”

But this land, so rich and beautiful, is all going to waste. Its
game and cattle are doomed to as swift destruction as the countless
herds of buffalo and antelope which only fifteen years ago thronged
the prairies of Dakota. We copy from the same source this picture
of the waste which is the sure precursor of want.

“By the Nile traders’ arrangements the companies of Abou Saood
receive as their perquisite one-third of all the cattle that may be
stolen in successful razzias. The consumption of cattle by these
brigands is enormous. All flour is purchased in exchange for flesh,
while flesh is also necessary for food: thus the cow is being eaten
at both ends. The frightful drain upon the country may be imagined
by the following calculation, which is certainly below the truth:

“If 1,000 loads of ivory must be carried to Ismailia,

  2,000 cows are required as payment of carriers;
  1,000 belong to the brigands as their perquisite;
    300 are necessary to feed the native carriers and soldiers during
        the journey;
  —————
  3,300 cows are required to deliver 1,000 loads of ivory a distance
        of 165 miles from Fatiko to Ismailia (Gondokoro).

        A station of 35 men consumes daily                  700 lbs.
        In addition they require to exchange for flour      350 lbs.
                                                          ——————————
        Daily consumption of flesh                        1,050 lbs.

        The oxen of the country do not average more than 170 lbs.
        cleaned.

  2,255 beasts are thus required annually.
  —————
  5,555 oxen are necessary to feed and pay for the transport from a
        station only 350 strong, according to the customs of White
        Nile brigandage.

“It must be remembered that at least a thousand, and sometimes
double that number of slaves, are prisoners in each station. All
these must be fed. The same principle is adopted in the exchange
of flesh for flour; thus the expenditure of cattle is frightful.
Not only oxen, but all the breeding cows and young calves are
killed without the slightest reflection. No country can support
such wilful waste; thus, after many years of ravage, this beautiful
country has become almost barren of cattle. The central districts,
occupied by the slave-traders, having been denuded of cattle, it
has become necessary to make journeys to distant countries.”

But this is not the worst aspect of affairs. For by how much a man
is better than a beast, by so much his life is more sacred, and
to be guarded with more jealous care. Read this story of a slave
raid, its treachery, its brutality, its capture not only of slaves,
but its slaughter of many times the number led away to sale. But
this is not all; for in the pages of “Ismailia” follows the record
of a dreadful retribution in which the whole 103 of Abou Saood’s
men are put to death and 150 of their allies. This is but one of
many like scenes which have helped to make the slave regions of
Africa as degraded as they are found to-day.

“A man named Ali Hussein was a well known employé of Abou Saood.
This ruffian was an Arab. He was a tall, wiry fellow, with a
determined but brutal cast of countenance, who was celebrated
as a scoundrel among scoundrels. Even his fellows dreaded his
brutality. There was no crime that he had not committed, and as
his only virtue was extreme daring, his reputation was terrible
among the native population. He had arranged to make a descent
upon the Umiro tribe, about six days’ march to the southeast. He
accordingly sent natives as spies with specious messages to the
Umiro, announcing his intention of visiting them to purchase ivory.
With a party increased by volunteers from other stations to a force
of about 300 men, he arrived at Umiro. The simple natives received
him gladly and showed extreme hospitality. The country was thickly
populated and abounded with vast herds of the finest cattle. After
a week’s sojourn among the Umiro, during which he had received
large presents of elephants’ tusks and seventy head of oxen from
the confiding natives, the treacherous ruffian gave an order to
his brigands at sunset. They were to be under arms an hour before
daybreak on the following morning, to set fire to the adjacent
villages of their generous hosts and to capture their large herds
of cattle, together with their women and children.

“At the time appointed, while every Umiro slept, unconscious of
approaching danger, several villages were surrounded, and volleys
of musketry were poured upon the sleeping inmates. The straw huts
were ignited, and the flames rapidly spread, while a massacre
commenced similar to the butcheries to which the slave-hunters were
so well accustomed. The Umiro, thus taken by surprise, and appalled
by so dastardly a treachery, were easily defeated. Their children
and wives were captured, together with large herds of cattle, which
are celebrated for their size. All these were driven in triumph to
Fatiko.”

We only ask, in conclusion, is not this a field for Christian
men to occupy—this fair land, with such means of supporting life,
and with horrors like these enacted year by year, against which
the presence of even a few white Christian men would be a most
effectual check?

       *       *       *       *       *


WAR OR MISSIONS?

Christian England is at war with the Zulus, not altogether
successfully, we fear not altogether justly. It seems to be about
the same question which is at issue perpetually between the United
States Government and the Indians—a disputed strip of territory
lying between Transvaal and Zululand is, by arbitration mutually
agreed upon, decided to belong of right to the Zulus. But the Dutch
Boers who had settled therein decline to give up their claims. The
English Government, to whom that territory had been transferred,
defend them in maintaining their resistance to what had been
declared to be the rightful owner, and because King Cetywayo is a
small sovereign, the Queen on whose dominions the sun never sets
proposes to compel him. This is about the story as it comes to us.
So Christian England and America—not the Christianity in England
and America—treat their poor neighbors.

Now, in the prosecution of this Zulu war thousands of men are
sent out to do battle—generals, captains, common soldiers. Money
is freely spent, millions of dollars, to keep a rude race from
acknowledged rights. Blood is spilt and lives are sacrificed, not
by the one or two, but by the hundred. But there is another battle
to be fought in Africa, in the interests of the Christianity that
is in England and America; a battle against superstition, and all
the ignorance and violence included in it, against the slave trade
and its demoralizing influences. It, too, will cost men and money.
In its accomplishment, lives will be laid down. Already in the new
fields opening, one and another have fallen, until six, perhaps,
have thus far given up their lives in this cause. The advance
guard, the scouts, have not all escaped the perils of such service.
It costs money, too; but it will not cost half as much to convert a
savage African as it will to kill him. Missions are cheap compared
with war.

And then, look at the end of it all. Money and blood to extend
territory, to defend a flag! Where is the treasury, and where the
lives ready to be laid down that the banner of the Prince of Peace
may be set up in Equatorial Africa, and its inhabitants be made
subjects of Him whose dominion hath no end?

Read these emphatic words of _David Livingstone_, so well
illustrated by his own quietly heroic life:

“We talk of ‘sacrifices’ until we fear the word is nauseous to
God. We have no English female missionary biography worth reading,
because it is all polluted by the black man’s idea of sacrifice. It
ought not so to be. Jesus became a missionary and gave His life for
us. Hundreds of young men annually leave our shores as cadets. When
any dangerous expedition is planned by Government, more volunteers
apply than are necessary to man it. On the proposal to send a band
of brave men in search of Sir John Franklin, a full complement
for the ships could have been procured of officers alone, without
any common sailors. And what thousands rushed to California from
different parts of America on the discovery of gold! How many
husbands left their wives and families! How many Christian men tore
themselves away from all home endearments to suffer and toil and
perish by cold and starvation on the overland route! How many sank
from fever and exhaustion on the banks of the Sacramento! Yet no
word of sacrifices there! Our talk of sacrifices is ungenerous and
heathenish.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO HEGIRA.

It is not many months since we had to record the Liberian exodus
fever. The movement which excited so great hopes among the deluded
blacks has passed out of sight, and the holders of ten-dollar
shares in the barque Azor are no nearer the tropical shores of
Africa than they were a year ago. From those who went out in so
ill-advised a manner, for a long time almost nothing came back to
us but their wail of suffering as they reached their journey’s end.

And now another impulse has seized upon thousands apparently of the
negro population of Mississippi and Louisiana, to leave the places
where they were born and reared and seek new homes. As early as
the middle of March probably fifteen hundred had found their way
to St. Louis under the impression, it is said, that they would be
supported in that city and provided with free transportation to
Kansas, where, on arrival, they would receive from the Government,
lands, mules, money and agricultural implements. A small proportion
of them appeared to be in comfortable circumstances, and proceeded
by steamer or rail to Kansas City or Topeka. Others were entirely
destitute and dependent from the first on charitable aid.
Thousands more were reported as only deterred from coming by lack
of means to pay their way up the river. The mayor and citizens
of St. Louis were in quite a panic over their visitors. What
should they do with them, or how keep them away? But the feeling
of kinship led the colored people of the city to give them such
welcome as they might. The basements of three colored churches were
opened to them, and food and shelter were generously given by their
brethren according to the flesh, and they were helped toward their
destination as far as might be.

Thus another is added to the many strange, sad stories in the
history of this dark-skinned race. This sudden impulse moving upon
this great mass of men and women may not have been reasonable,
and yet it must have had a reason. Kansas seems to be to them a
magical name, synonymous with freedom, friends and happiness, in
their crude thought. It was sought to turn some of them to Iowa,
where work and pay were offered; but no, Kansas was the goal from
which they could not be turned away. There seems to be no possible
interpretation of this so general migration, other than that they
have given up in despair the thought of peace or prosperity in
their old homes. For of all the inhabitants of our soil they are
the least migratory in their nature; they cling to the old State
and the old homestead on which they were reared. But repeated
wrongs have worked at last on their slow minds the conviction
that better things can only be in store for them far away. Not
political deprivations, for they seem easily to have given up that
contest, and they “don’t vote much;” but the wrongs of a hard
tenantry system, by which they have been compelled to rent land
at $10 an acre for the year—land worth not much more than that at
sale—with various other extortionate charges by the way, bringing
the laborer out at the year’s end no better, but rather the worse
off for all his toil, and with no liberty even of complaint; these
are the things which have at length wrought out their natural and
inevitable result.

The consequences of this movement, if it be suffered to go on—and
who can stop it?—are manifold and of most serious import. The
planters are already alarmed at the lack of laborers for the year
which is just opening upon them. A desertion of “hands” is a most
dire calamity in an agricultural community. Political changes
may follow those of population, and if this hegira goes on, the
proportion of representation may be seriously changed between
Louisiana and Kansas.

There can be no question but that the negro can, if he be well
treated, do better in the Gulf States than in the cold climate of
Kansas—at raising cotton and the sugar-cane than wheat and stock.
Is there no serious warning in this movement to the people of those
States?—a lesson not political so much as industrial; an intimation
that fair treatment even of the lowest, poorest and most ignorant
classes, especially if they are held by no artificial bond like
ownership, is essential to a rendering of the service for which
they were valued once as slaves, and for which they are no less
indispensable as freemen. There is policy as well as right in
justice, and the law of gravitation is as real and as irresistible
in masses of men as in the realm of material things. The South
needs the negro quite as much as the negro needs the South; and
unless its leaders of thought and action help its people to
recognize their mutual dependence, and teach them to conciliate and
not to abuse the arm that is ready to sow and gather their crops,
they will have to do without it. The present hegira is but a hint
of what may be. Is it not a hint, also, as to how so great a loss
may be avoided? For, after all, dislike the truth who may, the
negro is “a man and a brother.”

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN.

Every once in a while a feeling prevalent in the churches gets
voice in the question: “Cannot women find some recognized method of
doing more for the elevation of the freed women of the South than
they are doing now?” There has been an unwillingness on the part of
many to agitate this question lest there might be in it a seeming
antagonism to the work of the Woman’s Board; a work that in origin
and development is so clearly providential. Still the want has
been keenly felt. Some attention has been given it, and in a few
instances the thought has developed into action.

Nearly two years ago Mrs. Zachary Eddy, of Detroit, interested a
number of ladies in Eastern Michigan in the matter, and the result
was that these ladies became responsible for the support of a lady
missionary, to be appointed by the American Missionary Association,
to work exclusively among the freed women; and the work then begun
has been steadily sustained ever since by Miss Hattie Milton, at
Memphis, Tenn. It is no longer an experiment, it is now a success.
Miss Milton, in a letter, not long since, says: “This has been the
happiest year of my life; for this work has its own reward, both to
the missionary and those who send her, which is more valuable than
silver or gold. I sometimes think the angels might almost envy us
in this work.”

Within a few months the ladies connected with the First and Second
Churches of Oberlin have united to support a lady missionary
among the freed women. The money is already provided for, and the
missionary will soon start on her mission of love. And now I learn
that the young ladies connected with the Congregational church
in Waukegan, this State, have organized a society for the same
purpose, the aim being to work chiefly through the Sunday-school.
Monthly meetings, called “mission parties,” are held. A profitable
programme is prepared, consisting of an essay, information from
some mission station, brief addresses and singing. To these
meetings invitations are issued by card, with the understanding
that everybody invited will come. Thus far two meetings have been
held, and they give promise of great popularity.

May there not be in the organization of this young ladies’ society,
designing to work through the Sunday-school, a suggestion that the
ladies might take up everywhere? Why not, after first defining the
word young to have reference to feeling rather than years, organize
young ladies’ missionary societies in all our churches, to work
through the Sunday-schools for the support of lady missionaries
among the freed women?—SCROOBY, in _The Congregationalist_.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.


2. Since the War.

DIST. SEC. C. L. WOODWORTH, BOSTON.

The denomination which took possession of this country in the
name of Christ, which brought in the cabin of the Mayflower the
model of a democratic state, as well as of a democratic church,
was, practically, ruled out of the South for two hundred and fifty
years. Only since 1865 has it been possible for her to enter the
South in all the largeness of her freedom and of her faith. If it
now be asked, What has she to show for these thirteen years of
opportunity among the poorest of the poor, we answer, “Something of
which she need not be ashamed.”

Within five months from the time when the first gun of
the rebellion sent its shot at the heart of the Union,
Congregationalism, through the American Missionary Association,
was at Fortress Monroe with bread and clothing, with books and
Bibles, with teachers and preachers. Nor was this the only channel
of its charity to the needy. It maintained a vast work of physical
relief _during and after the war_, through the New England and
National Freedmen’s Aid Societies, and through agencies of more
private bounty. And not alone in the way of physical relief, but
a large number of teachers were sent out by these same agencies,
and kept in the field for years and years. They have passed away,
indeed, but the amount expended by them was very large, how large
we will not try to estimate even approximately.

The Society first in the field alone remains to do the work for the
Congregational churches. No sooner had General Butler established
himself at Fortress Monroe than the Association pushed in its
workers among the unhoused, half-clothed, half-starved thousands of
contrabands that had flocked inside his lines. From that beginning,
in 1861, the work has spread into every Southern State, and though
its income and its working force are scarcely half what they were
in 1870, yet it is among the great societies which our churches
cherish and love. It has just completed seventeen full years of
labor on the Southern field, and the number of laborers sent out
year by year are tabulated below:

  Teachers, 1862           15     Teachers, 1872           346
     “      1863           83        “      1873           323
     “      1864          250        “      1874           273
     “      1865          300        “      1875           260
     “      1866          353        “      1876           206
     “      1867          528        “      1877           203
     “      1868          532        “      1878           209
     “      1869          532                            —————
     “      1870          533     Total No. of Teachers  5,267
     “      1871          321

The tangible results of this work, as they appear in permanent
Christian institutions, and their natural outcome in the South,
will be seen in the statement below:


DETAILS OF SCHOOL WORK AT THE SOUTH.

_Chartered Institutions_, 8.—Hampton N. and A. Institute, Hampton,
Va.: Number of pupils, 332; boarding accommodations for 180. Berea
College, Berea, Ky.: Number of pupils, 273; boarding accommodations
for 180. Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.: Number of pupils, 338;
boarding accommodations for 150. Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Ga.: Number of pupils, 244; boarding accommodations for 150.
Talladega College, Talladega, Ala.: Number of pupils, 272; boarding
accommodations for 100. Tougaloo University, Tougaloo, Miss.:
Number of pupils, 193; boarding accommodations for 90. Straight
University, New Orleans, La.: Number of pupils, 287; no boarding
accommodations. Normal Institute, Austin, Texas: Number of pupils,
146.

_Other Institutions_, 11.—Normal School, Wilmington, N. C.:
Number of pupils, 126; Washington School, Raleigh, N. C., 435;
Avery Institute, Charleston, S. C., 294; Brewer Normal School,
Greenwood, S. C., 58; Storrs’ School, Atlanta, Ga., 701; Lewis High
School, Macon, Ga., 93; Trinity School, Athens, Ala., 158; Emerson
Institute, Mobile, Ala., 117; Swayne School, Montgomery, Ala., 436;
Burrell School, Selma, Ala., 421; Le Moyne School, Memphis, Tenn.,
184; Common Schools, 18;—total, 37.

Whole number of pupils, 7,229. Scholars in the South, taught by our
former pupils, estimated at 100,000.

Whole number of churches in the South, 64.—Virginia, 1; North
Carolina, 5; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 12; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 13; Louisiana, 12; Mississippi, 1; Kansas,
2; Texas, 5.

Whole number of church members, 4,189.

From this exhibit it will be seen that eight of the schools are
chartered, and contain nearly two thousand students. Four of them
are of college grade, and are doing regular college work. The
other schools are of Normal grade, and designed to bring forward,
as rapidly as possible, the teachers for the untaught millions.
They are all children of the Association, and in them are gathered
up the fruits of Congregational liberality and labor in behalf of
the colored race. These schools are an enduring investment for
this work, and hold property in buildings, lands, apparatus and
endowments, to the value, probably, of eight hundred thousand
dollars. It should be said, however, that many of the buildings
were put up by aid from the Freedmen’s Bureau; but this aid was
set apart as the proportion of the public moneys which should
appropriately flow through Congregational channels. The churches
established in the South are a result of the same effort. Their
chapels and houses of worship represent a money value of fifty
thousand dollars more. What Congregationalism has to show is in
these permanent institutions for the mental and moral training
of the colored people. It is not all that is needed, but it is
an investment of inestimable value, and one which will compare
favorably with the work of any other denomination, for thorough
educational and religious work among the enfranchised race.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

DUDLEY, N. C.—“We have quite a class of teachers in the school,
and I have spent a part of each day with them. I induced one of
the young men I found in Woodbridge to come here for the present.
He has had but little schooling, but is far ahead of all the young
people here and has taught several terms. He is now commencing
Latin and Algebra. He desires to fully fit himself for work among
his people, and his present idea is to devote himself to teaching.
He has a splendid voice and has never had any drill. One great
object in bringing him here was to train his voice and give him
instrumental lessons, and he is doing finely. Another was to secure
him, if possible, to us, and find a chance for him in one of the A.
M. A. Colleges. Is there any way of getting help for such a young
man?”

MCINTOSH, Liberty Co., Ga.—“Nineteen persons united with the church
last Sunday on confession of faith.”

WOODVILLE, Ga.—The annual examination of the school was held March
28th. From 400 to 500 persons were present. One conversion from the
Sunday-school during the month.

The St. Philip’s Society, Sengstacke’s Band of Hope, and Sons and
Daughters of Jerusalem, celebrated emancipation, Jan. 1st, in the
Congregational church. Rev. Mr. Markham, of Savannah, addressed
them on the results of freedom and the work of the A. M. A. A
thank-offering was sent in the form of a contribution to the
Association.

TALLADEGA, Ala.—Nine young men, students at Talladega, after
examination, were approved to preach by the Alabama Conference.

MONTGOMERY, Ala.—A deep religious interest has been manifested
during the last month. Some of our pupils are trusting in a
newly-found Saviour. A Sabbath afternoon Bible-reading at the
school-house has been blessed.

MARION, Ala.—There are thirty subscribers to the New York _Witness_
among the colored people in this place—a fact which speaks well for
their general intelligence.

MOBILE, Ala.—“God is pouring out His Spirit on our school. Several
have expressed a hope in Christ and many more are inquiring.
The interest is among the older scholars. We have a daily
fifteen-minute prayer-meeting just before school, and a half-hour
prayer-meeting after school on Friday. Pray for us.”

ANNISTON, Ala.—Sabbath-school very interesting, especially to the
older people. One conversion.

CORPUS CHRISTI, Texas.—The church has been revived. Six members
thus far have been received on profession.

FLATONIA, Fayette Co., Texas.—This young church has twenty-five
members, and several are waiting an opportunity to unite. It is
negotiating for a church building.

CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.—“The Sabbath-school is well attended. We had
a concert last Sabbath evening; the house was crowded and the
exercises went off quite well, after which a collection for the A.
M. A. was taken.”

INDIAN AGENCY, KESHENA, Wis.—From the report of the school at the
Green Bay Agency we extract the following: “Our school closed on
the 20th, and we are happy to report that this has been the most
favorable term since the opening of the boarding-school. We have
had very little sickness and very few changes, nearly all who came
at the beginning of the term remaining till its close. In this
respect, of steady, persevering work, we notice great improvement.
It is so contrary to the habits of the Indian that we note it with
pleasure. The progress, too, in studies is very satisfactory.”

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

—In commenting on the Windom Emigration Scheme, the _Atlanta
Constitution_ says: “In Georgia the colored people are doing as
well as could be expected. If they are to remain citizens they
ought to be educated, and they ought to have constantly before
them the example of the whites. They are beginning to appreciate
the responsibilities of citizenship; they are thrifty enough to
accumulate property, and they are anxious to take advantage of
the educational opportunities afforded them.” The colored man is
valuable to the South. The white people know it. The above is
important testimony to his worth and increasing usefulness.

—The Bainbridge _Democrat_ gives, unwittingly, testimony to the
industry and thrift of the colored laborer: “The ambition of every
negro man is to have a home of his own; and it is no mean ambition;
yet, if something is not done, this generation will live to see
the day when this class of labor cannot be obtained at any price;
and if we cannot supply it with labor just as good, there will be
no other alternative for the white man but to ‘go.’ People have no
use for lands when there is nobody to cultivate them; and as the
colored people set up in their little cabins upon their poor and
sickly lands, just in proportion will our finest and best acres
depreciate in value. This is a question big with interest to our
people, beside which others sink into nothingness.” Application:
The colored laborer is becoming a settled, independent property
holder, and his own master. When he can work, buy and sell for
himself, and own his cabin, he is emancipated from domineering
dictation. Whoever owns his own labor must control the market.

—After all, there is an inclination to block this aspiration of
the colored man. The _Atlanta Constitution_ holds that it is an
open question whether this effort should be encouraged. It holds
that there are two solutions of the labor problem which is now
vexing the farmers. Either the negro must be made comfortable as a
tenant, or he must be encouraged to provide himself a home. Either
something like the English tenant system must be adopted or the
system of small farms will prevail. There is something peculiarly
attractive in this English system. Whether it could be made to fit
the peculiar needs of the present and the contingencies of the
future, is a question that the editor is not just now prepared to
discuss.

—The colored man being an American citizen, it is improbable
that the English tenant system can be made to fit his case. The
rights of citizenship will secure to him the rights of labor.
The homestead delivers him from serfdom, and secures to him the
independent ballot.

—Many influential colored men are advocating colonization as a
remedy for the evils that afflict their race. One says, “We cannot
get equal rights in the South before the law. A white man will
pay ten dollars for the same offence that a negro will go to that
second death, the chain-gang, for.” He also says, “There are some
counties in Georgia, and in every one of the Southern states, where
a white man will whip a negro just the same as formerly.” Again, a
certain lawyer defending a white man the other day, at Jefferson,
in Georgia, said, “God made the negro inferior, and the white man
was justified in killing the negro for insulting him.” The jury
acquitted the white man (Atlanta _Rep._, March 1). The darkness
still lingers.

—The _Marietta Journal_, Cobb County, Ga., reports that a young
colored man, now a school-teacher, but who has been studying law
for the last three years, will soon apply for admission to the bar,
and says that he is so thoroughly prepared that his application
cannot be denied.

—A National Emigration Aid Society has been organized at
Washington, with Senator Windom at its head, its object being to
assist and regulate emigration from the South to the West. Rev. Dr.
J. E. Rankin is one of its Executive Committee, as are also Senator
Hamlin, Representative Garfield and other leading men.

—At the recent anniversary of the City Bible Society in Atlanta,
Ga., it was reported that the colporteur, who had just commenced
the canvass of the community, had found that of the first one
hundred and fifty-eight white families visited in the first ward,
_twenty-six_ were destitute of the Word of God; and that of the
first one hundred and seventy-two colored families visited in the
same ward, _forty-eight_ of them have no Bibles. Rev. Dr. Haygood,
who stated the fact, said that it had surprised and gratified
him to find that so large a proportion of the colored families
had supplied themselves with the Scriptures. It gave him great
encouragement for the welfare of the country. Of one hundred and
seventy-two colored families, one hundred and twenty-four had the
Bible. This people hunger for the Word. Here is a wide field for
the American Bible Society.


Africa.

—The Church Missionary Society has ordained missionaries at nine
stations on the River Niger, under the charge of the native Bishop
Crowther. At some of these stations the idols have already been
given up. At others there has been long and severe persecution,
which, however, appears to have largely broken down. On the whole,
these missions have been a great success.

—The “_Cardiff Livingstone Mission_” (Welsh) was originated about
three years ago, and has two stations on the Congo River.

—Dr. Laws and Mr. Stewart, of the Scottish Missionary Society on
Lake Nyassa, are examining the country on the west coast of the
Lake to find a permanent location better adapted to the wants of
the mission than Livingstonia. They have visited several of the
tribes, being received with some suspicion, and finding it hard
to make it understood that they are neither there to fight nor to
trade. At last advices (Oct. 30th) they were still investigating.

—Gordon Pacha, Governor-General of Southern Egypt, reports that
the capture of all the slave depots is considered certain. The
Egyptians, he says, killed ten chiefs and 2,000 men while following
up a victory they had gained over the slave-traders.

—The steamer Kangaroo, with part of the cable to be laid between
Natal and Aden, last month left the Thames for Natal via the Suez
Canal. The Natal and Zanzibar section will be open for business in
July. This will place South Africa within a week’s communication of
London. The remainder of the line will be completed before the end
of the present year.

—Mr. Henry M. Stanley is reported to be now on his way to Zanzibar
with a commission from the King of the Belgians to re-organize the
hitherto unsuccessful Belgian expedition.

—The Khedive has dismissed his English and French Ministers, and
appointed a Cabinet composed exclusively of his own subjects. He
has also prepared a financial scheme on his own account, and set
aside that of the English financier. This revolutionary conduct
will re-awaken anxiety in both England and France, for the future
of Egypt and for the safety of European capital invested in that
country.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


A TOUR INTO THE SOUTHWEST.

Through Alabama, Mississippi and Texas.

It took seven weeks. It started off with a week in the revival
meeting at Talladega College, where some score and a half of souls
were hopefully led to Christ.

I tarried for a day at Montgomery to contract for the repairing and
re-painting of the Swayne School building, and for the re-renting
of the same. Erected by the Freedmen’s Bureau, it had been put
into the hands of a local Board of Trust, and by that Board it had
been leased for ten years to the American Missionary Association,
which, after running it for several years, sub-rented it to the
City Board of Education—the A. M. A. giving the rent, keeping
the house in repair and appointing the teachers, the city paying
the salaries. This arrangement was renewed for another five years
by the appropriate legal papers. The teachers and the pastor’s
family—that of Rev. Dr. Flavel Bascom, for the winter—are domiciled
in the “Home.” A quiet, persuasive spiritual work was at that time
manifest in the school. The pastor was found to be happy in his
work, and to have made many friends in the city, being a regular
member of the weekly ministers’ meeting.

On the tour a week was given to New Orleans for the inspection
of the church and educational work in that vicinity, and for
attendance upon the first meeting of the Sunday-school Association
of Louisiana. This cause got a grand send-off. The Northern helpers
were greatly useful. The Freedmen’s interest was well represented in
the Association, as reported last month. The Straight University,
with its edifice rebuilt upon a much better location, was found
in a healthy working condition, with 200 pupils in the academic
department; twenty-five in the law department, one-half of them
white; and ten in the theological. The Central Church—Pres.
Alexander, pastor—had been having a revival that had brought in
a score of members. The three or four other churches were found
in a hopeful condition under their native pastors. Great was the
satisfaction in preaching for some of these congregations. Straight
is now in great need of dormitory buildings for boarding students.

A couple of days was given to Terrebonne parish in preaching for
Rev. Daniel Clay, and in visiting the other pastors and churches
under his fatherly eye. Mr. Clay, a son of the great “Commoner,” is
doing much in bringing the Gospel among the common people of his
race.

The tour led us by another cluster of Louisiana churches, the one
centering at New Iberia, on the Bayou Teche, in the region of the
ancient settlement of “Evangeline’s” story. Two parish seats and
three settlements belong to this cluster. All but one have plain
houses of worship. All are under colored preachers. At New Iberia,
besides fair public schools for the Freedmen, there is a fine
select school in Grant Hall, built by the colored people. Three
sermons sought to confirm these churches in the Gospel way.

Thence across the Gulf to Texas. The Barnes Institute, at
Galveston, built by the Bureau, and run for a time by the American
Missionary Association, is now used for a Freedmen’s public school,
with four teachers and over three hundred scholars. At Houston the
“Gregory Institute” duplicates the history of “The Barnes,” and is
doing remarkably well. Such is also the story of the Institute at
Waco. The American Missionary Association may count in with its
best work the founding of these Institutes, which being well set up
have flowed into the public school system. The impetus given and
the standard put up yet abide in large measure.

The tour finds its western limit at San Antonio, that ancient seat
of Spanish Romanism, with its antique mission fortifications yet
standing in their frowning strength. That early pre-emption secures
two-thirds of the present population, 21,000, to the Romanists, who
have three massive stone cathedrals—one for the Spanish, one for
the German and one for the English speaking people, and who have
their extensive Nunnery and Jesuit College, which are patronized
not a little by American families. This city is the metropolis for
Southwestern Texas, which is as large as the whole of New England.
It has also an immense wholesale trade with cities in Mexico. San
Antonio becomes also a strategic point for Protestantism. The M.
E. Church North is just now establishing itself here at large
expense. The colored people are well supplied with churches and
schools. The second best Protestant church edifice is that of
the African M. E. Church, just completed, at a cost of $8,000,
and nearly all paid for. Superintendent West was there the same
Sabbath, reconnoitering. He was urged by the M. E. South people to
remain and hold a protracted meeting; but a campaign just at hand
in Massachusetts prevented. Western Texas was suffering dreadfully
from an eight months’ drought. The plain of San Antonio was an
exception, being irrigated by the waters of the mighty springs just
above the city, which, forming the San Antonio River, furnish the
hydrant supply for that great population, and send babbling streams
through all the streets and over all the surrounding gardens and
farms. So may that sainted city be a fountain of moral refreshing
in all that region!

The Tillotson Normal Institute of Texas, under the excellent Mrs.
Garland, has already sent out twenty teachers. Its beautiful site,
overlooking the city, is this summer to be crowned with its comely
edifice, which, beyond the outer shell, is to await the incoming
of funds for its completion. This trip has resulted with me in a
profound impression as to the need of this institution and as to
the grand sweep of its future usefulness. Nothing better can be
done for the Freedmen of Texas. This empire, stretching a thousand
miles on the Rio Grande and eight hundred miles eastward to the
Sabine, calls mightily for such an institute to train those who
shall be the teachers of her sable children. These immense areas of
cheap, rich, southern lands, that were never cursed by the filth of
slavery, are calling in the Freedmen to take to themselves homes
and farms and the respectability that comes from ownership of the
soil. Such people, most of all, hunger for good schools. Texas
is liberal toward her colored school children. To furnish them
teachers, skilled in the art and trained so that they shall exert a
wholesome social and spiritual influence, is the great desideratum.

The cluster of churches made up of Corpus Christi, Goliad, Helena,
Schulenburg and Flatonia, are organized into the Congregational
Association of Southwestern Texas. The only two without houses of
worship are now moving to purchase “church houses.” Rev. B. C.
Church is a very patriarch among them. Rev. S. M. Coles, pastor
and teacher at “Corpus,” is a colored graduate of Yale. Brothers
Thompson and Turner, native pastors, are sound, pure and able men.
It was a treat to minister the Word to each of these hungering
congregations.

At Flatonia, when the local authorities went back upon their
promise of the public school-room for a service which had been
advertised in the town newspaper, because the white citizens would
not allow that place to be used by “niggers,” we resorted to the
platform of the R. R. Station, in the center of the village, and
had a rousing open-air meeting that attracted many of the white
citizens, who were cordially welcomed to our place of worship, for
our God is no respecter of persons. At Corpus Christi a two days’
meeting followed upon some special interest, under the preaching of
Mr. Thompson, which had greatly confirmed the church, and had added
a half dozen to the company of the believers.

One day by the mail-schooner from “Corpus” to Indianola, another
day by steamer to Galveston, and a third day by Morgan’s line,
carried the tour back to New Orleans. A day there for supplementary
reconnoissance, a Sabbath with the thriving church of Rev. D. L.
Hickok, and the Emerson Institute at Mobile, and then a long run
up to Atlanta finished this tour of many hundred miles among our
schools and churches of the Southwest.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

A Lady Missionary Needed.

REV. S. S. ASHLEY, ATLANTA, GA.

I desire to call your attention to the need of a missionary for
this city. This has been a pressing necessity in all the past of
the work here, but at present is more urgent than ever. This city
is rapidly increasing in population. The increase of the colored
population keeps pace with the white in numbers, and far outstrips
the white in ignorance and poverty. The number of vagabond black
children here would astonish you. On the Sabbath, the vacant lots
and outskirts of the city are thronged with them. They are without
parental restraint, and never attend meeting or Sabbath-school.
They are ripening in vice and crime. There is a chain-gang in the
city, composed, as I learn, of boys ranging from ten to fifteen
years of age. There are many children among the county convicts.
Thus they are drifting to the penitentiary and to ruin. Once in the
penitentiary, they are lost, for the convict prison system of this
State is bad.

This city is full of devil-traps. These strangers who are moving
in will largely become victims. Now, we should have some agency by
which as many as possible of these families can be reached. Their
domestic condition is deplorable. In fact, this may be said of the
colored families generally of the South. They need influences and
instruction that can best, and, as I believe, only be carried to
them by a woman missionary. The women, the mothers, the homemakers
of this people, must be instructed and led to better things in
their homes. They must be seen in their houses. With such homes
as are common among them, it is well nigh impossible for them to
be Christians. Large families living in one room—you know how it
is—comfort, cleanliness, modesty and religious devotion are almost
impossible. Illiterate, the Bible must be read to them; ignorant
of their moral duties as parents, they must be taught. Strangers
to domestic comforts and necessities, they must be made acquainted
with them. Superstitious and fanatical, they must be introduced
to places and modes of a scriptural, instructive and reasonable
worship—a thousand matters of great importance must be brought
to their attention and kept before their minds, until the proper
impression is produced. This can only be done by a missionary
moving about among them _at their homes_. This person should be a
woman, because women are principally to be reached. Now, can you
not commission Miss Stevenson for this work? In connection with
her school, she now does a great deal in this direction, but not a
tithe of what needs to be done. She is thoroughly acquainted with
all these people, has had ten years’ experience among them, and
is admirably adapted to the work. She has a heart for it. Please
consider this.

Another matter: The young men connected with this church and
congregation have organized a Library Association. A Library has
been started—number of volumes at present very small. I have
thought that perhaps you had in or about your office some spare
books that you could send to us. We want to build up a Parish
Library. I should like, especially, some works on Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Tenantry—A Promising Field—Politics.

REV. FLAVEL BASCOM, D.D., MONTGOMERY.

I gave you some first impressions on entering the service of the A.
M. A. last autumn, and you now ask for my impressions after three
months’ experience and observation.

So brief a residence in a single Southern city does not qualify
one to speak with authority on the various questions pertaining to
your work among the Freedmen; but it does enable him to test your
methods and to examine the results achieved. He can thus judge
of the adaptation of means employed to the ends desired, and can
forecast the future with more confidence.

There are some things of which I am fully persuaded, by my short
residence at the South; one of these is, that the colored people in
this country are not dying out. I occasionally hear it said that
they are. Possibly the wish is father to the thought. But they are
not only here to stay, but they are here to multiply and increase
as did the Jews in Egypt; and they are already so large a factor
in our population that their character and condition are to affect
the character and welfare of our country far more than is generally
realized.

I have been happily disappointed in witnessing the industry and
thrift of the Freedmen as mechanics and common laborers; the
colored men seem to do very nearly all the work which is done, and
with the aid of the women, who are equally industrious, they secure
an honest and, what is to them, a comfortable living.

The most dependent and least progressive class of the Freedmen are
those who work the plantations on shares. The planter dictates his
own terms to the tenant—furnishes him team and tools at his own
price—sells him provisions on credit at rates far above the cash
market price, and then charges interest, fixing the per cent. to
suit himself. When the crop is gathered, if the renter does not
find himself in debt to his landlord, he is more fortunate than
many. He rarely finds himself richer for his summer’s work. The
simple rules of arithmetic, thoroughly understood by the tenant,
will remedy all this; and when I hear the colored children at
school reciting the multiplication table so enthusiastically, I am
sure it is a prophecy of a “good time coming” to them.

My observation convinces me that the colored people are very
desirous for the education of their children, and that their
children acquire learning with as much facility as any other class.
Let all the colored children and youth of the Southern States have
access to schools conducted by competent teachers, and in a very
few years they will solve the political and social problems that
are just now so embarrassing. They will not only take care of
themselves, but they will be very valuable auxiliaries in taking
care of the nation.

I find in the colored churches of different denominations specimens
of very estimable Christian character. I find, also, just those
infirmities which I should expect if God made the Caucasian and the
African of the same blood.

I have found the colored congregations very decorous and eagerly
attentive to the preaching of the Gospel. I find them quite
accessible for religious conversation, and apparently thankful for
the interest manifested in their behalf. They furnish, therefore,
a field for Christian effort that is full of promise. If there
is another missionary field more inviting, or promising richer
harvests to faithful culture, I know not where it is found.

I am profoundly impressed with the importance of the schools,
and especially of the higher institutions established by the
American Missionary Association, and by the Mission Boards of
other Christian denominations. These institutions must train
multitudes of competent teachers, who will educate the masses. In
these institutions must also be educated a native ministry to meet
the wants of their people at home, and to carry the Gospel to the
dark continent from which their fathers came. It is difficult to
conceive of a work more important, or promising more beneficent
results, than that which is being done by the higher educational
institutions for the Freedmen. The importance of enlarging their
capacity for receiving pupils, and enabling them to aid indigent
pupils in defraying the expenses of their education, cannot be
over-estimated.

The relation of the Freedmen to politics raises questions that are
very perplexing and threatening. The Southern States have, for the
present, virtually disfranchised the colored men; and they seem
united and firm in the purpose to exclude them from all influence
in politics, unless they will vote for the party that so recently
sought to perpetuate their bondage by a dissolution of the Union.
What, then, should the colored men do, and what should their
friends do for them? Many of them are intelligent and patriotic,
and worthy to have a share in the government of the State and
the nation. But many of them are as utterly unfit, at present,
for such responsibility as are the most ignorant classes in our
Northern cities; but they are improving. Every year adds to their
intelligence, and if the helping hand of Christian philanthropy is
not withheld, they will, by education, by temperance, by morality
and more intelligent piety, by industry and the accumulation of
property, win for themselves a position of respectability. They
will not then need soldiers to protect them at the polls. They
will take care of themselves. Their ballots will be received and
counted. Not only so, among the whites there will be two parties,
as of old, that will vie with each other in soliciting the colored
vote, by out-bidding each other in the promise of favors in return.
Is it not wisdom, then, for the colored man patiently to bide his
time, meanwhile striving more earnestly for the qualifications than
for the rights of a voter? And is it not wiser for the friends
of the Freedmen to furnish him every facility for acquiring the
qualifications of a voter, than to wrangle forever about his rights?

       *       *       *       *       *


Emerson Institute—Early Discouragements, Later Encouragements.

REV. D. L. HICKOK, MOBILE.

For various reasons, among them the sickness of yellow fever, our
work here commenced under very unfavorable circumstances. Our
school opened the 20th of November, almost two months after the
regular time, with only 17 scholars the first week, and with but
little prospect of any considerable increase. The teachers were all
new except Miss Stephenson, and hence they did not know what to
expect, and therefore not enough about the work to be discouraged.
Ignorance, sometimes at least, is bliss. If it did not give us
faith, it saved us from being faithless. There are some things that
are food in a negative way by preventing the usual waste in the
system. Knowledge is power. Ignorance is somewhere along there when
it saves us from the need of power. We accepted what we found as
being all that we had any right in our simplicity to expect, and
carefully hid it as leaven in the meal. The leaven, however, seemed
wonderfully “little,” and the meal a great deal more than three
measures; but God has blessed our work beyond our expectation and
faith. The measure, “according to our faith,” was pressed down and
running over. Our numbers rapidly increased so that by Christmas
we had about 75 scholars, and after the holidays our numbers came
up to more than 150. We still have accessions every week, and the
prospect is that before the close of the year we shall have more
scholars than we have room for. Already the primary room is filled
beyond its seating capacity.

The school has at present four departments: the primary, which
numbers about 60; the intermediate, which numbers between 40 and
50; the normal, which numbers about the same, and the higher
normal, which at present is only a small class studying Latin,
geometry and natural philosophy. The “A” class of the normal, which
is quite large, will soon be in this department.

We feel that we are having the confidence and co-operation of the
colored people. The last few weeks has encouraged us very much.
We recently had a literary, musical and social entertainment for
the pupils and patrons of the school. It was held in the normal
room of our building, which we also use as an assembly room, where
we provided extra seats somewhat beyond rather than according to
our faith; but not only was every seat filled, many went away
because they could not even find standing room. At the close of the
literary exercises the pupils brought forward their parents and
friends and introduced them to the teachers, when sociability and
“the shaking of the hands” became the order for the remainder of
the evening.

The history of our school work for the past few months is repeated
in our Sabbath-school and church work. We began with scarcely more
than five loaves and two fishes. At the first religious meeting
which I attended there were just seven present—five colored and two
white people. What were they among so many? But God has graciously
given us the increase here also. Our Sabbath-school now numbers
60, with 10 teachers, and is increasing every Sabbath. It is yet
a small school, indeed, but it is in good working order. The
machinery is complete in all its parts. Its lack is inward rather
than outward. It needs only the animating power of the Holy Spirit
to make it a living body. We have got the dust together and have
formed it, and we are praying that God would breathe into its
nostrils that it may become a living soul. To this end the teachers
have just resolved to hold a half-hour prayer-meeting at the close
of the school each Sabbath.

Our church is quite small. Congregationalism makes but little show
in this typical Southern city. It will be a good many years before
we have New England on the Gulf; yet I believe the leaven is here
that is to leaven the lump. Our church contains a few earnest,
faithful workers. There are those who have watched with Christ in
the dark hour. Their days of vigilance will soon be over, when they
may sleep in Jesus and take their rest. May God bless them!

       *       *       *       *       *


A Revival of Education—A Useful Church.

REV. GEORGE E. HILL, MARION.

I cannot say that we are enjoying a revival of religion, but we
are in the midst of a revival of education, which is here at the
South, emphatically, the handmaid of the Gospel. The Lincoln Normal
Institute, for colored pupils of both sexes, was founded in 1869 by
the A. M. A. Six years ago it passed into the hands of the State,
which makes an annual appropriation of $4,000 for the teachers’
salaries.

This year the school has taken a fresh start, having enrolled
217 pupils, and a new building is about to be erected for their
accommodation. In the Normal Department for the training of
teachers, there are classes in Latin, Greek and French, as well as
the higher English branches. The order and discipline are equal to
the average of our high schools at the North. Its pupils sustain
a literary society, for weekly essays and discussions, and also
publish a monthly paper. One young man walks ten miles every day to
attend the school.

The influence of such an institution is felt in the very
atmosphere. The fever for learning is contagious. Men who work hard
all day in the field or at their trade are so eager for knowledge
that, to meet the demand, classes have just been organized for a
night school.

Meanwhile our little church is keeping on the even tenor of its
way. There have been several hopeful conversions, and four are
about to unite by profession. No falling off in attendance on
Sabbath or evening meetings. Four of our young people are this year
at Talladega College, and two promising young men have the ministry
in view. Nineteen were present at our teachers’ meeting last week.

At the “Home” we have three meetings Sunday evenings: one for
women, one for boys, and a girls’ class prayer meeting, with a
kindergarten for the little ones during the week.

One of the pleasant incidents in our winter’s work has been the
distribution of five barrels of clothing from kind friends at the
North. The people are poor, but not penurious. A girls’ sewing
class has sent $21, the avails of their handiwork, for the Mendi
Mission, and the church appropriates the “weekly offering” once a
month towards the pastor’s salary.

It is truly delightful to see the readiness of this people for
religious instruction, and to witness the fruits of our labor in
their marked elevation. They are quick, industrious, pleasing,
and unobtrusive in their manners, with a decided distaste for
“loudness” of every sort; showing, too, as much decorum at church,
and as proper a regard for the Sabbath, as I have ever seen in any
community.

From all which, it may be inferred that here, at least, the
uplifting process has already passed the stage of incipiency.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Concert—Last Year’s Graduates—Gifts Acknowledged.

PROF. J. K. COLE, STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

We have reached another mile-stone in our school work. Many of our
older pupils, especially the senior class, would have been glad to
keep in harness, but circumstances were favorable for a two days’
break in school routine, and we have it.

Last evening the singing class, under the direction of Prof.
McPherron, gave a concert at Central Church. The house was filled
with as fine an audience as could be gathered in any city. There
was a generous sprinkling of “white folks,” including several of
the local board of trustees and other appreciative friends. The
proceeds will help some of our needy students to books; while a
greater and more lasting good will result from the influence of the
music sung—not upon those only who took part in the singing, but
upon the large audience who listened so attentively, and who were
cheered and encouraged by what the young people of their race are
doing.

New scholars come in almost every week, and though some drop out
our number is kept well up to 200.

We hear interesting and encouraging reports from our last year’s
graduates, who are all teaching. Dr. J. E. Roy has lately seen two
of them, and reports that they are doing well. One has an evening
school for the parents and older ones, and both are doing good work
in Sabbath-school.

In a letter just received from one of them she says that she has
to humor the parents in their whims, or they keep their children
out of school. She writes: “Before school began my ability to
teach was doubted by a father. He wanted to get a book for his
son, who had never been to school; he intended to buy a Webster’s
speller. I told him what book he needed, but he would not get it
until many of the patrons of the school reasoned him into it. I
have a Sabbath-school, which is almost beyond my ability to teach.
I am superintendent, treasurer, secretary, and everything. I find
it difficult to interest the children. Last Sabbath there was an
attendance of twenty-seven.” Of her day-school she writes: “It is
very difficult to make the children think that they do not know
everything. Many of them have been studying books that they cannot
even read understandingly. I am trying to govern by kindness as
much as possible, and punish only when I see that I cannot possibly
help it. I think the children are progressing as rapidly as they
could anywhere under like circumstances.”

Thus the influence of our school and our teaching is extended,
and in this way are the masses to be reached. Christian people of
the North, let the means be liberally provided to educate these
_teachers_ who are to carry light and knowledge to their people.

Our work is not all overspread with cloudless skies. We are under
many disadvantages, and experience some sore disappointments.
Not all whom we look upon with great hopes and earnest desires
that their future may be marked by Christian usefulness, meet our
expectations. We find careless and idle and heedless pupils; some,
though they are very eager to learn, and work hard, make very
slow progress; but, to the credit of this people be it said, a
stubborn or wilfully disobedient pupil is rare. On the whole, the
encouraging cases are largely in the majority, and the opposite
kind lead us to exercise more care, perseverance, patience and
prayerfulness.

Our thanks are due to the ladies of the Congregational Church at
Colchester, Conn., and to the ladies of the Free Church, Andover,
Mass., for a barrel of bedding each, for the Mission Home. The
contents were especially acceptable at the time received, for the
Sunny South had on, just then, a decidedly winterish aspect, with
the mercury at 18 degrees. Now we are in the midst of spring, with
a profusion of orange blossoms, roses and green leaves.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEXAS.

Revival—Ministerial Carpentry—Organ and Papers Needed.

REV. S. M. COLES, CORPUS CHRISTI.

“Surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not.” I have been
led to feel the force of these words with somewhat of the surprise
of their author, within the last two or three weeks. My work among
this people has been, I confess, a little discouraging; but now the
Lord has smiled upon us, aye, He has showered upon us blessings
from heaven. Brother Thompson, from Helena, has been with us the
last four weeks. We have worked together, and God has crowned our
feeble efforts with success. In our conference we decided to hold
a series of religious meetings, intending thereby to stir up, if
possible, the members of the church to greater activity. These
meetings were commenced, and, as they continued, the interest
deepened, both Christians and sinners being impressed. Many rose
and asked the church to pray for them. To our great surprise
and joy, sinners have come flocking home, backsliders have been
reclaimed, the church has been made alive, and many out of Christ
are inquiring. The manifest result of our season of revival thus
far is, that six have been added to the church. Four young ladies,
all under twenty-three years of age, joined by the profession of
their faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. One who had backslidden came
and acknowledged her sins, professing her belief that God had
forgiven the same, asked pardon of the church, and was received
back again into the fold. Another came, by letter, from the Baptist
church. He was formerly a member of this church, and, as he said,
he “only came back again.” And let me say, that these meetings
were not characterized by excitement; not the least “shouting” was
manifest during their continuance, but there was a deep seriousness
shown upon each countenance. The colored people here are so wild
and physical in their religious meetings, while our church is so
quiet, that they speak skeptically about our Christianity. An A. M.
E. minister asked one of our young converts to-day, when she was
converted. They are still looking through Elijah’s wind, earthquake
and fire for the appearance of God, and but few wish to receive Him
through the “still small voice.”

Our financial condition is not what we could wish, but in the
circumstances I do not think it could be much better. The members
failed this year to meet their pledges; they are fifty dollars
short. But this was caused by having to meet unforeseen expenses.
We enclosed our church lot just before Christmas. I advised them to
do this, as the edifice was so much exposed. The carpenter’s work
I did myself, and charged them nothing for it. My Sabbath-school
is quite prosperous, but it is not so large now as it has been.
Children need something to draw their attention. I find that they
are wonderfully attracted by music. We need an organ; but we are
too poor to buy one. Will some kind friend send us an organ for our
Sabbath-school? I am sure that great good could be done with an
organ in attracting the attention of children and drawing them in
from the streets. There are numbers of children strolling around on
the Sabbath. Children here are allowed to go where they wish. If
they want to come to my school, they come; if not, they stay away;
and parents have but little influence over them in this respect. I
would like to capture such, and I think I should be able to do this
with music and papers.

Cannot some of the friends of the missionary cause send us their
old Sabbath-school papers when they are done with them, remembering
that God will bless their beneficence?

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Material and Spiritual Value of the Yellow Fever Fund.

MISS HATTIE A. MILTON.

Various sums were sent to our treasury for the relief of the
yellow fever sufferers. This little fund has been distributed in
New Orleans, Memphis and Mobile. The accompanying letter from Miss
Milton shows the manner of its distribution in Memphis:

“Most of those whom I found worthy of relief were people who were
suffering from the effects of the fever, and could only make money
enough to pay the rent. To such, a few barrels of coal or some
provision and shoes gave a start, so that they could get on very
well alone. We have had an unusually cold winter, and people have
consequently needed more fuel, the sickly ones often having to
remain in bed to keep warm. A pastor of one of the colored churches
has been a great help in this work, by reporting needy cases in
his part of the city. One poor woman, whom he reported, when
visited, said, ‘Sure the Lord must have sent you, for I have tried
ever since I had the fever to get help, but being blind could not
succeed.’ She was furnished with fuel and provision. She then said,
‘You see how good the Lord is to me because I trust Him.’

“Another man had always done very well until he had the fever, from
which he partially recovered, but had a relapse which laid him on
his bed for months. His wife also was sick, and the family were
in great distress when I visited them, and sent relief, which so
encouraged them that the man was soon able to be at work again, and
is doing well now. I had never gained access to this neighborhood
before, but by relieving this family I gained the confidence of
the people, and they invited me to hold a weekly prayer-meeting
there, which is well attended. Several families which have been
relieved now send their children to our Sunday-school. Although
several thousand dollars were sent here to relieve yellow fever
sufferers, many of the colored people received but little, some
nothing. It is very sad to hear of those who were so feeble that
they could not stand in the ranks to await their turn at the relief
office, but sat on the ground till night came, and then receiving
no attention, went home to die! One man, who had always been a good
provider, sent his family to the country during the fever, but fell
a victim to it himself, and died, leaving his wife a nice house
and lot, but with several debts unpaid, and not a dollar for her
support. Within a week after his death a beautiful baby opened its
wondering eyes for the first time in this world of trouble. The
poor heart-broken mother, instead of welcoming the tiny, helpless
creature, only looked at it with tearful eyes and an aching heart,
as she had nothing for it, most of their clothing being burned
when her husband died, to prevent the spread of the disease. When
I found her, the baby was three months’ old, and had never had but
two garments, and the mother could not leave the three little ones,
all under four years of age, to get work. She was relieved, and now
the cold is nearly over, and as she has rented her house and taken
small rooms herself, she saves a little money, which, with the work
she can get, will, she hopes, keep the wolf from the door, and she
is very thankful for the relief that came just when she most needed
it.

“I will only add that this relief fund has at least doubled my
field of work, besides doing much to call the attention of the
people to our school. May God’s blessing rest on those interested
in this good work.”

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


NATIVE PREACHERS—AN ADVANCE CALLED—TEN NEW
COMMUNICANTS—SUNDAY-SCHOOL NEEDS—THE FARM AND MILL.

REV. A. E. JACKSON, AVERY STATION.

We are all enjoying a moderate degree of health, which, of course,
is quite encouraging to one laboring in this country, and helps
him to enter upon the year’s work with renewed vigor. Finding
that I was unable to reach a very great number of country men who
live too far from my station to attend services, I have in such
localities established preaching stations conducted by the hands
employed in the Mission. They meet me each Saturday afternoon, so
that I may explain to them the passages of Scripture that they
are to use on Sunday at their respective stations. Great good is
thus being accomplished. One station, in a very beautiful little
town of about twelve hundred inhabitants, is conducted by my
interpreter. The meetings are full of interest, and doubtless great
good will be accomplished by its thus being established. The chief
himself is learning to take a very great interest in the meetings,
and, of course, if he expresses an interest in the meetings, the
subjects will always attend very largely. I hope to see the chief
converted before a very great while. Another station is maintained
in a smaller village, where I trust to see greater interest soon
manifested.

Avery is the most interior station held by the American Missionary
Association in Africa. This one step has been taken, and a
sufficient time has elapsed since to teach us that it is all
important to push our work farther into the country. There lies on
either side of us a vast territory, densely populated by an anxious
and thirsty people who are dying for want of the truths of the
Gospel.

In regard to the work at Avery, the new year has opened up quite
favorably to us in all our departments. The church I am glad to
say, is progressing far beyond all expectation. Sunday, Feb. 9, was
our communion day, and it did seem as if the presence of the Lord
was with each one in spirit and in power. There were added to the
church ten souls, who were that day with us permitted to partake
of the Lord’s Supper. Another feature connected with the church
work is full of interest, and that is the prayer meetings. They
are, as a general thing, largely attended by the country men, and
great interest is manifested among them. We hope that many will be
brought to the Lord during this year; but this will depend very
greatly upon earnest prayer on the part of the Christians at home.

One thing is discouraging, and that is the condition of the
Sabbath-school. We have no papers, no Bibles, and scarcely any
singing-books, with which to carry it on. All who know anything
of Sunday-school work are perfectly aware that much depends upon
the interest that one is enabled to keep up among the children and
adults by such means; it is so with you in civilized countries,
much more so in a heathen country, where one is required to teach
them everything. Now I am sure that some Sunday-school or some
lover of the Christian cause will respond to this, my most humble
appeal in the name of Christ, and send such books, papers, etc., to
Avery Station as he can afford.

The agricultural department is progressing nicely. Our coffee farm
is in a flourishing condition. Many of the trees are in bloom, and
some have on them many berries of coffee. I think by another year
a greater part of the trees will be bearing well. Our mill is now
undergoing repair, and we hope to have it in perfect running order
by April 1st.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOME POINTS ON THE CHINESE QUESTION.

Rev. WM. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

1. There are two sides to the question. Many Christians, both
laymen and ministers, are earnestly opposed to Chinese immigration,
for reasons which seem to them ample and even imperative. As
against such reasons, vituperation and contempt fall powerless. But
it should be observed that these reasons do not—with, at most, two
exceptions—apply to Chinese immigration alone. The Irish laborer
underbid the native American, and crowded him out of the field. In
some cases great suffering temporarily ensued. But the American
at length found other and better fields to which, indeed, the
Irishman’s toil prepared his way. It would be so again. The Irish,
French and German immigrants have brought with them principles
and practices sadly at variance with those which gave us free
institutions, our Christian Sabbaths, and our happy homes; and
thoughtful Christians viewed this influx of an alien element with
great alarm for many years. For the same reasons, and some others,
they cannot but view with anxiety an influx from the heathen
nations over our Western sea. But what did we do about it in the
former case? Did we lock the door? Did we attempt to dyke back the
incoming tide? No; but we said, We will meet these people with the
Gospel; we will bring their children into our public schools; we
will make the very air they breathe redolent with the principles of
a genuine Christian liberty, and thus we will make them no longer
Irish, or French, or Germans, but, in the second generation, if not
the first, Americans all. And this process is saving the nation’s
life. Why not try it again with the new immigration from the old
Orient?

2. But there are two _special_ reasons for opposing this Chinese
immigration; one is, that it consists of unmarried men, homeless
and vagrant, and our country needs homes; the other is, that they
are exceptionally clannish, refuse to associate and assimilate with
us, and remain, after thirty years, as much an alien race as when
they first arrived. I feel the force of these facts, but is there
not a cause? They are, it is true, a very conservative race; slow
to change, and ardently attached to their native land; but if it
were otherwise, I submit whether the courtesies they have received
are of the sort which would specially incline them to fall in love
with our country or ourselves. The Chinese _can be Americanized_;
and in response to treatment such as European immigrants receive,
would long ago have begun to make homes and to identify themselves
with us. And, by the grace of God and the power of the Gospel,
they might have been, and may yet be, educated into intelligent,
patriotic and useful citizens. He who doubts this ought no longer
to profess and call himself a Christian.

3. There is no occasion to be frightened lest we be overwhelmed by
a rush of Chinese immigrants. The lapse of thirty years finds about
100,000 in the United States, and to-day they are going faster than
they come; going, not because they are frightened, but for the very
sensible reason that they can do better elsewhere. The supply has
exceeded the demand. The wealthier Chinese find their impoverished
countrymen thrown upon their charities, and they use every
influence they can bring to bear to restrain others from coming.
What if there are 400,000,000 of them just across the sea; they may
as well stay there and starve, as to come 10,000 miles and do the
same. If the recent bill had become a law, and had been executed,
no others in all the land would have profited by it so much as the
Chinese in California.

4. The anti-Chinese mania seems to neutralize, even in otherwise
honorable men, all scruple about ascertaining the truth of
statements before they make them, or even about repeating
statements proven to be false. I brand it as a falsehood that the
Chinese in this country are in any sense coolies. They are freemen.
If they have borrowed money to come here, it has not been of the
Six Companies; nor are the terms on which such loans are made in
any wise different from those on which a New Englander might borrow
in order to “go west.” I brand it as a falsehood that there is
among them any _imperium in imperio_, defying our laws, and meting
out to its victims punishment even unto death. The Six Companies
are voluntary societies for mutual aid. Sometimes, instead of
going to law, our Chinese agree to refer matters in dispute to
the presidents of these companies as a board of arbitrators; but
such arbitration is in principle and practice exactly that which
American business men often resort to; exactly that which between
Christians ought to be always a sufficient substitute for suits at
law. Some years ago Chinese merchants were able to arrange with
the steamship companies to sell no tickets to Chinamen unless they
could show what has been incorrectly called a permit from one or
the other of these companies. The object was to prevent men from
leaving with their debts unpaid. In order to obtain one of these
passes, a man must announce at the office of the company to which
he belongs his intention of returning to China, and thus give his
creditors, if he have any, an opportunity to protest. The result
is, I suppose, that the glorious Anglo-Saxon liberty of running
away from unpaid bills is, for them, somewhat curtailed. But our
Congregational Association of Christian Chinese has the same
authority to issue passes that the Six Companies have, and its
passes are equally respected. And for years no Christian Chinaman
has recognized any obligation to either of these companies in any
way. I go into detail on this point, because much has been made of
it, as an out-cropping of that _imperium in imperio_ of which so
much has been said. It goes the length that I have stated, and no
further.

Finally, I brand as falsehoods the representations constantly made
as to the success of missionary labor among the Chinese here. I
am sure that Mr. Blaine would not wilfully belittle such a work.
He is a follower of Christ, and a friend to his fellow-men, but
he has listened to those who were neither of these, or he would
never have said that “not one in a thousand have even nominally
professed a change from heathenism, and of this small number
nearly one-half had been taught in missionary schools in China.”
The known and counted results are more than five times as large
as the “missionary,” (?) whom he quotes, represents, and of them,
I venture to say, that not one in a hundred ever entered the door
of a mission-school in China; while their conversion has not
been merely nominal and negative, “_from_ heathenism,” but real
and positive, to a faithful, prayerful, earnest Christian life.
Meanwhile, there are grand results that cannot be measured, but
which will tell mightily on the future, in the starting of thought,
the loosening of the bonds of superstition, the _preparation_ of
the way of the Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR MARCH, 1879.


  MAINE, $38.80.

    Andover. S. W. Pearson, _for Student Aid_                 $5.00
    Lyman. Cong. Soc.                                          7.05
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                 26.75


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $397.51.

    Bennington. Miss Emily Whittemore, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                75.00
    Concord. C. T. P.                                          0.50
    Exeter. “A Friend,” $10; Second Cong. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., class of boys, $2.82, _for Chapel,
      Wilmington, N. C._                                      12.82
    Farmington. First Cong. Ch.                               14.92
    Fisherville. J. C. Martin                                 10.00
    Francestown. R. G. Cochran                                 2.00
    Hanover. Dartmouth College Ch. $70 (of which
      $50 for the debt. See debt receipts)                    20.00
    Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                14.75
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. AMOS BAILEY
      L. M.                                                   35.00
    Lyndeborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.38
    Manchester. Jasper P. George                               5.00
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which $5
      for a pupil Taladega C.)                                25.10
    Nashua. Olive St. Ch. and Soc., $20.78; Miss
      H. M. Swallow, $10                                      30.78
    New Ipswich. G. W. T. $1; A. N. T., $1—Ladies,
      75c _for Freight_; Miss A. W., 50c                       3.25
    North Hampton. E. Gove                                    10.00
    Northwood Centre. J. M. M.                                 1.00
    Piermont. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $6.51; Mrs.
      Marden, $3.50                                           10.01
    Portsmouth. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., Infant Class
      of Mrs. E. P. Kimball, _for Chapel,
      Wilmington, N. C._                                       7.50
    Troy. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   5.00
    West Concord. Cong. Ch.                                    8.50
    —— “A Friend in N. B.”                                   100.00


  VERMONT, $240.92.

    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              35.71
    Burlington. (Winooski) Cong. Ch.                          68.50
    Burlington. Third Cong. Ch. $13.47; N. S. H.,
      $1                                                      14.47
    Corinth. Cong. Ch.                                         7.63
    Dummerston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             6.38
    East Berkshire. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         6.75
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               35.00
    North Craftsbury. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., bbl. of
      Bedding and $3, _for Atlanta, Ga._;—Mrs. M.
      C. P., $1; Others, $1                                    5.00
    Randolph Centre. First Cong. Ch.                           7.00
    South Londonderry. Mrs. Betsey Gibson                     10.00
    Stafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                            11.14
    West Randolph. M. A. and S. E. Albin, $6; S.
      I. W., $1                                                7.00
    West Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.34


  MASSACHUSETTS, $1,970.60.

    Amherst. Second Cong. Ch. $9.25; Mass. Ag.
      Col. “College Christian Union,” $3.25                   12.50
    Andover. Free Ch. (of which $100 from Francis
      H. Johnson) $184.58; South Cong. Ch. and
      Soc. $41.31; Calvin, E. Goodale, $25                   250.89
    Arlington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.50
    Athol. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. REV. HENRY
      A. BLAKE L. M.                                          51.80
    Blandford. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Boston Highlands. Immanuel Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $100; H. W. T., 50c.                                   100.50
    Brocton. I. P.                                             0.50
    Brookline. S. A., E. H. C.                                10.00
    Byfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.38
    Cambridgeport. Cash, $10; G. B. C., 50c                   10.50
    Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $10; Cong. Sab.
      Sch. $5.69                                              15.69
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $66.96;—Mrs. R. G. P., $1, _for the aid of
      Pupils, Talladega, Ala._                                67.96
    Chestertown. S. C. A.                                      0.50
    Clinton. First Evan. Ch. and Soc.
      $75.23;—Ladies’ Missionary Soc., bbl. of C.,
      _for Fisk U. and City Mission Work_, and $3
      _for Freight_                                           78.23
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $50; Ira D.
      Haskell, $5                                             55.00
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.00
    Foxborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            52.00
    Framingham. “A Friend,” $30, to const. MISS
      MARY BILLINGS L. M.;—Ladies of Plymouth Ch.
      _for Freight_, $2                                       32.00
    Gardner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            75.94
    Great Barrington. L. M. Chapin                             5.00
    Groton. Union Orthodox Ch.                                20.82
    Groveland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.00
    Haverhill. Joseph Flanders                                 5.00
    Holbrook. Sarah J. Holbrook, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Holden. “Holden Benev. Soc.,” by J. Calvin,
      _for Aid of Pupils, Atlanta U._                         10.00
    Holliston. Coll. No. 4 Sat. Evening Prayer
      Meeting, by John Batchelder                             25.00
    Littleton. Ladies’ Mission Circle                         10.00
    Lowell. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch. bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
    Lynn. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          14.50
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            26.25
    Mansfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc. (in  part)           42.05
    Millbury. M. D. Garfield                                   5.00
    Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.65
    North Abington. Freedmen’s Aid Soc., bbl. of
      C. _for Fisk U. and City Mission Work_, “M.
      A.,” $2 _for Freight_                                    2.00
    Northampton. Sab. Sch. of First Parish                    46.00
    Northborough. Mrs. A. E. D. F.                             1.00
    Northfield. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      20.62
    North Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           2.45
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          38.45
    Norton. Wheaton Sem., _for Aid of Pupils,
      Atlanta U._                                             17.00
    Peabody. So. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           18.39
    Peru. G. Wells                                             1.51
    Phillipston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            8.17
    Plainfield. Mr. and Mrs. Albert Dyer                      10.00
    Quincy. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                27.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             123.82
    Rockport. “A Friend.”                                      5.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. E. W. Wells, $5; Mrs. Robert
      Tobey, $5                                               10.00
    Shelburne. Ladies of Cong. Ch. $2 and bbl. of
      C. _for Montgomery, Ala._                                2.00
    Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch.                            14.50
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    South Byfield. Mrs. E. H. Evans                            2.00
    South Framingham. G. M. Amsden                             5.00
    South Royalston. Individuals, by Rev. C. L.
      Tomblen                                                  1.00
    South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch. $60, to const.
      MRS. HANNAH C. CUSHING and MRS. GEO. W.
      CONANT L. M.’s; Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $41, to const. MRS. ALMATIA HEALD L. M.                101.00
    Springfield. First Ch., $57.25; Hope Ch.,
      $15.14; Mrs. Ira Merrill, $2                            74.90
    Taunton. Ladies’ Sewing Circle of Winslow Ch.,
      $25 _for a Student, Talladega C._; also, box
      of C. _for Talladega_, and $2 _for Freight_             27.00
    Topsfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. box of C., _for
      Wilmington, N. C._
    Waverly. Cong. Ch. and Soc. _for a Student,
      Atlanta U._                                             30.00
    Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $5; L. B. H.,
      50c                                                      5.50
    Westborough. Cong. Sab. Sch., $48.84; Evan.
      Cong. Ch. M. C. Coll., $14.84                           63.68
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
    West Stockbridge Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              12.94
    Wilmington. Mrs. E. M. G. Noyes, _for aid of
      Pupils, Talladega, Ala._                                30.00
    Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               150.00
    Worcester. T. W. T.                                        0.51


  RHODE ISLAND, $30.

    Oak Lawn. Rev. Marcus Ames                                10.00
    Providence. Mrs. Lucius Lyon, $10, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._; E. Weston, $5                    15.00
    Tiverton Four Corners. Cong. Ch.                           5.00


  CONNECTICUT, $1,199.82.

    Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                               83.96
    Brookfield. “A Friend”                                     5.00
    Canton Centre. Mrs. S. B. H.                               1.02
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        36.80
    Collinsville. Mrs. Chidsey, _for Girl’s Ind.
      Sch., Talladega, Ala._                                   5.00
    Danbury. E. B.                                             1.00
    Danielsonville. J. D. Bigelow                              4.00
    East Hampton. Talladega Soc. _for Aid of
      Pupils, Talladega, Ala._                                22.00
    East Hartford. First Cong. Ch.                            20.00
    East Windsor Hill. Bbl. of C. _for City
      Mission Work_, and $1 _for Freight_; Mrs.
      C., $5                                                   6.00
    Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                57.09
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch. to const. HORACE
      H. STRONG L. M.                                         40.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch., $60; E. M., 50c.             60.50
    Guilford. Ladies of Third Cong. Ch. bbl. of
      C., val. $25, and $5 _for Freight_                       5.00
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               24.87
    Hartford. Windsor Av. Cong. Ch. $25.01;
      Collected by Mrs. G. W. Root, $11.00                    36.01
    Lakeville. Mrs. M. H. W.                                   1.00
    Ledyard. Cong. Ch.                                        14.38
    Lyme. J. A. R.                                             0.50
    Mansfield Centre. First Cong. Ch.                          6.00
    New Britain. Mrs. N. H.                                    0.50
    New Hartford. Bible Class, by Rev. F. H.
      Adams, _for Theo. Student, Fisk U._                      8.00
    New Haven. Ch. of the Redeemer, $130; Amos
      Townsend, $35; East Cong. Ch., $12;                    177.00
    New London. First Cong. Ch. $38.23; “A Thank
      Offering,” $3                                           41.23
    New Preston. Rev. H. Upson                                 5.00
    Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                       14.10
    Plantsville. Individuals, by Rev. L. F. Berry             10.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       16.00
    Ridgefield. First Cong. Ch.                               16.11
    Simsbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 19.00
    South Britain. “A Friend”                                  1.00
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         4.54
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     423.81
    Woodbury. Benj. Fabrique                                  20.00
    West Meriden. Mrs. M. P. B.                                1.00
    Wethersfield. Mrs. Mary D. McLean, box of
      Books and $1.40, _for Talladega, Ala._                   1.40


  NEW YORK, $740.00.

    Batavia. “A. V. S. F.”                                    20.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., E. R.
      Kennedy, Supt., $100, _for a Teacher_;—Miss
      M. E. S., 50c.; Mrs. G. H., 50c.                       101.00
    Chenango Forks. Cong. Ch.                                  1.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Aid
      of Pupils, Atlanta U._                                  25.00
    Cincinnatus. “Cincinnatus”                                10.00
    Copenhagen. E. G.                                          0.50
    Crown Point. First Cong. Ch., Mrs. Triphena
      Walker                                                   2.00
    Dryden. Mrs. L. M. K.                                      1.00
    Floyd. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                     4.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Ch.                                 13.00
    Fredonia. Presb. Sab. Sch., $15; “McK.,” $15,
      to const. CHRISTINE GILBERT L. M.                       30.00
    Gilbertsville. Rev. A. Wood                               15.00
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch., $33, and Sab. Sch., $17               50.00
    Kiantone. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              12.25
    Livonia. G. W. Jackman, $10; M. A. Jackman,
      $5; Mrs. Wm. Calvert (_$5 of which for
      Chinese M. in Cal._) $10                                25.00
    Lockport. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. Mrs. J.
      E. MERRITT L. M.                                        30.00
    Malone. Mrs. H. R. Wilson                                  5.00
    Martinsburgh. Horatio Hough, $5; Mrs. Almira
      Arthur, $3                                               8.00
    Middlesex. Mr. and Mrs. Lester Adams                      10.00
    Millville. Cong. Ch.                                      10.34
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch.                                    27.61
    New Hamburgh. S. H. S.                                     0.50
    Newark Valley. LEGACY of a deceased Sister, by
      Mrs. A. B. Smith                                        34.00
    New York. “X. Y. Z.,” _for Hampton Inst._,
      $100;—Mrs. James Stokes, $10, _for Ch. Work,
      Ogeechee, Ga._;—S. T. Richards, $6; Mrs.
      Elizabeth Merritt, $5, Mrs. L. B. B., 50c.;
      S. T. G., 50c.; American Tract Soc., Grant
      of S. S. Papers, val. $30                              122.00
    Oneida. S. H. Goodwin, $10; Edward Loomis, $2             12.00
    Oneonta. L. J. S.                                          0.50
    Orient. H. M. W.                                           1.00
    Parma. Mrs. Harriet Clark                                  5.00
    Peon Yan. F. O. Hamlin                                    20.00
    Poughkeepsie. Mrs. M. J. M.                                1.00
    Pulaski. S. C.                                             1.00
    Seneca Falls. “A Friend”                                  50.00
    Sherburne. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                            55.45
    Spencerport. S. V. and M. D., $1 each, _for
      Freight_; Mary Dyer, $5, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             7.00
    Spencertown. Rev. H. P. Bake                               5.00
    Taberg. Aaron Stedman, $2; Dewey Hopkins, $2;
      A. W., $1                                                5.00
    Turin. Mrs. Martha Woodworth                               2.00
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. S.                                        1.00
    Union Valley. Dr. J. Angel                                10.00
    Volney. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          6.94


  NEW JERSEY, $230.56.

    Morristown. Mrs. Ella M. Graves, _for Aid of
      Pupils, Atlanta U._                                    100.00
    Newark. C. S. Haines                                      40.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  64.01
    Stanley. Hillside Missionary Sab. Sch. of
      Cong. Ch., _for a Lady Missionary_                      25.00
    Vineland. Cong. Ch. of the Pilgrims                        1.55


  PENNSYLVANIA, $14.

    East Springfield. Mrs. C. J. Cowles                        2.00
    Farmer’s Valley. Mrs. E. C. O.                             1.00
    Hermitage. W. F. Stewart, $4; E. P., $1                    5.00
    Jeanesville. Welsh Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    North East. C. A. T.                                       1.00


  OHIO, $463.68.

    Chatham Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 28.00
    Cincinnati. Vine St. Cong. Ch. $41.65; Rev. B.
      P. Aydelott, D.D., $10                                  51.65
    Claridon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Atlanta, Ga._              7.00
    Clarksfield. Rev. J. M. and Mrs. H. B. Fraser             10.00
    Fostoria. C. M.                                            0.50
    Granville. Thomas D. Williams                              5.00
    Harmar. Cong. Ch.                                         35.32
    Hartford. A. N., $1; J. M. J., $1; Miss H. J.,
      $1; S. C. B., $1; Others, $1                             5.00
    Huntington. Edward West                                   25.00
    Kingsville. J. L. Gage                                    10.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           22.58
    Mechanicsburgh. Mrs. M. K. H.                              1.00
    New Richland. Elizabeth Johnston                           2.00
    Oberlin. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $50, _for Ag’l
      Dept., Talladega, Ala._;—First Cong. Ch.
      $38.74; Second Cong. Ch., $10.39                        99.13
    Ravenna. Ira B. Cutts                                      5.00
    Richfield. Mrs. Uri Oviatt, $5; Mrs. Sylvester
      Townsend, $2.50                                          7.50
    Steubenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Improvements, Tougaloo U._                              24.00
    Strongsville. Free Cong. Ch., $6, _for
      Tougaloo U._;—“A Friend,” $3, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            9.00
    Wakeman. Franklin Hale                                   100.00
    Wellington. C. F.                                          1.00
    Willoughby. Miss Mary P. Hastings, $10;
      Florence A. Page, $5                                    15.00


  INDIANA, $5.50.

    Sparta. J. H.                                              0.50
    Winchester. Mrs. John Commons                              5.00


  ILLINOIS, $748.

    Avon. Mrs. Celinda Woods                                   5.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                                    4.00
    Chicago. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Lincoln Park
      Ch., _for Lady Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._              17.00
    Dundee. Cong. Ch., $8; Mrs. Wm. D., $1                     9.00
    Galesburg. ESTATE of Warren C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard                                     21.00
    Galesburg. Mrs. E. T. Parker, to const. DEA.
      GEO. T. HOLYOKE L. M.                                   30.00
    Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                    37.16
    Lyonsville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., box of
      household goods, _for Montgomery, Ala._
    Naperville. A. A. Smith                                    5.00
    Odell. Mrs. H. E. Dana                                    10.00
    Peoria. Chas. Fisher, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     12.00
    Plymouth. N. F. Burton                                     5.00
    Port Byron. A. F. Hollister                                5.00
    Princeton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $14.50,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._;—Mrs. P. B.
      Corse, $10                                              24.50
    Rockford. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for aid of
      Pupils, Talladega, Ala._                                15.00
    Sycamore. A. S.                                            1.00
    Tonica. “V. G. S.,” $5; F. A. Wood, $2.50; “A
      Friend,” $2.50                                          10.00
    Tolona. Mrs. L. Haskell                                    7.00
    Waukegan. Young Ladies’ Missionary Soc., $15;
      Cong. Ch., $6.34                                        21.34
    Waukegan. “Friends,”, _for Freight_                        1.00
    Wheaton. First Cong. Ch.                                   8.00
    ——. “A Friend,”                                          500.00


  MICHIGAN, $567.75.

    Calumet. Cong. Ch., $238.25, to const. BERTHA
      CALISTA CURTIS and HAROLD MORSE WRIGHT L.
      M.’s.; Robert Dobbie, $20.50                           258.75
    Churches Corners. Cong. Sab. Sch., $11.25;
      H.C. 50c.                                               11.75
    Claire. A. H. Norris                                       5.00
    Detroit. Fort St. Cong. Sab. Sch., $50; Mrs.
      Z. Eddy, $25; Miss Grout, $10; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $2; Miss L., $1; Miss H., $1; Mrs. C.,
      $1, _for Lady Missionary, Memphis.
      Tenn._;—Mrs. D. P., $1; Mrs. A. D. G., $1;
      Others, $2.50, by Mrs. J. A. Nutting                    94.50
    Greenville. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.91
    Hancock. First Cong. Ch., $30; Sab. Sch.
      Scholars, $1                                            31.00
    Imlay City. Cong. Sab. Sch., box of Books,
      _for Montgomery, Ala._
    Leland. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Milford. E. G.                                             1.00
    Pontiac. Cong. Sab. Sch., $1.40; Mrs. S. J.
      C., $1; Dea. J. P. W., $1; Juv. Miss. Soc.,
      $1,                                                      4.40
    South Haven. Clark Pierce                                  5.00
    Unadilla. Mrs. Agnes D. Bird, $4; Mrs. M. M.,
      $1                                                       5.00
    Union City. Mrs. I. W. Clark and Miss Sarah B.
      Clark, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                       10.00
    Vernon. BEQUEST of Sarah Holley, by D. C.
      Holley                                                 100.00
    Vienna Union Cong. Ch.                                     8.44


  WISCONSIN, $127.96.

    Arena. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Centre. Cong. Ch.                                          2.53
    Elk Grove. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch.                                   36.70
    Oshkosh. Cong. Ch., $54.73; H. S. M., 50c.                55.23
    Shopiere. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Shullsburg. Cong. Ch.                                      3.50
    Whitewater. Ladies of Cong. Ch., bbl. of C.,
      and house furnishing goods, val. $50 Mrs.
      Coburn, $2, _for Montgomery, Ala._                       2.00


  IOWA, $1,175.15.

    Ashland. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Tougaloo U._             2.00
    Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Burlington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Plymouth
      Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                   20.00
    Grinnell. ESTATE of Charles F. Dike, by Mrs.
      C. F. Dike, Executrix,                               1,000.00
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. and Friends,
      $50, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._;—Cong. Ch.,
      $27.25                                                  77.25
    Keokuk. Will Collier. Smith Hamill, and M.
      Messer, $5 ea.; X. X. C., 50c., _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            15.50
    Nevinville. Cong. Ch.                                      2.40
    Traer. Mrs. C. H. Bissel, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 5.00
    Waterloo. Rev. M. K. Cross                                 8.00


  KANSAS, $16.50.

    Bavaria. A. M.                                             0.50
    Brookville. Rev. S. G. Wright                             15.00
    Eudora. Mrs. L. R.                                         1.00


  MINNESOTA, $53.89.

    Clear Water. Cong. Ch.                                     3.01
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                  9.68
    Plainview. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                              7.10
    Saint Paul. Plymouth Ch.                                  20.30
    Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        13.80


  NEBRASKA, $6.50.

    Hastings. Mrs. N. C. B.                                    1.00
    Fontanelle. “A Friend,”                                    5.50


  MISSOURI, 50c.

    Saint Louis. C. M. J.                                      0.50


  CALIFORNIA, $299.65.

    Los Angeles. Francis Wilson                               15.00
    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                        284.65


  OREGON, $1.55.

    Astoria. First Cong. Ch.                                   1.55


  KENTUCKY, $5.05.

    Berea. Cong. Ch.                                           4.55
    Germantown. H. N.                                          0.50


  TENNESSEE, $153.15.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   153.15


  NORTH CAROLINA, $133.24.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch.                                  35.80
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., $93.70; First Cong.
      Ch., $3.74                                              97.44


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $271.75

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  271.75


  GEORGIA, $581.71.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., $259.30; Atlanta
      University, $87                                        346.30
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    50.90
    Savannah. Beach Inst.                                    184.51


  ALABAMA, $921.81.

    Athens. Pub. Sch. Fund, $270; Trinity Sch.,
      $49.40                                                 319.40
    Blount Springs. J. Q. A. E.                                0.50
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         29.48
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    204.50
    Montgomery. Swayne Sch.                                  175.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           5.10
    Talladega. Talladega College $174.28;—Governor
      Parsons, _for Aid of Pupils, Talladega,
      Ala._, $13.55                                          187.33


  LOUISIANA, $138.75.

    New Orleans. Straight University                         138.75


  MISSISSIPPI, $35.55.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                             35.55


  TEXAS, $3.

    Brenham. Individuals, by Mrs. I. Howells, $2;
      D. C., $1                                                3.00


  NOVA SCOTIA, $10.

    Yarmouth. Yarmouth Tabernacle Missionary
      Asso., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                       10.00


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $1,000.

    “A Friend”                                             1.000.00


  TURKEY, $10.

    Van. Dr. G. C. Reynolds and Wife                          10.00


  INCOME FUND, $311.74.

    General Fund                                             311.74
                                                          —————————
            Total                                         11,904.68
        Total from Oct. 1st to March 31st                $77,638.09

                                             H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                     _Ass’t Treas._


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Hanover, N. H. Dartmouth College Ch.                     $50.00
    Cromwell, Ct. M. G. Savage                                13.00
    New Haven, Ct. Centre Ch.                                 25.00
    West Hartford, Ct. Charles Boswell                       250.00
    Crown Point, N. Y. Mrs. George Page                       25.00
    Madison, Ohio. Mrs. J. G. Fraser                           3.00
    Northville, Mich. D. Pomeroy                               5.00
    Saint Louis, Mo. Miss C. M. Janes                          5.00
    Woodville, Ga. St. Phillip’s Soc., $2; Band of
      Hope, $2.25                                              4.25
    Tougaloo, Miss. Tougaloo University                       50.00
                                                          —————————
            Total                                            430.25
    Previously acknowledged in Feb. receipts              24,488.97
                                                          —————————
          Total                                          $24,919.22

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

  E. PALACHE, Treasurer.

  _From Dec. 20th, 1878, to March 20th, 1879._

    1. From auxiliaries:
      Petaluma Chinese Mission—(for room)                    $65.00
      Sacramento Chinese Mission—(12 Annual
        Memberships)                                          24.00
      Santa Barbara Chinese Mission—(4 Annual
        Memberships: Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D., $2; N.
        W. Winton, $2; Mrs. C. E. Huse, $2; Wong Ah
        Yon, $2)                                               8.00
          ——                                                   2.00
          Collection Annual Meeting                            2.50
          Chinese Pupils                                      18.00
          Stockton Chinese Mission—Mrs. M. C. Brown            4.00
          Brown                                                4.00
          Chinese Pupils                                       2.50
                                                             ——————
            Total                                            126.00
    2. From churches:
      Oakland—First Cong. Ch.                                 36.15
      Sacramento—First Cong. Ch.                               7.00
      San Francisco—First Cong. Ch.                           49.50
      San Francisco—Bethany Ch., I. C. H.                      2.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                             94.65
    3. From individuals:
      Pescadero—Rev. W. C. Merritt                             2.00
      San Francisco—Rev. J. Rowell                            20.00
      Sonoma—“A Thank Offering”                               10.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                             32.00
    4. From Eastern Friends:
      Bangor, Me.—Unknown, by Rev. G. W. Field, D.
        D., _for Barnes’ Mission House_                       12.00
      Auburn, Mass.—Cong. Sab. Sch., by Horace
        Hobbs, _for Barnes’ Mission House_                    20.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                             32.00
                                                             ——————
            Grand Total                                     $284.65

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Cambridge, Vt. Madison Safford                           $25.00
    Groton, Mass. Mrs. Elizabeth Farnsworth                   20.00
    Haverhill, Mass. Gyles Merrill and Wife                   50.00
    Westfield, Mass. Miss E. B. Dickinson                    100.00
    Hartford, Conn. D. H. WELLS, to const. himself
      L. M.                                                   50.00
    Oriskany Falls, N. Y. Joseph C. Griggs                    24.00
    Union Springs, N. Y. Mrs. Mary H. Thomas                  10.00
    West Farms, N. Y. Daniel Mapes                           100.00
    Painesville, Ohio. Mrs. Reuben Hitchcock                 100.00
                                                           ————————
            Total                                            479.00
    Previously acknowledged in Feb. receipts               1,627.17
                                                           ————————
            Total                                         $2,106.17

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and to diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may by constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made in this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting: nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va. 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 12;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 13; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 5.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 66.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11. _Other
Schools_, 18. Total 37.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 231;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 17; in Africa, 14. Total,
279. STUDENTS—In Theology, 88; Law, 17; in College Course, 106;
in other studies, 7,018. Total, 7,229. Scholars, taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK    H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON      Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO     Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            73,620 MORE

                Singer Sewing Machines Sold in 1878

                    Than in any previous year.

           In =1870= we sold =127,833= Sewing Machines,
            “ =1878=  “   “  =356,432=     “      “

Our sales have increased enormously every year through the whole
period of “hard times.”

We now Sell Three-quarters of all the Sewing Machines sold in the
World.

For the accommodation of the Public we have 1,500 subordinate
offices in the United States and Canada, and 3,000 offices in the
Old World and South America.

                      PRICES GREATLY REDUCED.

Waste no money on “cheap” counterfeits. Send for our handsomely
Illustrated Price List.

                 THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

                      Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

         =$4,900,000= Returned Premiums to Policy-Holders.

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                    $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES

               _By New York Standard of Valuation_.

               _It gives the Best Insurance on the
                      Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates_.

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

              C. Y. WEMPLE,
                    Vice-President.

              J. L. HALSEY,
                    Secretary.

              S. N. STEBBINS,
                    Actuary.

              H. Y. WEMPLE,
              H. B. STOKES,
                    Assistant Secretaries.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,

          59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                   66 State Street, Boston.

Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money between
this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills of exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee
of repayment,

                 Circular Credits for Travellers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                         PUBLISH THE ONLY

                     SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and enlarged.
Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For Samples
(loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.


                          LYMAN ABBOTT’S

                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=,
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.

                             EDITED BY

           Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev E. S. LORENZ.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church Prayer Meetings=.

      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.

                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.

                  A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,

                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        N. TIBBALS & SONS,

                      37 Park Row, New York.

                  30 YEARS IN THE BOOK BUSINESS.

We endeavor to get every valuable work in every department of
Biblical and Theological Literature. For example: We have 400
different works on Bible Evidences, from Augustine down; 100 on
Bible Interpretation; 150 on Homiletics; 200 on Lectures to the
Young and Lectures to Children; also on Prayers, Baptism, Prophecy,
Church History, etc., etc.

               Sunday-School Libraries a Specialty.

                       Send for particulars.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         UNFERMENTED WINE.

=Pure Juice of the Grape; no Alcohol=; tested for years; received
=International Medal=. =T. H. JOHNSON, New Brunswick, N. J=.
National Temperance Society, 58 Reade St., N.Y.; Congregational and
Baptist Publication Societies, Boston and Philadelphia.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     “IMPORTANT TO CLERGYMEN.”

                  Prince’s Improved Fountain Pen.

[Illustration: CAP THE HANDLE CONTAINS THE INK.]

As now improved, saves one third the time.

“If I were bereft of it, I should feel myself bereft of my right
hand.”—REV. LYMAN ABBOTT, _Ed. Ch. Union_.

Can be sent by mail in a registered letter. Send for circulars.
Manufactured by

                          JOHN S. PURDY,
                      212 Broadway, Cor. Fulton St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          DUDLEY’S PATENT

                             DIAGONAL

                           ROAD SCRAPER

                           IS THE BEST.

Weighs but 50 lbs., has Steel Cutter Plate, can be worked square or
at any desired angle, and is rapidly superseding all others where
it is known.

[Illustration]

A Few of Many Testimonials of its Value:

“Works in rough or smooth ground. No one who has used it will be
without it.”—M. Bartholomew & Sons, Goshen, Ct.

“Select-men of the Town of Litchfield, Ct., say: It is the
best Scraper ever invented, and cheerfully recommend it to all
interested in Roads, as calculated materially to lessen the expense
of making and repairing the same.”

“Is twice as good as you represent it. With same labor will do
two or three times as much as any scraper I ever saw. Answers our
fullest expectations.”—H. TUCKER, of Rockville.

“Leaves a road in better shape, and is easier for man and team
than any scraper I ever saw.”—J. S. KINNEY, Washington. Send for
circular,

                           S. H. DUDLEY,

               Bantam Falls, Litchfield County, Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

                ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN

           SABBATH SCHOOLS, CHURCHES OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth, 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

    TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                            758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS. Special attention given to
=CHURCH BELLS=.

         ☞ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        BUY THE BEST GOODS

                          BOGLE & LYLES,

               Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place ... NEW YORK,

                            Dealers in

                       CHOICE CANNED FRUITS

                  VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,

                          Sole Agents for

                       RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’

                       Extra Yellow Peaches.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PURE OLD

                            PALM SOAP.

                          [Illustration]

                     For the Laundry,
                                The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


            1832.       MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.       1878.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           Table Cutlery

                   _Of every Description, with_

         Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory, Celluloid,
                 Pearl and Silver-plated Handles.

                       The Celluloid Handle,

(of which we are the exclusive makers), is the equal of Ivory in
beauty, when new, and surpasses it in durability and appearance in
use.

              POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS.

         All goods bearing our NAME are fully guaranteed.

                       MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.,

                    49 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  PALAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
  SUI GENERIS]

                  Mason & Hamlin Cabinet Organs.

_Demonstrated best_ by HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
FOR TWELVE YEARS; viz: at PARIS, 1867; VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO,
1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876; TWO HIGHEST MEDALS at PARIS 1878 and
GRAND SWEDISH GOLD MEDAL, 1878. Only American Organs ever awarded
highest honors at any. Sold for cash or installments. ILLUSTRATED
CATALOGUES with new styles and prices, free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN
CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


        =9000 SUNDAY-SCHOOL MUSIC BOOKS= AT LESS THAN COST

=Owing= _to_ =Removal= _and_ =Discontinuing Publishing, we will
sell our entire stock of Sunday-School Music Books at the following
prices:—SONGS OF GRACE AND GLORY, Boards, $15 per 100. ECHOES FROM
ZION, Boards, $10. SABBATH-SCHOOL BELL, DIADEM, HEAVENLY ECHOES,
CHRISTIAN MELODIST=, _and_ =CHORAL HARP, Paper, $4, Boards $6.
REVIVAL HYMN AND TUNE BOOK, Paper, $2, Boards. $4. DAY SCHOOL BELL,
Paper, $6, Boards. $10. Postage—Paper, 2c., Boards, 4c. Sheet Music
at 1c. per page. ORGANS for SUNDAY-SCHOOLS, $35 and $40, 5 Stops.
$45, 7 do $50, 9 do $55 & $60, 11 do $65, 12 do $70, 13 do $80,
Cash.= _Not used a year, as good as new._ =PIANOS at prices equally
low. Warranted 6 years. Send for CATALOGUES. HORACE WATERS & SONS,
40 East 14th St., N. Y.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE FAMOUS

                       _VIENNA COFFEE POT_.

                          [Illustration]

          From the Vienna and Philadelphia Exhibitions.
                         Imported only by

                          E. D. BASSFORD,

         Housefurnishing, Hardware, China, Class, Cutlery
                      AND SILVERWARE STORES,

             Nos. 1 to 17 COOPER INSTITUTE, New York.

  ☞ To meet the popular demand, prices have been reduced 50 per
  cent. PRICE LIST FREE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO OBTAIN THE MISSIONARY.

Enclose Fifty Cents for your subscription (or One Dollar for two
years, or for yourself and some friend), to H. W. Hubbard, Esq.,
Assistant Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York.

If a Life Member or Pastor or S. S. Superintendent of a
contributing church, or an annual contributor of $5 or more to the
A. M. A., order it sent to you on that ground.

Keep us informed of your changes of address, etc.


HOW TO READ THE MISSIONARY.

In these busy days few people read anything all through; but you
can do better than to open at random, read a page and lay aside. 1.
Read the Editorial paragraphs for the latest aspects of our work.
2. Read the titles of longer Editorials and Contributions to see if
they contain anything you want. 3. Read through at least the one
which attracts you most. 4. The General Notes furnish a summary of
facts, opinions, legislation, discussion, and progress concerning
the three races of our care, such as you will not find elsewhere.
5. Glance over headings of Letters from the Field, and you will be
sure to find something you will want to know more about.


HOW TO CIRCULATE THE MISSIONARY.

Mark something which interests you in it, and lend it to your
neighbor.

Read or refer to a fact gleaned from it in your Prayer Meeting or
Monthly Concert.

Secure subscriptions for it in your church or community. We will
send you a list of present subscribers in your town to work from,
if you request it.


HOW TO PRESERVE THE MISSIONARY.

It is often useful for reference. The December number contains
minutes of the Annual Meeting. The February number has our list of
workers. Friends from contributing Churches come to the office for
information, which, nine times out of ten, is pointed out to them
in a recent MISSIONARY.

To preserve and bind them, punch two holes near the back and three
inches from top and bottom, through which put a string and tie
behind; open and add as the monthly numbers come to you. This
makes a simple, cheap, flexible and effective binding, and is not
patented.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                    J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


       *       *       *       *       *


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious punctuation errors corrected.

“tilth” corrected to “filth” on page 142. (the filth of slavery)

Replaced missing “U” on page 155. (Unadilla under Michigan)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 05, MAY, 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.