VOL. XXXIII.                                              NO. 6.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            JUNE, 1879.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPH—MONEY WHICH COSTS MONEY                            161
    RAILROADS AND RIVERS                                         162
    CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH                               164
    WORK STOPPED, BUT THE RECOMPENSE CONTINUED                   165
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                         166
    GENERAL NOTES                                                167
    OUR QUERY COLUMN                                             169


  THE FREEDMEN.

    A TOUR OF A MONTH THROUGH THE SOUTH ATLANTIC STATES:
      Rev. J. E. Roy, D. D.                                      169
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS—Students’ Day at Le Moyne                 171
    GEORGIA—NO. 1 MILLER STATION—Perils of Young Converts—An
      Open House                                                 171
    GEORGIA—Midway Church—Dorchester Academy—New Church at
      Cypress Slash                                              172
    SOUTH CAROLINA, CHARLESTON—Plymouth Church and Avery
      Institute                                                  174
    ALABAMA—State Conference                                     176
    LOUISIANA—South-Western Conference—Revivals and
      Conversions                                                178


  THE INDIANS.

    SPICE OF MISSIONARY LIFE                                     181

  THE CHINESE.

    THE “CONGREGATIONAL WAY” IN MISSION WORK: Rev. Wm. C.
      Pond                                                       184

  GOLDEN WEDDING GIFTS                                           186

  RECEIPTS                                                       186

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &C.                                   190

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association.

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.
    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

should be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Ass’t Treasurer, No. 56 Reade
Street, New York, or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West
Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXIII.    JUNE, 1879.         NO. 6.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are in receipt of several communications suggesting that we, as
an Association, should do something for the relief of the negro
emigrants to Kansas. We are compelled to say to this, however, that
1. We cannot divert funds from our overdrawn treasury from the work
to which we are pledged and the responsibilities we have definitely
assumed. 2. Our legitimate work is with the Freedmen in the South,
where our schools and churches are, and where the mass of the
people will be for a very long time yet. 3. That assistance to
reach their destination has been given to them from many sources,
and that their greatest need of help for a time will be after
reaching Kansas, in securing and settling upon lands. 4. That we
cherish the deepest interest in the suffering multitudes who have
already left their homes, and will cheerfully transmit, for friends
who may prefer to send through us, such moneys as may be designed
for this specific object, and will use our utmost diligence to see
that they accomplish the end for which they are set apart.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONEY WHICH COSTS MONEY.

It is unfortunate, perhaps, that the agents of the beneficence
of the churches and Christian people of the land should be
compelled so often to “rise and explain,” but the necessity will
in all probability continue so long as there is a possibility
of misunderstanding facts and figures. We are all creatures of
association, and things which are coupled together are apt to make
unwarranted impressions on our minds.

For instance, the name of the American Missionary Association has
been of late passing the rounds of the public press in connection
with large sums of money. $150,000 to four of its institutions
from the Stone estate; $20,000 for Fisk University from the
Graves legacy; $20,000 from the estate of Deacon James Smith, of
Philadelphia; $12,000 announced last month from the Avery estate,
and which is to be increased to about $18,000; $15,000 from Mr.
Arthington, of Leeds. All this sounds very rich and prosperous, and
our contributors say: “They are rich and increased in goods. For
a time, at least, they will do well. Let us thank God for their
prosperity, and turn to those whose wants are more pressing than
theirs can be.”

Just here is where the explanation must be made. First, then,
almost none of these bequests are in our hands as yet. The largest
of all is coupled with conditions which we hope to be able to meet,
but of which, until we shall have met them, we have no right to be
sure.

But secondly, and what is of more consequence, with one possible
exception, the way in which all this money is to be expended
is determined before it reaches our treasury. The donors have
examined the field, or parts of it, for themselves, and have given
their gifts, not to us, but only through us, to certain definite
fields and uses. Most of this, which is for home use, is to build
buildings, and must go for that purpose. But it will cost us money
to see these buildings built; the oversight, the correspondence,
and the co-operation of all sorts will be a drain upon our time
and treasury; and when the much needed buildings shall have been
erected, the enlarged work to which they lead will increase very
considerably the annual expense for which we must provide. Other
of these funds are for a new mission field, of which the founding
is only an item, but the carrying on from year to year will demand
larger resources than the past has ever furnished.

Dear friends, we recognize the call of God in these large gifts to
go forward, trusting in Him and in His people to supply our needs.
We do not wait until our work shall be fully provided for before we
enter on it; we do not shrink from the advance which may be needed;
but we do want you all to know that while, on the one hand, the
equipment and the opportunity for larger work are thrust upon us,
the outfit for the journey is insufficient, and the officers are
embarrassed already to carry on the work in hand.

Even with special gifts to help the current work, our receipts are
$10,595.85 less than last year at this time (May 12th), through the
falling off in legacies. Enlarging work and a shrinking purse—this
is our quandary.

Is our explanation clear? We want money day by day—more money day
by day. Not millions, though we could use millions so that they
would help on the cause of our Divine Redeemer in the world; but
moderate gifts—yes, mites even, as they come with prayer and love
for Christ; but more in number and with greater frequency; above
all, the steady supply of constantly recurring and increasing
needs, to carry on the work in hand. It costs money to spend money;
that is our most pressing need to-day, and our new gifts will need
more money. Will you plan to supply it? Or must we say to those who
would entrust us with the administration of their beneficence, “We
cannot afford to administer the trust”?

       *       *       *       *       *


RAILROADS AND RIVERS.

There are railroads and there are rivers. The first are laid out
after careful survey of the country, and follow the most direct
lines of communication possible or politic between two given
points. They tunnel mountains and bridge gorges; they cut through
hills and level up valleys. They are made. But the rivers—we, at
least, do not make them; we only find them, follow them, and use
them. They do not run exactly in parallels of longitude, nor flow
exactly south or west. They do not take the shortest courses to the
sea; they yield to circumstances, and gracefully circle round the
obstacles which they cannot surmount. Somehow, they always reach
their destination, and leave a path of life and beauty as they go.
You may divert them for a little to serve other than their main
uses, but still they flow on unwasted to the larger waters, into
which they pour their steady streams.

There are two theories of missionary work, and especially of the
work of missionary societies. One, which sets out to do one
definite thing, and to reach it by the shortest surveyed and
graded road; another which seeks an end with no less purpose and
persistency, but seeks it with more pliability—does not make the
country over to fit its needs. Now, our Association is not a
railroad, but a river. It was not made by man to serve one fixed
and changeless end. It was born of an emergency, and it has been
adapting itself to the changing needs of successive years for the
third of a century of its existence. We need not recapitulate
its history. Its early work was peculiar, and in part transient.
Enough that since the war the claims of millions of Freedmen,
enfranchised but in ignorance, has seemed its greatest work. It
has stretched out a hand more warm than full to the Chinamen on
the Western coast. It has not forgotten the wrongs or the needs of
the poor Indian. Intrusted with a fund for African evangelization,
it has sought to exercise that trust with all fidelity. Of late
the foreign work, by new offers, has claimed new attention, and
the possibility of opening a new mission in that field has been
considered. A little help was sent through it to the poorest class
of sufferers by the scourge of pestilence; a little aid seeks by it
to reach the needy thousands who have just sought asylum in Kansas;
and some of our old friends, perhaps, have come to fear lest we
were in peril of being diverted from what they and we consider to
be still our great and most important work.

We write this to assure such friends that they need not be anxious
on this score. There are no such anchors as institutions whose
foundations are laid deep in the soil. Many men talk with less
swelling pride than a few years ago of owning real estate, when
the plain truth is that real estate owns them. So we are held, if
by no other bond, to the educational and church work among the
colored people of the South. But far more we are, and shall be,
kept true to this as our main work by our ever-growing sense of its
importance to the race so long oppressed, and to the interests of
Christian civilization in our land.

The river will flow on southward still. It may bend a little to
the east or to the west, as Providence may determine; there may be
eddies along its banks, and now and then a dam along the stream to
concentrate its power; it may open, as does our own Mississippi,
through more mouths than one into the Gulf; but its course for a
generation to come is fixed, not by human resolution, but by the
Providence which makes the water-sheds and water-courses both.
To educate the colored people of the South and lift them to the
elevation of a worthy Christian citizenship is our great work.

So let the springs among the hills of New England, and the streams
which water the prairies of the West, not fear to flow in as
aforetime, only with a larger flowing, and we will pledge them
that the work to which they are devoted shall go on till the end
be reached. Meanwhile, let us not try to be a railroad, but a
river—one of the rivers of God’s earth which flow into the sea of
His great universal love and peace.

       *       *       *       *       *

We call special attention to the account in Mr. Alexander’s letter
of the work of grace which accompanied and followed the recent
meeting of the South-western Conference, at New Iberia, La. Such
records are rarer than they ought to be, and ecclesiastical bodies
are often more careful to be “not slothful in business” than
“fervent in spirit.” Pastor Butler, of the church in that place,
writes that already fifty-seven persons have offered themselves for
reception to its membership, and still more are coming.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.

3. Its Obligations.

DIST. SEC. C. L. WOODWORTH, BOSTON.

It ought to be clear by this time that Congregationalism is under
bonds to do its best to fit the Freedmen for their new condition
and duties. They _are freemen_ and _citizens_ largely through the
influence of the Congregational churches. No small part of the
anti-slavery sentiment of the country which gripped the conscience
and put into the word “_right_” an almost omnipotent meaning can be
traced to the teaching of our pulpits. They were behind no others
in preparing the people to carry into their political action what
they thought in their hearts and uttered in their closets. But with
every gain to freedom in the Northern mind a new pang was wrung
out of the heart of the slave. The laws became more severe, the
punishments more cruel, the tasks more exacting. The two sections
were being driven asunder with a repulsive force which could only
end in war. The South saw it and threatened; but the Northern
conscience, quickened by the principles of religion and of the
“higher law,” would concede nothing. The people said, “No more
slave States; no more slave territory. If we _must_ have war, let
it come; but slavery shall not be national.” This stern resolution
carried a million and a half of men to our battle-fields, and held
them there till the slave was free! It is not claimed that the
convictions of equality and right which swayed the Northern mind
were the result of Congregational teaching alone, but only that
Congregationalism marched abreast of those moral forces which made
the North equal to the work and sacrifice to which it was called.
The responsibility, nevertheless, is the same as if our churches
_alone_ had taught the doctrines which brought freedom to the slave.

This, however, is only the first step in the work they did for the
negro. No sooner was he made free than they insisted that he should
be invested with all the dignities and rights of citizenship.
They urged this upon the Government when nothing but the _direst_
necessity could justify it in putting the ballot into the hands
of a million ignorant voters. The change in the negro’s condition
was so radical—so above his capacity and education—that the
highest moral obligation rested upon those who brought it about,
to see that he was fitted for its duties. This was so clear to
the Southern people that they have said, with as much force as
logic: “We were ready to take care of the negro as a slave, in
our way; but the North took him out of our hands by violence, and
now let it take care of him in its way.” And why not? Especially,
why should not the Congregational churches, foremost in arousing
the conscience of the North against slavery, and in spurring the
Government to smite the system and enfranchise the slave, now come
to the front and lead him into the better future?

But if we had not assumed these obligations by forcing upon the
negro the condition and duties of an American citizen, he would
lay them upon us by all the wrongs he has suffered at our hands;
by all the gains we have made from his unpaid toil; by all the aid
he rendered us upon the field, and by his fidelity to us through
all the years of the struggle. How he served our living, nursed our
sick, fought our battles, watches by the graves of our fallen, will
be the unequaled theme of the future historian.

As he alone in the South showed us sympathy and offered us aid,
so now he alone is ready to receive learning and religion from
the lips of Northern instructors. And is not this reason enough
why our churches should improve the opportunity to fill his mind
and heart with those principles which are so fraught with human
weal, and are working so powerfully for the regeneration of the
world? For every interest of the South as well as of the country at
large, Congregationalism is summoned to put in its best work for
the colored people. Only thus can we lay to rest the passions which
have reddened the South with innocent blood, and bring to the land
the reign of peace and love.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WORK STOPPED, BUT THE RECOMPENSE CONTINUED.

BY A DISABLED TEACHER.

_TO_ THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY:

_Dear Friend_: Ever since our first acquaintance, fourteen years
ago, at old “61 John St.,” you have never failed to make me
your monthly visits, when we could talk over our work with all
its encouragements and discouragements, giving our own personal
experience. That experience has not at all times been very
cheering, but it certainly was inspiring, for we always separated
with more of zeal and determination in our hearts to do our part
in the great work which we love so well. During the long months
in which I wait for health and strength to come back to me, your
coming, with fresh reports of our work, is eagerly looked for, and
your visits are often “times of refreshing” to me.

Since you, in January, spoke of “the abundant recompense” which all
your workers in the field have, I have been thinking whether those
who have fallen from the ranks have any, and I feel sure that we,
too, have a goodly share of it, and I want to tell you something
about mine.

In the years when I was engaged in the work, pious souls often
assured me that I would have my reward in the future, both of this
life and that which is to come. I replied: “I get so much reward
from day to day as I work, I don’t see how there can be any left
for the future.” But I was mistaken; those workers who have been
laid aside from active service find that the reward _continues_
after the work is done.

It comes to us in various ways—this “abundant recompense.” We often
thank the Master that when health and strength were ours He led us
into the Southern field, and gave us so much to do there that self
could not always have our first or best efforts. The consciousness
that all the best years of our lives have not been wasted ones is
worth a great deal to us, and as we think of the work, and plan
and pray for it, even now our souls grow stronger, braver and
truer. There has come into our lives a recompense in the Christian
sympathy and love of noble souls who have toiled with us, and of
those who have helped us over many a hard place with their money,
and stayed our hands with their prayers and words of cheer. I hold
in sweet and grateful remembrance many who have opened their purses
in response to my importunate and oft-repeated calls, some of whom
have entered upon their eternal reward.

Up from the Southland comes many a word to cheer and comfort the
heart. From the pen of one who has long labored there comes the
precious, but forgotten promises of the 41st Psalm. How the heart
thrills with thankfulness and gladness, and, it may be, with a
little pride, when a present worker assures us that some of those
pupils in whom we are most interested, and for whom we have long
worked and prayed, are growing in true manhood and womanhood,
fitting themselves to go out into the harvest field to take up the
work that has fallen from the tired hands of their teachers. Of
those pupils who are already teachers many are carrying the light
and truth received at school into the gross darkness which hangs
over their people. From the rice fields of Ogeechee, where two of
us began the work and labored from 1865–’67, comes a good report
from one who has since, and in other places, been our pupil, and I
have your assurance that he and his wife, also a former pupil of
mine, are doing good work there. In that “School of the Prophets,”
the theological department at Talladega, are some who manfully
struggled through common fractions under my instruction. To them it
was a fiery ordeal, but it proved what manner of stuff was in them,
and when they get out into the conflict of life, fighting against
the powers of darkness, I shall look for victory.

One who nearly twelve years ago was taught to read in the old
boat-house on that beautiful sea-girt isle, is moved to preach the
Gospel. He writes me that his greatest desire is to go to Talladega
to prepare for the ministry, and will do any kind of work to pay
his expenses.

The hearts of my old aunties send up many a “God bless her dear
soul!” One writes, “I have been studying about you a great deal. I
have been praying for you, and if it is God’s will, you will get
well.” Another says, “Tell her I pray for her _every_ day.” Oh, how
rich the prayers of these poor children of the King make one feel!

All these things which make up our “abundant recompense” are
_riches_ which cannot “take to themselves wings,” but are as
enduring as the eternal ages. And who can tell what work for God
has branched off and is now spreading over the South, from the
little that we, the worn-out ones, have done.

                                                           N. T.

  _Augusta, Me., March 12, 1879._

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

ATLANTA, GA.—The new catalogue of Atlanta University gives a total
of 245 in attendance, a number exceeding any previous year. These
have come from _ten_ different States, and those from Georgia from
forty-seven counties. They are classified as follows: College
course, 27; preparatory course, 44; higher Normal course, 59; and
Normal course, 115.

A new and interesting feature has been introduced during the
year. The young women who graduate from the higher Normal course
are taught “Household Science,” embracing plain sewing, cookery,
house-cleaning, nursing the sick, &c. These branches are taught
both by familiar lectures and by practice in those arts.

MACON, GA.—The Lewis High School is prospering under its competent
teachers, Misses Gilbert and Phelps. It has been favored by the
gifts of friends. Recently a fine Smith American organ was donated,
and more recently another Northern friend has given six of Warren’s
fine geographical wall charts, which are of great assistance in
teaching geography. A number of text books have also been donated.
Daily instruction in vocal music is given, besides all the ordinary
branches, and there are weekly rhetorical exercises. The three
rooms have in all 750 square feet of good wall blackboard, and the
best school furniture.

TALLADEGA, ALA.—Seven were received into the Talladega church, May
4th, which, with those received two months ago, make thirty-seven
in all as the gathered fruits of the revival last winter. The
meetings continue to be full of interest.

SELMA, ALA.—We are happy to learn that the Rev. H. E. Brown,
of Michigan, who a few years since was in the employ of this
Association, has been sent out under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Young Men’s Christian Association as
a visitor to the colored young men of the South, and has been very
successfully conducting a series of Bible readings and Union Gospel
meetings in Selma, Ala.

HELENA, TEXAS.—On the last communion day two adults and nine
children were baptized. The church and Sunday-school are
prosperous, the latter numbering over sixty.

GOLIAD, TEXAS.—The quarterly meeting was a day of unusual interest.
The church house was furnished with a new pulpit, and the teacher
presented the church with two lamps for the same. One person was
converted on that day and four children were baptized.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

—The Mississippi Valley Labor Convention met, May 6th, at
Vicksburg. It was composed of both white and colored delegates; the
latter, however, by their own choice, not voting, but hearing what
there was to say to them. The resolutions which were adopted refer
to many causes for the exodus to Kansas, among which they do not
name extortionate and oppressive contracts, and express wonder at
the credulity of the negroes. The practical suggestions are: 1. A
system of contracts which shall be of mutual benefit. 2. Absolute
political equality. 3. Free and fair elections. 4. A limitation of
liens on expected crops. 5. Contradiction of false reports about
Kansas. 6. The unrestricted right to emigrate. Governor Foote
offered a substitute intimating that the true causes had not been
given, and suggesting local committees to investigate grievances
and protect the rights of the Freedmen, which was voted down.

—The Refugee Relief Committee of St. Louis reports that over six
thousand of the emigrants have passed through that city. About
two thousand of these were able to pay their fares to Kansas. The
others were sheltered, fed and partly clothed while there, and had
their passage paid to the same destination.

       *       *       *       *       *


Africa.

—A letter dated Demidris, Jan. 1, to Gordon (Pasha),
Governor-General of Southern Egypt, from one of his officers who
was sent to break up the slave depots in the neighborhood of Bahr
el Gazal, in the Province of Kordofan, reports an engagement with
Suleiman, one of the chief slave-traders and owner of 25 depots,
in which it is stated that the women alone, waiting importation
into Egypt, number 10,000. The Egyptian forces numbered 3,000, and
were intrenched, a part of them being armed with Remington rifles.
On the morning of the 28th of December, Suleiman, with 11,000 men,
attacked the intrenchments. After numerous assaults, in which the
Arabs, under the personal lead of Suleiman, fought with desperate
courage, the attack was completely defeated, and the assailants
fled in disorder, leaving 1,087 dead on the field. The Egyptians
lost 20 men. A special dispatch from Alexandria says: “On the day
after the battle between the Egyptians and Arabs, under the lead
of Suleiman, 5,000 deserters came over to the Egyptian camp. The
Egyptians followed the retiring enemy, killed ten chiefs and 2,000
more men, and were still in pursuit at last advices. The capture of
all the slave depots is considered certain.”

—A telegram dated London, May 5, says: Conflicts between the
Egyptian troops and the slave-dealers on the 13th and 14th of
January, in Upper Egypt, resulted in the complete defeat of the
latter, with the loss of six thousand killed and wounded and
prisoners. The Egyptian troops lost two hundred men.

—A telegraph line is now proposed from Cairo up the Nile southward
to Gondokoro; thence to Mtesa’s capital; thence to Unyanyembe;
thence to Ujiji west and Zanzibar east, from Bagamoyo to Lake
Nyassa, and to meet a line from Cape Colony to Pretoria, in the
Transvaal at Pretoria. This is said to be no more difficult than
was similar work accomplished in Australia and India.

—The Methodist Missionary Society have made arrangements for
missionary work in the interior of Africa. Mr. Osgood, who is now
in Africa, will locate a mission post somewhere in the interior,
and Miss Mary A. Sharp will soon leave this country for work
there.—_Christian Union, April 2._

—A letter from Zanzibar announces the arrival of Henry M. Stanley,
the African explorer, with M. Dutalis, the officer in command of
the Belgian expedition in Africa. It is stated that Mr. Stanley
will act as guide and interpreter to the Belgian exploring
expedition under M. Dutalis.

—An interesting discussion is begun as to the likeness between
Lake Tanganyika and the Dead Sea. No outlet of the lake has been
discovered, but the exploration has hardly yet been sufficiently
thorough to make the negative a proof. The freshness of its waters
is in striking contrast with the saltness of the Dead Sea, and, so
far, against the theory proposed. We wait for further light.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—Two new projects for a wholesale intrusion into the Indian
Territory have come to light: one promoted by certain railroads who
claim land grants there, and another expedition of several hundred
emigrants, under the lead of C. C. Carpenter, who led the Black
Hills expedition into the Sioux country several years ago. In view
of these illegal purposes, the President has issued a proclamation,
in which he says: “I do further warn and notify any and all
such persons who may so offend that they will be speedily and
immediately removed therefrom by the agent, according to the laws
made and provided; and, if necessary, the aid and assistance of the
military forces of the United States will be invoked to carry into
proper execution the laws of the United States herein referred to.”

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—Eleven young Chinese, nine males and two females, were recently
received into a Presbyterian Church in San Francisco.

—The following card is furnished for publication by the Chinese
Six Companies: “The Chinese Six Companies are daily in receipt
of applications for laborers to go to Southern States, notably
Mississippi and Louisiana, to take the place of the negro labor now
emigrating. The officers of these companies wish it to be expressly
understood that they have no control over their people’s labor, and
have never brought or caused to be brought one of their countrymen
here; and have never contracted their labor or collected their
wages in any manner whatsoever, the press of California to the
contrary notwithstanding.”

—It has been very well said recently: “In America if a man is
black, we enslave him; if he is red, we steal his lands and
massacre his wife and children; and if he is yellow, we won’t let
him come here at all.”

—The _Sunday School Times_, in commenting on the fact that eight
Chinamen were recently received into a church at Sacramento, asks
whether it wouldn’t be a good plan for Congress to pass a law that
not more than fifteen Chinese converts should join any Christian
church the same Sunday.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR QUERY COLUMN.

1. What English pronouncing dictionary is the standard in England?

2. What is the authorized pronunciation of _Khedive_?

3. Should _Beaufort_ (N. C.), be pronounced as is _Beaufort_ (S.
C.)?

4. Ought A. M. A. teachers to make special effort to have their
pupils sign the temperance pledge?

5. Can any teacher afford (or can his pupils afford to have him) do
without an educational publication?

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


A TOUR OF A MONTH THROUGH THE SOUTH ATLANTIC STATES.

  [We omit the mention of the Midway Church and School and the
  organization of the church at Cypress Slash, as an account of
  them is given elsewhere by Rev. Floyd Snelson.]

At Savannah, the Beach Institute and the mother church, with her
four or five daughters settled in the suburbs, were found to be in
a prosperous condition. Pastor Markham and Principal Koons, with
their corps of lady teachers, are making a decided impression upon
that city.

Thence to Orangeburgh, S. C., where Rev. W. L. Johnson is pastor,
and also principal of a large school, in which his wife is
assistant. Mr. Johnson had been trained up at the North, in the
Dutch Reformed way, as a protégé of the Rev. Dr. E. P. Rodgers
of New York. The visitor gave from his big map a lesson upon the
geography of our country. As a guest of Rev. Dr. Cooke, President
of the Claflin University, he had an opportunity to become
acquainted and favorably impressed with that fine institution of
our Methodist brethren. In Charleston, a Sabbath was given to
the Plymouth Church, now happy under the new pastorate of Rev.
Temple Cutler, and one day to the Avery Institute, under Prof. A.
W. Farnham, who is reproducing the style of his own Alma Mater,
the Oswego Normal. It was a delight to witness the orderliness
and accuracy of that training. It is only common fame that this
Institute stands ahead of every other in the city. It has a corps
of six teachers, and scholars enough to work them hard. Our lady
missionary, Miss H. E. Wells, I found getting hold of her peculiar
work quite hopefully; as also Miss Douglass, at Miller’s Station,
Ga. I think this arm of our service will prove equal to the
anticipation of its friends.

In North Carolina, I went first to Wilmington, where is the
nourishing Williston Normal School, with its consort church, and
all under the management of Rev. D. D. Dodge and his wife, and
Misses Warner, Fitts, Goodwin and Phelps. Besides the several young
teachers under training here, there is also a class of preachers in
the old time churches who are getting brushed up. Two nights had to
be given to talks before the school and congregation. Thence up to
Dudley, where Rev. David Peebles and his wife, lately Miss Anna
M. Day, of the Washington School at Raleigh, have charge of the
church and school in the large and comely structure which serves a
double purpose. Besides a half dozen candidates for the teaching
profession, one young man is pursuing Latin with reference to a
full classical course. This church numbers seventy-five members,
and makes a specialty of temperance and music. It has to meet in
the community a theological _coloring_ taken from the Hard-shell
Baptists and the Quakers. In the Ku-Klux times a good many Freedmen
came in here for safety.

At Beaufort I found the church and school making headway under Mr.
Michael Jerkins, a graduate of the Theological Department of Howard
University. At Morehead City, a town once of great expectations,
now blighted, our school and the city lie dead side by side.

At Woodbridge our school is under the care of Mr. W. H. Ellis, a
graduate of Williams, who was recently licensed to preach by Mr.
Peebles’ church, of Dudley. Last year, in this school, under the
excellent Miss Waugh, a revival was enjoyed which enlisted more
than a score of the scholars as disciples of the Great Master. Mr.
Ellis ministers the word on the Lord’s day, and a church fellowship
must soon be gathered here. At this place, at North River near
Beaufort, and at Dudley, some years ago, the A. M. A., with funds
specially provided, purchased several hundred acres of land to be
sold to the Freedmen. Not all of this has yet been taken up. The
highest ideal of such an investment has not been realized at these
points. Nevertheless, I find that the Freedmen almost everywhere
are making advance in securing homes and farms.

At Goldsboro’, a fine railway centre, we found an urgent call for
a church and school movement, which must soon be set forward.
Chapel Hill, the location of the State University, offers a similar
opening.

Heretofore the churches of this State have been unassociated.
Feeling the need of such fellowship, they have now secured it. In
the North Carolina Conference, which was organized at Raleigh on
May 2d, holding over a Sabbath, the five churches at Wilmington,
Dudley, Beaufort, Raleigh and McLeansville, with their ministers,
were thus united. The pastor of the church, Rev. G. S. Smith, a
graduate of Atlanta, was made the moderator of the Conference, and
Rev. David Peebles secretary. It was a rich and glowing meeting.
The several parts and methods of a regular Conference came together
as naturally as though this were an experienced ecclesiastical
body. The entertaining church was greatly comforted, and some
special services were to follow, Rev. David Peebles remaining to
assist. The next meeting is to be at Dudley, beginning on the first
Friday of May, 1880.

By letters missive from the church at Beaufort, an Ecclesiastical
Council was convened at Raleigh, during the session of the
Conference, to examine and ordain Mr. Michael Jerkins. The Council
being well satisfied with the examination, proceeded on Sabbath
evening to the appropriate public services. Sermon and prayer of
ordination by Supt. Roy; right hand of fellowship by Rev. David
Peebles; charge by Rev. Geo. B. Smith. Rev. Dr. H. M. Tupper,
President of Shaw University (Baptist), participated in the
services.

The Washington School of Raleigh, these many years under the
formative influence of Miss E. P. Hayes, now assisted by the
pastor’s wife and Miss Hettie Minton, has here, as with our
schools everywhere else, been the great feeder of the church. It
has prepared not a few school-teachers and started some young
men on the way to the ministry. The Sabbath-school held in the
Washington school-house, also under the superintendence of Miss
Hayes, has been complimented by one of the white pastors as the
best Sunday-school in the city. Its teachers are all from among the
former pupils of the school, except the pastor and his wife, who
have large classes of adults. It ordinarily numbers from two to
three hundred. It is gratifying indeed to hear the young people,
who from these schools have come on to be teachers and preachers,
publicly express their profound appreciation of these godly women
who have led them along the path of education and of character. It
is characteristic of these students in general that they delight to
put honor upon their lady teachers. They are not too proud to own
that they came up under the tutelage of women.

On the home stretch I visited, inspected and addressed the church
and school at McLeansville, N. C., under the care of Rev. Alfred
Connet and his daughter, and also the Brewer Normal School at
Greenwood, S. C., under Principal Backenstose. Since going to his
field last summer, Pastor Connet has shared with his people in a
gracious revival and in the building of a parsonage. The structure
serving for church and school use is comely and convenient.

This tour through the old North State has greatly increased my
appreciation of its material resources, its people of both colors,
its recuperative process, and its public institutions.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Students’ Day at Le Moyne.

PROF. A. J. STEELE, MEMPHIS.

April 23d was Students’ day at Le Moyne. This interesting day was
a complete success in every respect. The school was under such
excellent discipline that there was no hesitancy in surrendering
it entirely to the students for a day’s experience. The faculty
were chosen by the school with a great deal of judgment, and on
Wednesday morning they took their places upon the platform.

The new principal is a man of a great deal of promise—the principal
of the intermediate department, a young man Who is an earnest
student and who has already had some experience in teaching. Other
teachers were equally well chosen.

The lower schools came up as usual, marching to the music of
the piano. After appropriate devotional exercises, the pupils
re-passed to their school-rooms below, and the other classes to
their respective duties. The work in the classes was as usual, and
the order and attention were remarkable. The teachers deported
themselves with much dignity, and seemed anxious to avoid an
assuming, overbearing manner, which might have been expected from
the newness of the positions.

Many visitors were in and out during the day, and remarked upon the
order and good feeling manifested. The influence of these days upon
the school is most excellent. We can but feel that being thrown
upon their own resources in this way, their executive ability and
devotion to work is tested to the utmost; and it requires no small
moral culture to avoid temptations to disorder that might come to
those whose hearts are not thoroughly in the work.

Our year has been greatly broken by the time lost at the beginning
of the year by the epidemic, yet the school never seemed to be
in a more prosperous condition. Both the normal and intermediate
departments are filled to overflowing. Our horizon seems
brightening more and more, and we hope at the close of the year
not only to have gained in popularity, but to have extended the
influence of the school for good.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Perils of Young Converts—An Open House—Temperance.

MISS E. W. DOUGLASS, NO. 1, MILLER STATION.

Since I wrote last we have had a series of meetings during the
evenings of one week. Every Friday evening there is a meeting for
prayer and religious instruction, attended by all the scholars.
This has been greatly blessed. Twenty of the scholars profess
to have been converted. As soon as their parents knew that they
were interested about their souls’ welfare, many of them were put
under the instruction of ignorant godfathers or godmothers, to be
“brought through” by a course of dreams and other superstitions.
How far this has turned them away from simple trust in Jesus we
cannot tell. We can only teach them the right way, and leave them
with the Master. One thing I have learned—that these teachers
are never satisfied with their pupils till they obtain a promise
to join _their_ church. Four joined us at our communion season
in March. One, an old white-headed man; three, children. These
children are exposed to persecution because they did not “come
through” the right way. They are told that they are no Christians,
for they “hav’n’t dun prayed yet.” One little boy, who has been
a member of the church a year, and of whose life all speak well,
could not partake with us. He sat and looked on sadly as long as he
could endure it, and then went out and wept bitterly. He did not go
to his godfather for guidance, and he has now persuaded the boy’s
mother to forbid his communing. I found him weeping after meeting,
but still trusting in Jesus. He said, “I know I love Him, and try
every day to do what He wants me to.”

This course of “travel” in dreams is what they call “praying.”
Though most of those converted will join other churches, yet they
will continue in our Sunday-school, being absent only when there is
preaching in their churches. Thus we hope to lead them to take the
Bible for their guide.

Notwithstanding the house is so open that we have to hold our
papers tightly, or put a weight on what we lay down (for the wind
always blows there), yet my school at Cross Roads is increasing in
numbers and interest. Last Sabbath the wind was breaking trees and
throwing down fences, and twice during our school here burst open
the door and blew over benches, so that all said, “You cannot go to
Cross Roads; you will get killed by falling branches.” After asking
guidance, I thought I ought to go. As I passed under swaying limbs,
and was enveloped in a cloud of sand, I saw how impossible it would
be to teach in that open house; but I thought, God can calm the
wind. I asked Him, and almost immediately there was a comparative
calm, and I went on comfortably.

I find many in my walks who have once been church members, but
“fell out.” Often, too, I meet those who show very plainly that
they frequent the whiskey shops, of which there are no less than
six within two miles of the Cross Roads church. A young man, one of
my former pupils, told me, as I tried to show him his danger even
in taking a little, “The ministers and church members use it; how
then can it be so bad?” This is true, and some say they cannot pray
and sing well till they get enough to make them feel well. Wherever
I find those who can read I give tracts, and to others I read of
the evils of tobacco and strong drink. To all I read the Bible, and
try to make them see that, the Bible way is the only safe way, and
the road to happiness here and hereafter.

If Christians could only realize the terrible heathenism of the
ignorant masses, and the danger to our free institutions from
this ignorance, coming under Romish influence and the lead of
unprincipled men, I am sure your treasury would be so filled that
the number of teachers and missionaries would be multiplied a
hundred fold, as they need to be if we are saved.

       *       *       *       *       *


Midway Church—Dorchester Academy—New Church at Cypress Slash.

REV. FLOYD SNELSON, M’INTOSH, LIBERTY CO.

I have been quite silent since my return from Africa and resumed my
work here; not altogether because there was nothing of interest to
write, but because I thought it more important to keep the sword in
hand until the victory was gained than to stop in the heat of the
battle to report progress. Notwithstanding the unpleasant situation
of a church worshiping in a house unfinished and unprovided with
heaters in the month of January, we determined to observe the week
of prayer. Some religious interest was manifested among the young
people, which was encouraged in every way possible, and one after
another gave himself to the Lord, until March 23d on our communion
season, when nineteen, hopefully converted, united with the church.
Rev. R. F. Markham, who is now in charge of the work of the A. M.
A. in and around Savannah, came out by invitation on the 21st and
remained until Monday the 24th; delivered the preparatory lecture
on Saturday, preached Sunday morning, assisted in the other duties
pertaining to the communion, and in the afternoon delivered a very
interesting lecture on the work of the A. M. A. This was listened
to with great interest by about 700 people in the house and about
300 outside who could not possibly get in. I would like much to
give you a short account of the candidates’ confessions, but it
would make my letter too long. Their ages range from 10 to 60 years.

I have had the work of building a new school-house, nicely
furnished and very conveniently arranged, and have also been
working up a church in a new field. The new building was built
with means furnished by the A. M. A., and with such help as the
people here could give, at a cost of $1,100. It is called the
Dorchester Academy, from its Puritan history. First, the Pilgrim
Fathers planted Dorchester in Massachusetts; then Dorchester, South
Carolina; then Dorchester, Liberty, Georgia; and lastly, Dorchester
Academy at Snelsonville, four miles on the Sunberry Road, from No.
3 A. & G. R. R. This was dedicated April 13 by Dr. J. E. Roy, Field
Superintendent of the A. M. A. The address was rich and full of
instruction. He dwelt principally upon the blessings of the family
institution of home; the duties of the three divisions of the
family in the relation which each sustains to the other. $50 was
pledged toward the debt of $100 which was due on the new building.
Judge E. Fulton (white) promised $5 of the $50, and made a very
encouraging speech to the people.

On Monday night Dr. Roy delivered at our church a lecture on “Our
Country,” illustrated by his large map. This was a grand treat
to all. The whites present expressed themselves as being highly
pleased.

Tuesday morning, the 15th, it began to rain, but ceased about 7
o’clock. Very soon ten buggies and one-horse wagons, well loaded
with ministers, delegates and spectators, were seen on their way
to a council of churches which was called to meet 14 miles N. W.
of us to consider the expediency of organizing a church at Cypress
Slash. The roads are quite level all the way, pretty much through a
pine forest. All were highly pleased with the trip. Three churches
were represented in the council—the Midway, Ogeechee and Savannah
churches. Dr. Roy represented the A. M. A.; Rev. J. R. McLean
was chosen scribe, and Rev. F. Snelson moderator. In reply to
inquiries it was said that the community generally would look upon
the movement with favor. They wished as soon as possible to have
an intelligent minister sent to them, such as the A. M. A. would
recommend, and they pledged to do all they could to support him.
Fifteen persons were then baptized, 20 were received by confession,
28 from other churches—48 in all. A sermon was preached by Dr. Roy,
from Rev. xxii 17: “The Spirit and the Bride say, Come.” Scripture
read by Mr. J. McIntosh. The ordinance of baptism administered
and the prayer offered by Rev. F. Snelson. Rev. J. R. McLean
gave a short address and the right hand of fellowship. Rev. R.
F. Markham gave the address to the church, and Dr. Roy extended
a cordial welcome to the fellowship of all the Congregational
churches in America. Five deacons were then ordained, Mr. Markham
offering the ordaining prayer of consecration. Several whites were
present; one white lady, who assisted largely in providing dinner
for our company. I must acknowledge this to be the first place
in the South where I have _ever_ seen a white man ask for prayer
among the colored people and at their meeting. This was done by a
man of about 60 years, while I was trying to gather the nucleus
which formed this church. Another important Congregational seed is
planted; pray that its growth may be a success.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH CAROLINA.

Plymouth Church—Home and Sunday-School Work—Avery Institute—Social
Recognition.

REV. TEMPLE CUTLER, CHARLESTON.

We came here from Chattanooga about the first of March. We have
not had time to do much more than to look about us and take the
lay of the land. There seems to be no reason why we may not build
up, in this city, a strong church upon the true foundation of the
Apostles. The church here (Plymouth) is largely an offshoot from
the old Circular, Independent, or Congregational church, one of
the oldest in this city. In an old plan of the city, giving the
location of the principal buildings in 1704, the White Meeting
House occupies a conspicuous position, and probably gave its name
to the street on which it stood, which is now the principal street.
This church was established by Presbyterians, Congregationalists
and French Protestant refugees. It afterwards passed into the
hands of Congregationalists, and then suffered, as many of our
Congregational churches did, by a division, a part forming
themselves into a Unitarian congregation. Not far from 120 members
from this old Independent church have joined Plymouth church since
its organization. We do not have to contend, therefore, with the
prejudice against a new form of government and worship, as we do
in some parts of the South. Besides this, there are Presbyterian
churches among the colored people here whose mode of worship is so
like ours that the people have been educated into sympathy with our
government and worship. Notwithstanding all this, from one cause
and another, Plymouth church has had a stormy life, and is now
struggling for existence. What will be the outcome of our effort it
is not best to predict; only this: “If God be for us, who can be
against us?” I remember a Christian worker once made the remark,
that “If we have God on our side, we are in the majority, let who
will be on the other.” This is the encouragement we have. If we
can succeed in getting the membership decidedly and firmly on the
Lord’s side, the end is secured. But the obstacles and hindrances
are not few. What we need, and what alone can save us, is a baptism
of power from on high. Some of our good friends at the North are
in mortal fear of the doctrine of a higher Christian life. If they
will come down here, we will show them some of the phases of the
lower Christian life, until they will be willing to accept anything
that will tend to make Christians holy and love one another. I
don’t propose to say much about the church at present, only this:
that we need greatly a revival of pure religion.

Miss Wells, our missionary, is getting into the homes of the
people, and we already see the good results of her work. She has
organized a Sunday-school in the out-skirts of the city, at which
she has secured many more promises than attendants. Still she
is working on, and will eventually succeed in her enterprise.
The readiness of the colored people to promise is wonderful, but
the fulfilment is exceedingly doubtful. If you question their
fulfilling their pledge, they reply, “Oh, yes, Missus, we coming
shuah; you may look for we.” Sure enough we do look, but seldom
find. Our home Sunday-school is increasing in efficiency and
numbers, and we hope before long to report a prosperous condition.

Avery Institute is one of the finest schools in the South; I don’t
know as there is a superior to it anywhere. A gentleman in the
city was speaking of the receptivity of the colored children in
comparison with the whites, to the disparagement of the former,
when another gentleman, prominent in democratic politics, said
there was no disparagement on that side. “You just go over
to that Avery school, and hear the examinations, and listen
to their literary exercises; why, it is glorious, perfectly
wonderful—_magnificent!_” This is not undeserved praise. Every
visitor expresses himself highly pleased with the appearance of the
school. Prof. Farnham deserves the praise which he receives for the
high character of his school. After the anniversary exercises, just
before Easter, the students and graduates of the school presented
Avery with a beautiful flag of blue bunting with a palmetto in
white worked in the centre, and Avery Institute in large letters
above and below. It is the first time the flag of the State was
ever presented to a school supported by Northern philanthropists
for the benefit of the colored people.

I would say in regard to social recognition, that the principal
objection to us workers here is, that we are Northerners. I do
not think any class regards it such a terrible disgrace to do
something for the elevation of the negroes. Charleston is far in
advance of other cities of the South in this respect. It is the
only city that I have seen where a real Christian conception, or
rather _perception_, of duty seems to be felt. The city has built
some of its finest school buildings for the colored children; in
one of which there are 25 white teachers, all Southern born. In
another school, under the care of Rev. Mr. Adams, a colored man,
as principal, there are three or four white ladies from some of
the most respected families in the South. Several of the colored
churches are ministered to by white men. In _antebellum_ days, Dr.
Jeredeaux (Presbyterian) had a church of colored people, where the
whites had to take the gallery, while the blacks held the pews
below. The building was one of the largest in the city and used
to be thronged. Since he left, his congregation has become a good
deal scattered. He had a singular power over his people. He thought
as much of his “niggers” as he did of his white congregation, if
not more. He would not let any man preach to his colored church.
He was pastor of a white church at the same time, and many of his
white congregation would go to hear him at Zion church, but they
had to take the gallery. I do not mean to say, by any means, that
every thing is pleasant and sweet between the two races, but there
are things to commend. The things to be condemned, we hope, will
soon pass away, and we shall not have to think of some things which
we leave unsaid. It is certainly pleasant to labor in a community
where you are not constantly reminded that you are despised by
Christian people, and some of them from the North, too, because
you are doing what your conscience and every sentiment of our holy
religion commends. If anything will stir up all the depths of
righteous indignation, and sorely tempt one to go a little over the
bounds of the term righteous, it is to be brought in contact with
that phase of Christianity which prevails almost universally in
the South; and the fact that letters are not filled with burning
words of scathing criticism of this spirit, is a standing proof
that our workers exercise the largest spirit of charity. And they
are right. We are not here to seek the applause of men, and I
presume it is altogether better for us and the people among whom we
labor, that the white people do not welcome us to this field. I can
easily see the snare that popular favor would be to us. I have long
since come to the conclusion that God knows best how to have His
work accomplished. If some misconstrue our motives in coming into
this work, it is no more than the men in Christ’s day did in regard
to his motive. It is sufficient if the servant be as his Lord. Oh,
for grace, _grace_, _grace_, to do our Master’s will.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

The State Conference of Congregational Churches.

MRS. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA.

The fourth annual meeting of the Conference opened with a sermon by
Rev. Dr. Bascom, for the last winter pastor of the church. He spoke
from the words, “Ye are the salt of the earth,” impressing us with
the valuable estate of the Christian.

Saturday was held our first morning prayer meeting, when “Blest be
the tie that binds” was the sentiment of every heart. Thanksgivings
for revivals of God’s grace in the churches and in individual
hearts arose like holy incense. At other meetings of this kind,
numerous and interesting accounts were given of special visitations
of the Spirit; at Anniston, the Cove, and Childersburg; at
Talladega, Selma, Marion and Montgomery; the last two not resulting
in any extensive work of grace. We felt how sweet that there are no
desert places in God’s love.

The first paper noticed on the programme was “Our Mission Work,” by
Rev. G. W. Andrews, Talladega—an inspiration from his experience of
nearly nine years in the service, instructive and profitable. After
the rest and refreshment at the “Home” of two hours’ “nooning,” we
listened to the discussion of the question, “How shall we interest
the church of Christ, North and South, in our work?” Some of the
replies: By doing it with all our might, thus showing that it
interests us; by showing that it is a specific work, placed in the
hands of the Christian church by the marked Providence of God;
by combining the efforts of women, North and South, for special
missionary work; by not only arousing men, but raising money to
carry it on to successful completion.

Right here came in most appropriately the presentation of “The duty
of economy and industry,” so as to increase our giving, by Rev. D.
L. Hickok, Mobile. Full of fresh and vigorous thought, the most
prominent was that of _saving_ to spend.

At the announcement, “Examination of candidates for the ministry,”
nine young men came forward. The young men were not only questioned
by their leader, Rev. Mr. Andrews, but by many others on the
general range of questions in systematic theology, followed by
personal Christian experience in their calls to the ministry, until
all present were convinced of their thorough preparation for their
work. The evening was given to an address by the Rev. J. E. Roy, D.
D.: “How are the Freedmen getting on?”—a graphic picture of their
condition then (at the surrender) and now.

A little time being left, “How to win souls,” by Rev. O. W. Fay,
of Illinois, lately arrived, was impressively treated. First, make
it your business; then, in successfully prosecuting this business,
come into personal contact with him you would win. Sabbath morning
we were disappointed by the absence of Prof. J. C. Silsby, of
Selma, who was to have conducted the Sabbath-school quarterly
review. After a short review of the quarter’s lessons, brief
addresses were made, and the time profitably spent. The sermon
Sabbath morning, by Mr. J. D. Smith, of Shelby, from the text,
“Can ye not watch with me one hour?” was a touching picture of the
heavy-laden disciple and a Saviour’s yearning for sympathy. At 3
P. M. a children’s meeting, addressed chiefly by Prof. E. P. Lord,
of Talladega, was said to be very interesting and instructive. The
writer was unable to be present. Monday morning a business meeting
closed the session of Conference proper and opened


THE THEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

The first paper, “The History and necessity of a new Revision of
the Bible,” by Rev. C. B. Curtis, was a most thorough treatise upon
the subject, for which he expressed himself partly indebted to the
_Sunday-School World_. We admired the caution with which he handled
the sacred subject, lest some poor wayfaring man should hear to
his hurt. At the end we were left to anticipate with joy the new,
complete and pure revision, which, after all, will not contain _one
single change_ vital to Christian faith.

The second paper, “The Relation of Theological Education to the
Church of Christ,” was by Mr. J. D. Smith, of Shelby, showing that
a pure religion is conserved by an educated ministry; and without
it, the tendency is to superstition and heathenism. Following this,
a study of the 110th Psalm, conducted by Mr. Y. B. Sims, of the
theological class, brought us all under his tutelage and sharp
questioning for half an hour. I noticed some of the Doctors of
Divinity scratching their heads previous to answering, while “the
smile went round.” At night we listened to a sermon on the “First
Commandment,” by Rev. D. L. Hickok. Power, pathos and eloquence
were combined in it. Plans of sermons by Revs. P. J. McEntosh,
Horace Taylor, Alfred Jones, and Revs. Andrews and Bascom, closed
the Institute.


THE SABBATH-SCHOOL CONVENTION,

the third section of the Conference, opened on Tuesday with an
address by Rev. D. L. Hickok, of Mobile, on “The Field and the
Workers.” Other topics of this interesting day were: “The Best
Methods of Conducting Teachers’ Meetings,” Rev. G. W. Andrews;
“Necessity of Pointed Teaching,” Rev. P. J. McEntosh; “How to
Cultivate the Spirit of Giving in Sunday-schools, and How to
Dispose of Moneys Collected,” Mr. J. D. Smith; “S. S. Music—How to
keep up with the mass of New Music,” Rev. C. B. Curtis. Reports
of Sabbath-schools. At night the S. S. Convention closed with a
multitude of speeches on as many topics.


THE WOMAN’S MISSIONARY MEETING

was held in the afternoon. We could not have foregone the good we
gained by that excellent meeting. I have regretted that I did not
reserve my time for an exclusive report of it, as it was one of
so much interest; I will only note its general features, however,
as full minutes will be published in connection with the minutes
of the Conference. After the usual devotional exercises and
reports, we listened to an address by Rev. Dr. Roy, which was so
thoroughly appreciated, that a unanimous vote of thanks was given
at its close. Then came the following papers: “The Opportunities
afforded to the Women of the Colored Race for Education and Moral
Improvement,” Miss M. J. Adams, Montgomery; “Present Encouragements
to further prosecute Special Missionary Work for our Colored
Women and Girls,” Mrs. H. W. Andrews, Talladega; “The Industrial
School, a Means of Success in Training our Young Women for Future
Usefulness,” S. Ida Allen, Talladega.

The Conference with its triple object closed, we were ready to
enjoy the best wine, which, after the example in Cana, had been
reserved till the last. The interesting


EXAMINATION AND ORDINATION SERVICES

of Mr. J. D. Smith, Shelby, took place on Wednesday; examination
conducted by Rev. O. W. Fay, the new pastor at Montgomery.
Searching questions were put, and grew more and more so as the
candidate showed abundant ability to answer. An examination of
two hours was well sustained. The leading examiner said he had
never listened to a better examination, and had attended all the
important ones about Chicago. One reply I must give you, showing
the firm convictions of Mr. Smith on the subject of emotional
religion: Ques.—Do you think it necessary, when under conviction,
that a man should be thrown on to the floor and go through various
contortions of body before he can become a Christian? Ans.—No,
sir; I do not think when God knocks at the door of a man’s heart,
that he “knocks down the man.” This reply evidently met with
hearty approval. The ordination exercises were conducted in the
evening; sermon by Rev. Wm. H. Ash, Florence, an earnest setting
forth of ministerial duties. The impressive ordaining prayer by
Rev. Dr. Bascom, and charge to pastor and right hand of fellowship
by Revs. Taylor and Andrews. The doxology, “Praise God, from whom
all blessings flow,” closed what to us had seemed like a “feast of
weeks.”

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH-WESTERN CONFERENCE.

Annual Meeting at New Iberia, La.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, NEW ORLEANS.

Our Annual Conference met at New Iberia, April 2–6, and on account
of the deep interest and spiritual results directly attending
it, marks an important era in the history of the Congregational
churches of Louisiana. The very delightful meeting of the
Conference in 1878, at the same place, prepared us for the
recurrence of like scenes this year. But the Lord had greater
and better things in store for us, and the Conference of 1879
stands alone in the marvellous tenderness and earnestness which
characterized all its sessions, and in the precious baptism of the
Holy Spirit, resulting in the conversion of _fifty souls_, and in
the quickening and reviving of all the churches represented.

Of the 16 churches connected with the Conference, 14 were
represented. Two large churches, one at Gretna, (Rev. W. P. Ward,
pastor,) numbering 250 members, and the one at Algiers, (Rev. James
Craig, pastor,) numbering 121 members, which left the Conference
seven years ago, and have since been independent, were very
cordially re-admitted. The brethren on the ground understand the
great importance of this step. The re-admission of these large
churches will be an element of strength in many directions. Their
temporary withdrawal was the result of a misunderstanding which
should never have occurred.

Two new churches were received—the church at _Harangville_, in
Lafourche parish, with a membership of 30, and the church at
_Little Pecan_, in Iberia parish, eight miles from the city of New
Iberia. Rev. P. P. Proctor will take charge of this church.

The year has been one of growth. Revivals were reported in several
of the churches, especially in the Central Church of New Orleans
and in Terrebonne.

The membership of the churches numbers 1,303. During the year
ending April 1st, 1879, there have been admitted to the churches
213, of whom 190 were received on profession of their faith. Number
in Sabbath-school, 670. Adult baptisms, 146; infant baptisms, 122.

Our Northern friends will be startled to know that 119 have been
excommunicated during the year. But after all it is a hopeful
sign. It is a process of purification painful, but necessary. The
church cannot afford to shelter unworthy people. I wrote to one of
the pastors who had sent his report to me, and asked him if it was
true that 37 had been excommunicated from his church the past year.
“Yes, sir,” he wrote me, “it is all right; they were not walking in
Christ.”


DISCUSSIONS.

The subjects considered were practical and the addresses were
earnest and to the point. The topics of “Church Extension,”
“Education,” “Temperance,” and the “Moral Character of Ministers
and Church Members,” came prominently before the Conference. The
sentiments expressed, in which there was entire agreement among
the brethren, were pure in tone, and placed our churches upon
the broad platform of moral purity and intelligence. I shall be
pardoned if I particularize. Social and domestic relations among
the colored people in the dark days of slavery, in a great many
instances, do not bear inspection. The necessities of those days
call for a charitable judgment, but do not justify a continuance
of the evil. There is but one sentiment in the Congregational
churches of Louisiana on this subject: _legal marriage is insisted
on in all cases_. No exception is allowed on any plea. Said one of
our pastors while this discussion was pending, “Individuals living
unlawfully can remain members of my church only so long as it takes
to call a church meeting to turn them out.” The pastors agreed that
they could afford to preside over small churches, but not over
impure churches. I desire to emphasize this fact, that our friends
may know that we are building upon a good foundation, and that our
work, whatever the rate of its progress, is in accord with the
Gospel of Christ.

The discussion on the topic of “Education” called forth the deep
convictions of the brethren that the churches need and must have
educated pastors, and that the colored people must demand the
highest benefits of education that can be obtained. The first
eager, enthusiastic desire for education which followed in the
wake of emancipation has been succeeded by a calm, intelligent,
determined conviction that the future of the race in America
depends upon the thorough education of the people.


CHURCH EXTENSION.

A question which occupied the serious attention of the brethren was
the extension of our work in the State,—how may our churches be
strengthened and their usefulness extended, and how may new fields
be occupied and cultivated? It was represented to the Conference
that several churches occupying virtually an independent position
were prepared to join our ranks, and that “all things were ready”
to organize churches in many communities where the people were in
sympathy with our spirit and polity. To meet this demand, and to
gather a harvest already ripe, the Conference decided, and I think
wisely, to appoint from their own number four missionaries, who
should go through the Southern parishes to preach the Word, to
instruct and encourage the people, and, wherever the opportunity
offered, organize believers into churches, and minister to them
till stated preaching and pastoral care could be provided. The
brethren appointed were Rev. W. P. Ward, of Gretna, Rev. James
Craig, of Algiers, Rev. Homer Jones, of Lake Peigneur, and Rev.
Samuel Smith, of Terrebonne.

I have great confidence that these brethren will bring good tidings
to the Conference in 1880.


ORDINATION.

The church at Terrebonne asked that Samuel Smith, who had for
several years exercised his gifts as a preacher, and who was known
to the brethren as a thoroughly good man, be ordained to the Gospel
ministry. The church at Lafourche Crossing presented the name
of William Reed, who had supplied their pulpit for one year; and
Thomas E. Hillson, of New Orleans, who was licensed two years ago,
applied in his own name for ordination. The examination of the
candidates was faithful and searching, and was well sustained. It
was unanimously approved, and the public services of ordination
took place on Saturday night, in the presence of a very large and
deeply interested audience.


THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

I have reserved till now the narrative of one of the most wonderful
and precious revivals it has been my privilege to witness.
Occurring in connection with the sessions of the Conference, it
seemed like the Divine benediction upon our work.

The pastor, Rev. Wm. Butler, said to me on my arrival, “We want
revival services every night. I have announced them, and the people
expect them.”

No special services had been held, and no conversions had occurred;
but the people were anticipating the Conference with great
expectations of good. The first night the church was filled. As
Moderator I preached the annual sermon to an attentive and tender
audience. At the conclusion of my sermon the pastor said to me,
“Call out the mourners.” I said, “No; wait until to-morrow night.”
In my heart I did not expect a revival to begin the first night.

The early morning prayer meeting was a rich spiritual feast; the
discussions during the day were marked by perfect harmony. At night
the church was packed. The spirit of God was manifestly present.
Mr. Hall and Mr. Ward preached effectively. Those desiring to
become Christians were invited forward to the “mourner’s seat.”
Thirteen responded. The good work had begun, and we had only to
“wait and see the salvation of God.”

An inquiry meeting was held in connection with the morning prayer
meeting. Those who came proved by their words and manner how deeply
God had convicted them of sin, and their need of a Saviour. Night
came again, and with it an eager, crowded assembly. Mr. James
preached earnestly, and the number of inquirers was increased to
twenty.

The next night, Saturday, was to be the last of our Conference,
and my anxiety was almost painful. I was appointed to preach the
ordination sermon for the three brethren to be set apart to the
ministry, and in my selection and treatment of a subject I had
but one desire and thought—to deepen the impression already made,
and to persuade sinners to make their peace with God. I said to
the brethren, “We will change the usual order of services, and
the sermon will come last to-night.” God helped me to preach. I
felt that His word went home to many hearts. The church could not
nearly contain the throngs who came. The door-ways were crowded,
and numbers stood beneath all the windows. The appeal to rise and
come to Jesus was responded to by 40, half of whom were men. None
could doubt the presence and power of the Holy Ghost. The tidal
wave was moving on, but had not yet reached its height. On Sunday
morning I took a 5 o’clock breakfast and started for two distant
churches, the one 15 miles away and the other 25 miles distant from
New Iberia, leaving St. Paul’s church in the care of the pastors
who had remained over the Conference. As I was passing the house
of one of the brethren I was called in to see the most prominent
man in the community among the colored people, formerly State
senator, who was under the deepest and most agonizing conviction
of sin. He had risen from his bed two hours before the break of
day, and had come to this house to beg the brethren to pray for
him. The household were aroused, a prayer circle was formed around
him, and they interceded for him with heartfelt earnestness. When
I went in he was pacing the room, his tears were flowing like
summer rain, and cries of agony broke from his lips. “What does
this mean, Mr. Alexander?” he said to me. I replied, “It means, my
dear friend, that God is speaking to you, and entreating you to
repent and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” We knelt together. I
prayed for him; and he then and there offered up to God the prayer
of a contrite, heart-broken man. I shall always remember one or
two expressions in that prayer. “O God! Thou hast always been kind
and good to me. Thou hast crowned my life with blessings, and I
have been Thine enemy. O God! spare me and save me. My poor little
babes who are in heaven, go to Jesus and ask Him to forgive me. All
Christians in heaven, go to the Saviour and intercede for me.”

I was obliged to leave him to meet my appointments. I returned on
Monday. The pastor and people met me and said, “You cannot go to
New Orleans to-day; you must preach to-night.” I gladly consented.
Never did I feel myself so completely in God’s hands. It was an
unspeakable joy to preach the precious Gospel that night. I again
appealed to all who felt their need of forgiveness to come forward
and begin a Christian life. As though moved by one impulse, SIXTY
at once came forward and fell upon their knees. I saw before me 30
men from 18 to 70 years of age, and as many women. With prayer and
song and exhortation the meeting continued till nearly midnight.
We could not close it a moment sooner. Eight or ten found peace in
believing in Jesus on their knees that night.

I was compelled to return to New Orleans on Tuesday. It was God’s
work, and He carried it forward gloriously. About 50 have already
joined the church, including the man of whom I have particularly
spoken. His confession of Christ in the church was manly and
thrilling. I am in almost daily receipt of letters from the young
converts. Their joy is deep, peaceful and intelligent. I feel how
inadequately I have described this wonderful work of grace. I have
left much for our friends to infer; but even then they can hardly
conceive the warmth, the depth and the glory of this work of God.

I am profoundly grateful for the Conference of 1879, and desire to
say to our friends that the “signs of promise” for our small band
of Congregational churches in Louisiana were never so bright as
to-day. Let those who have ever been the friends of the colored
people take fresh heart and courage, and push forward the work,
till brighter, richer, grander results are attained.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

THE SPICE OF MISSIONARY LIFE.

Rev. Myron Eells, S’Kokomish, W. T.


This frontier life among the Indians has its romance, some things
being pleasant and some not so pleasant. The white people in the
region where I travel are generally as kind as they can be; the
Indians seldom do a favor without wishing pay for it, though that
is not always so; but the elements are sometimes antagonistic.

At one time I was returning from Seabeck in a canoe, thirty miles
distant, after preaching, with two Indians. We live three miles
above the mouth of the S’kokomish River, but everywhere around its
mouth are mud flats, which are very troublesome at low tide. At
nine o’clock at night we reached the mouth of the river, with the
tide low and still running out. The Indians thought that they could
find the channel, but in the darkness they made a mistake and ran
on to the flats, where we remained until the tide turned. It was
chilly, as a November night generally is. We had an overcoat and
pair of blankets which kept us somewhat comfortable, but it was
four o’clock in the morning before we reached home.

Again, I started with eight canoes from Port Gamble for Seabeck,
twenty miles, but a strong head wind arose. The Indians worked
hard for five hours, when nearly all gave out, having traveled
only ten miles, and we camped on the beach. It rained also, and
the wind blew stronger, so that the trees were constantly falling
around us. I had only a pair of blankets, an overcoat and a mat
with me, but having obtained another mat of the Indians, I made a
slight roof over me with it, and went to sleep. About two o’clock
in the morning I was aroused by the Indians, when I learned that a
very high tide had come and drowned them out. My bed was on higher
ground than theirs, but in fifteen minutes that ground was three
or four inches under water. We waded around, put our things in
the canoes, and soon, wet and cold, in the middle of February, we
started. There was still some rain and wind, and rowing by turns in
order to keep from suffering, it took us four hours to reach our
destination.

I started from Dunginess for Elkwa, a distance of twenty-five
miles, on horseback, but after proceeding ten miles the horse
became so lame that he could go no farther. I could not well get
another one, so I was obliged to travel on foot; but soon I reached
Morse Creek, and could find no way of crossing. The stream was
quite swift, having been swollen by recent rains. The best way
seemed to be to ford it; so after taking off some of my clothes, I
started in. It was only about three feet deep, but so swift that it
was difficult to stand, and cold as December; but with a stick to
feel my way, I crossed, and it only remained for me to get warm,
which I soon did by climbing a high hill.

Coming from Elkwa on a previous trip, on horseback, with a friend,
we were obliged to travel on the beach for eight miles, as there
was no other road. The tide was quite high, the wind was blowing
and the waves came in very roughly. There were many trees lying on
the beach, around which we were obliged to canter as fast as we
could when the waves were out. But one time my friend who was ahead
just passed safely, while I was caught by the wave, which came up
to my side, and a part of which went over my head. It was very
fortunate that my horse was not carried off his feet.

Another of our experiences, which is very unpleasant, is with
the vermin, especially the fleas, which dwell constantly with
the Indians and with some of the whites. I stood one evening
and preached in one of their houses, when I am satisfied that I
scratched every half minute during the service; for, although I
stood them as long as I could, I could not help it. I would quietly
take up one foot and rub it against the other leg; put my hand in
my pocket or behind my back, and treat the creatures as gently as I
could, and the like.

Once in a while I am obliged to stay over night in one of their
houses in the winter, a thing I seldom do unless there is no white
man’s house near; even in summer they are afraid the panthers will
eat me up if I sleep outside; but between the fleas, rats and smoke
(for they often keep the house full of smoke all night), sleep is
not very refreshing, and the next morning I feel more like a piece
of bacon than a minister.

But Indian houses are not the only unpleasant ones. Here we are at
a hotel, the best in a milling town of four or five hundred people;
but the bar-room is filled with tobacco smoke almost as thick as
the smoke from the fires which often fills an Indian house. Here
about fifty men spend a great portion of the night (some of them
all night) in drinking, gambling and smoking. The house is used to
it, for the rooms directly over the bar-room are saturated with
the smoke, and I am assigned to one of these rooms. Before I get
to sleep the smoke has so filled my nostrils that I cannot breathe
through them, and at midnight I wake up with a headache so severe
that I can scarcely hold up my head for the next twenty-four hours.
It is not so bad, however, but that I can do a little thinking on
this wise: Who are the lowest, the Indians or these whites? The
smoke in each of their houses is of about equal thickness; that of
the Indians, however, is clean smoke from wood; that of the whites
filthy from tobacco. The Indian has sense enough to make holes in
the roof where some of it may escape; the white man does not even
that much. The Indian sits or lies on or near the ground, beneath
a great portion of it; the white man puts a portion of his guests
and his ladies’ parlor in rooms directly over it. Sleeping in the
Indian smoke, I come out well, though feeling like smoked bacon,
and a thorough wash cures it; but sleeping in the white man’s smoke
I come out sick, and the brain has to be washed.

But these are the sharp spice. There is another side, more like
currant jelly. The people are generally as kind as they can be. “We
will give you the best we have,” is what is often told me, and they
do it. Here are houses, where I occasionally stop a week at a time,
and the people will take nothing for it. Here is a region for forty
miles, where a man’s company is supposed to pay for his lodgings
at any house. Now I meet a man who offers to go home, half a mile,
on purpose to get me a dinner; or a girl, with whose family I am
very slightly acquainted, stands on the porch as I pass and says,
“Mister, have you been to dinner? You had better stop and have
some.” Here is a hotel-keeper, who has sold whiskey for fifteen
years, who puts me in his best room, one fitted up for private use,
and will take nothing for it. Now I am invited into the home of the
superintendent of a large mill, and during the two years and a half
that I have occasionally preached at the place I have spent seven
weeks in his family, yet he will never take anything for it, and
hardly allow me to thank him. Again, here is a steamer, which has
always carried me free whenever myself or family wished to travel
on it, and which during two years and a half has actually given
me sixty or seventy-five dollars’ worth of travel. Then there is
another which runs irregularly, but whose captain says, “Whenever
you or your family or your Indian and canoe wish to travel where
I am going, I will take you all free,” and who has actually made
extra effort with his steamer in order to help me.

Indians, too, are not wholly devoid of gratitude. Now it is a
funeral. They are often accustomed to make presents at such times
to their friends who attend. “Take this money,” they say to me,
as they give me two or three dollars; “do not refuse; it is our
custom, for you come to comfort us with Christ’s words.” Again, I
am at a great festival, and am there on purpose to protect them
from drunkenness and other evils equally bad; so they hand me seven
dollars and a half, saying, “You have come a long distance to help
us; we cannot give you food as we do these Indians, as you do not
eat with us,” (and generally I do not, if I can avoid it); “take
this money, it will help to pay your board.” Or, again, they carry
me nearly a hundred miles free, in order that I may teach them and
dedicate a church for them.

God is good to put these kind thoughts into the hearts of the
people, and not the least good thing He has put in the Bible is
that verse about the giving of a cup of cold water.




THE CHINESE.


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.


THE “CONGREGATIONAL WAY” IN MISSION WORK.

REV. WM. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

There are two methods of dealing with converts from heathenism,
whether in our own land or that from which they come. One is that
which treats them as children to be provided for and controlled;
the other is that which welcomes them at once as co-workers—as
brethren, having only one Master, and that _our_ Master, even
Christ. According to the one, the missionary lays the plans, and
the converts work by it, if at all; to consult them would puff
them up and make them presumptuous. According to the other,—while,
of course, those who are responsible for the use of funds must
control in regard to expenditures, and, consequently, must retain
a veto power as to almost all projects for concerted work,—still
suggestions from the brethren are cordially welcomed and carefully
considered, and they are encouraged to work for Christ, with
earnest prayer for _His_ guidance, each in the way Christ points
out specially to him. The one is apt to say, “Do as you see
us do, accepting our standard and walking by our rules;” the
other inculcates principles—faith, hope, charity, and believes
that with these in the heart the young disciple may become a
law unto himself. I scarcely need say which of these two is the
“Congregational way.”

There are various objections made to this way; one, and the chief,
is that it is not adapted to these undeveloped Christians—babes in
Christ. They are but children, and must be treated as such. It is
urged on foreign missionary fields with greater show of reason
possibly, but it is the same objection which for so many years
hindered the planting of Congregational churches in our new
settlements at the West. We were told that Congregationalism was
good for New England, but not stout enough for the rough-and-tumble,
heterogeneous communities in the younger States. It is the same
which is now urged against Congregationalism in the South. The
negro race, we are assured, is too emotional, too ignorant, too
easily carried away by every wind of doctrine or of feeling, to be
entrusted with self-government.

If you work upon this scheme among converts from heathenism, it is
certain that you will find trouble. If you work upon the other,
you will find trouble also. No good work in this evil world ever
went forward without trouble. But this “Congregational way,” it is
supposed by some, opens the door specially wide to all sorts of
dissatisfaction and dissension. False brethren, unawares brought
in, will scatter seeds of heresy and lead off into all sorts of
back-slidings. Time will be wasted in disputes that had better be
given to study and prayer. Ill-considered and impossible projects
will be pressed upon you, and you will find the exercise of your
veto power involving you in ungracious, even hostile, criticism.
Thus your influence will be weakened, and your usefulness impaired.

These objections are plausible, and address themselves to
principles in human nature which the new birth, and even a
missionary’s consecration, do not at once supplant. If we are not
mistaken, they have gone far to determine the method in much of the
missionary work of the world.

But if we have read the New Testament correctly, the method
against which these objections may be urged, is the one under
which the first Christian missions were conducted—the one to which
the teachings of the Master point, and which the example of his
Apostles has endorsed. And the heathen among whom these primitive
missions were conducted were just such as we find in the world
to-day, only, if possible, more corrupt—a less promising material
for a self-governing church.

It is certain, furthermore, that those primitive churches,
organized on this scheme of Christian liberty, did get into
difficulties—into just such difficulties as these objections
suggest. The epistles give mournful evidence of this. The hearts of
the Apostles were often heavy on account of it. And yet no other
scheme was substituted for it until long after the Apostles’ day,
and liberty, with all its dangers and all its inconveniences, was
preferred to any yoke of bondage, however well contrived.

I believe that the Apostles were right in this, and that we do
well to follow in their steps. It may be that we shall have
trouble which, under a less democratic régime, we might have
escaped; but these troubles, if the hearts that are exercised by
them are really renewed, may be made means of grace; while, if
there be lurking hypocrisy, it will be, by the same means, brought
to light. And, then, the smothered discontent under a system of
churchly government in distinction from Christian fellowship, may
be more poisonous than even open disputes can be. Encourage the
free and frank expression of what lies troublesome within; thus
often a few words of explanation remove the cause of friction, or,
possibly, the very effort to express one’s discontent reveals its
futility and unreason. Furthermore, let me add, out of oft-repeated
experiences, the suggestions of these brethren who have come out
of the depths of _heathenism_, and know it as no words could
possibly portray it, are often very wise. The superintendent of
mission work, no matter how well schooled he be in the language
and literature, the history, philosophy and laws of the people
for whom he labors, can never know their heathenism as they know
it themselves. A system which invites such suggestions, which
encourages the idea that the work is not mine only, but theirs
also, which thus nurtures frankness and freedom of utterance,
has advantages which no system of constraint and repression can
possibly secure.

And, then, it is only under conditions of liberty that the
educating process can go on to best advantage. Men learn to swim,
not by hearing lectures on the art, but _by swimming_; and men are
educated up to manhood in Christ, to self-denial and self-control,
only as they have it thrown upon them to control themselves. Men
learn their weak points by being put to the test; and the weak are
strengthened best by well-timed, well-measured exercise. And Christ
has organized His churches with reference to this; not for the
smoothest possible working of Gospel machinery, but for the highest
possible attainment in faith and hope and love by each individual
soul.

I venture to throw out these hints as indicating the principle on
which our Chinese mission is conducted; and now I wish to testify,
after so many years, that if it were possible to begin again, we
could choose no other one than that, the underlying principle of
the “Congregational way.”




GOLDEN WEDDING GIFTS.


From our Treasurer’s correspondence this month, we copy the two
following items:

“We send you the accompanying draft. It is our Golden Wedding gift,
April 1, 1879, which is the fiftieth anniversary of our married
life. We want you to use it for the Christian and educational
elevation of the poor Freedmen as you think best. We talked the
subject over, and concluded to make you this gift in behalf of
_them_, instead of making a fashionable golden wedding party for
the entertainment of our fifty-year-old friends or our own personal
benefit. With it you shall have our daily prayers for the ultimate
success of so worthy a cause.”

“Enclosed please find my check for $——, donation of my “Lady
Friends” at my Golden Wedding.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1879.


  MAINE, $175.49.

    Bath. M. F. Gannett                                      $10.00
    Bethel. F. B. and H. C. B.                                 1.00
    Blanchard. “A Friend.”                                     5.00
    Brewer. First Cong. Ch., $10.83; First Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $3.52, bal. to const. Mrs. Rev.
      C. A. BECKWITH, L. M.                                   14.35
    Brunswick. First Cong. Soc.                               19.65
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        9.20
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    36.28
    Gorham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          31.85
    Hallowell. South Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Tougaloo
      U._                                                     15.00
    Hampden. L. H.                                             0.50
    Lewiston. Rev. G. S. Dickerman                            20.00
    North Waterford. S. E. H.                                  1.00
    Orono. First Cong. Ch.                                     1.56
    St. Albans. First Cong. Ch.                                1.60
    Sweden. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Waterford. “H. E. and C. M. D.” $3 and box of
      C.; Mrs. C. D. 50c                                       3.50


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $619.08.

    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.07
    Chichester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.76
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.12
    Deerfield. ESTATE of Mrs. Merriam F. Brown, by
      Joseph T. Brown, Ex.                                   347.81
    Great Falls. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     40.00
    Hanover. Dartmouth College Ch.                            16.73
    Lancaster. H. F. H.                                        1.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $19.43; Mrs. A.
      J. C., 50c                                              19.93
    Orfordville. D. T. H.                                      1.00
    Marlborough. Ladies’ Aid Soc., box of C.
    Mason. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch. to const. LOVEL HARRIS, L.
      M.                                                      34.31
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          29.26
    Newport. Cong. Ch.                                        39.73
    Peterborough. Cong. Ch., $24.29; Mrs. E. C.
      H., 51c                                                 24.80
    Pittsfield. “A Friend.”                                   10.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.56
    Temple. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   17.00
    Wentworth. Ephraim Cook                                    5.00


  VERMONT, $394.85.

    Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      15.00
    Cambridge. Madison Safford                                44.94
    Clarendon. Rev. G. H. Morss, $5; “A Friend,”
      $5; Mrs. J. N. P., $1                                   11.00
    Danville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 11.00
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            32.74
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Saint Albans. Mrs. F. S. Stranahan, $42.71;
      First Cong. Ch., Class in Sab. Sch., $25; H.
      M. Stevens, $10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             77.71
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                         125.75
    Shelburne. James D. Duncan, to const. HOYT G.
      POST, L. M.                                             30.00
    West Fairlee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             12.00
    West Randolph. Miss Betsy Nichols                          2.00
    Williamstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          13.71
    Windham. Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              4.00
    —— “A Friend,”                                            10.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,688.37.

    Amherst. Mrs. R. A. Lester                                50.00
    Andover. Theo. Sem. Individuals by Edgar J.
      Penney, $30 to const. ESTELLA CROSBY, L.
      M.;—Ladies’ Soc. of Free Ch., $1.51 _for
      Straight U._                                            31.51
    Andover. West Parish Cong. Ch.                            50.00
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   65.00
    Ayer. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding, _for Student Aid_             25.00
    Barre. Mrs. Edwin Wood, $1 and bbl. of C.                  1.00
    Bedford. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      Rev. GEO. E. LOVEJOY, L. M.                             30.00
    Belchertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           40.50
    Blackstone. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.63
    Boston. E. B. P.                                           1.00
    Boxford. A. E. S.                                          1.00
    Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                              68.96
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch., $10.11;—Cash, $5
      _for Chinese M._;—N. C. 50c                             15.61
    Cambridge. Mrs. J. S. S.                                   1.00
    Clinton. “A. E. F.” $10; Ladies’ Benev. Soc of
      Cong. Ch., bbl. of C. and $2.50 _for
      Freight, for City Mission Work, Nashville,
      Tenn._                                                  12.50
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.41
    Conway. Mrs. Wm. Tilton                                    2.00
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         183.61
    East Hawley. “A Friend,”                                   2.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.07
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                   107.66
    Fitchburgh. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Rollstone
      Ch., Bbl of Bedding and C. _for Atlanta
      U._;—W. L. B. $1                                         1.00
    Foxborough. D. Carpenter, $40.; Orth. Cong.
      Ch. and Soc. (ad’l) 75c                                 40.75
    Gardener. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $10; Mrs.
      Knowlton, $1.50; Dea. H. B., 50c                        12.00
    Granby. Cong. Ch. $14.17;—Mrs. John Church’s
      Sab. Sch. Class, _for Chinese M._ $6                    20.17
    Great Barrington. L. M. P.                                 1.00
    Greenfield. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., bbl of bedding
      and C., _for Atlanta U._
    Holliston. John Batchelder                                25.00
    Housatonic. Dea. A. D. W.                                  1.00
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       17.38
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          40.85
    Marlborough. Ladies’ Aid Soc., _for Freight_               1.00
    Melrose. Orth. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                   0.50
    Millbury. ESTATE of Hannah W. Stockwell, by
      Geo. W. Rice, Ex.                                      207.49
    Mittineaque. Luke Bliss, $50, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._;—Cong. Ch. $12.37                      62.37
    Monson. Cong. Ch.                                         15.72
    Newburyport. Miss S. N. B.                                 0.50
    Newton. Eliot Ch. (in part)                              125.00
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $52.61;—Mrs. Furber’s Bible Class, $40, _for
      Student Aid. Atlanta U._                                92.61
    Newton Lower Falls. Mrs. H. H. Lord, box of
      books and papers, _for Raleigh, N. C._
    North Abington. “Friends,” $25, _for City
      Mission Work, Nashville, Tenn._                         25.00
    Northampton. ESTATE of J. P. Williston, by A.
      L. Williston, Ex.                                      637.60
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch.                              65.44
    Northborough. Box of C.
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., $50;—Miss
      A. W. Johnson, trunk of C., _for Fisk U._               50.00
    North Middleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   15.33
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          27.91
    Peabody. Thomas Stimpson                                 100.00
    Plympton. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
    Prescott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.00
    Princeton. Ladies, by Anna H. Whitteker                    2.00
    Quincy. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           13.00
    Reading. Rev. W. H. Willcox, $58 _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._; $100 _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._; $50 _for Girls’ Ind. Sch.,
      Talladega C._, and $15 _for a Map for
      Straight U._                                           223.00
    Reading. Mrs. Wm. W.                                       1.00
    Royalston. H. M. Estabrook, to const. JOSEPH
      ESTABROOK, L. M.                                        30.00
    Rutland. First Cong. Ch., $16; Rev. G. S.
      Dodge, $1.50                                            17.50
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                    130.00
    South Braintree. A. P. W.                                  1.00
    Springfield. South Cong. Ch., $25.02; C. H.
      B., 25c                                                 25.27
    Templeton. Trin. Sab. Sch. Concert                         3.09
    Townsend. Mary B. Burnap                                  10.00
    Upton. L. L. L.                                            1.00
    Wakefield. Henry L. Haskell, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.27
    Ware. East Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. WM.
      F. CONEY, SILAS A. SPOONER, MRS. H. M.
      CONEY, MARY BLOOD and SUSIE BOND, L. M.’s              384.50
    Westfield. Cong. Ch., Mrs. Elizabeth F.
      Strong, $12 _for Student Aid_, and $18 _for
      furnishing a Dormitory, Straight U._ and to
      const. Miss JOSEPHINE E. STRONG, L. M.                  30.00
    West Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17.00
    Westminster. R. Merriam, _for Bibles_                      2.00
    West Newton. Miss Ann Miller                              20.00
    Whitinsville. ESTATE of E. W. Fletcher, by
      Chas P. Whitin, Ex.                                    100.00
    Williamsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         14.31
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             11.35
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            43.00
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch.                             150.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $1.

    Providence. L. M. W.                                       1.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,851.25.

    Ansonia. Cong. Ch.                                        18.09
    Avon. N. L. C.                                             1.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Bethel. Samuel B. Kyle, to const. H. H. BAIRD,
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Canaan. First Cong. Ch.                                    6.50
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch.                                       8.50
    Columbia. Cong Ch. and Soc.                               18.48
    Cornwall Hollow. Mrs. H. S.                                0.50
    Coventry. Second Cong. Ch.                                26.25
    Falls Village. Cong. Ch.                                   6.50
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     60.47
    Hartford. Mrs. S. M. Dewing, $50; Asylum Hill
      Cong. Ch. $10                                           60.00
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.98
    Middletown. Individuals by E. M. Williams                  1.50
    New Britain. John B. and L. E. Smith, _for
      Fisk U._                                                15.00
    New Haven. First Cong. Ch. (of which $20 from
      Rev. W. Patton, D. D. _for Howard U._)                 278.21
    New Haven. Howard Ave. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 25.63
    New Preston. First Ch. of Christ, $129.76;
      Miss H. P. B., $1                                      130.76
    North Haven. Cong. Ch. $48, and Sab. Sch. $20,
      to const. ROBERT W. SMITH and CHARLES B.
      SMITH, L. M.’s.                                         68.00
    North Madison. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.00
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch.                              200.00
    Plainville. Dea. Lucas Carter, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Ch.                                   204.01
    Plantsville. Mrs. Mary Hotchkiss, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.00
    Pomfret. First Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._               52.50
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00
    Simsbury. “A few Friends,” by Mrs. Nettie H.
      Eno. $15;—Box of C., by Mrs. McLean, _for
      Atlanta U._                                             15.00
    Somers. Mrs. S. C. P.                                      1.00
    Somerville. Cong. Ch.                                     40.00
    South Manchester. E. T.                                    1.00
    Stamford. Cong. Ch. (of which $28.80 _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._)                               53.75
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      74.91
    Thompson. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             8.98
    West Brook. Cong. Sab. Sch., $20; Mrs. R. S.,
      $1; Mrs. J. R. S., $1; Mrs. D., $1; Mrs. E.
      S., $1; Mrs. W. D., $1; Mrs. D. S., $1; Mrs.
      E. A. P., $1                                            27.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which
      $70 _for Student Aid_.)                                200.00
    West Meriden. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                       33.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.56
    Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch., $53.17; “A Friend,”
      $2                                                      55.17
    ——“A Friend,” _for Fisk U._                             1000.00
    ——“A Friend.”                                             20.00


  NEW YORK, $978.30.

    Albion. L. S.                                              1.00
    Amsterdam. C. Bartlett                                    10.00
    Brooklyn. Plymouth Church                                226.53
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Lucy Thurber, $5; Church of the
      Covenant, $2.50; Mrs. H. Dickinson, $2                   9.50
    Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     65.00
    Champion. Mr. and Mrs. Joel A. Hubbard                    50.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     29.37
    Clarkson. Fanny M. Palmer                                  2.00
    Crown Point. ESTATE of Tryphena Walker, by
      Juba Howe, Ex., to const. Rev. A. E. CLARKE,
      L. M.                                                   50.00
    Essex Co. “A Friend,”                                     50.00
    Franklin. Mrs. I. H. Penfield                              3.00
    Harlem. Cong. Sab. Sch., 2 packages Sab. Sch.
      books
    Homer. Cong. Ch., Miss Nancy Knight                        5.00
    Honeoye. Miss Hannah Pitts                                20.00
    Little Genesee. Rev. Thomas B. Brown                       5.00
    Little York. Augusta Arnold, $4.50; F. F. P.,
      50c                                                      5.00
    Moravia. ESTATE of Matilda S. Rogers, by S.
      Edwin Day                                              200.00
    New York. Mrs. James Stokes, $100, _for
      Livingstone Missionary Hall, Nashville,
      Tenn._ Charles J. Martin, $25, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                       125.00
    Penn Yan. M. Hamlin                                       60.00
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Steuben. First Welsh Cong. Ch.                             7.00
    Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, $6.90; Miss F.
      A. C., 50c.; W. H., $1; A. B., $1                        9.40
    Tompkinsville. Mrs. M. S.                                  0.50
    Union Falls. Margaret B. Duncan                           10.00
    Utica. Miss Cornelia Hurlburt                             10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $28.11.

    Gibson. L. G., $1; Miss B. C., 61c                         1.61
    Philadelphia. M. A. L., $1; Rev. H. L. P., 50c             1.50
    Sewickley. Miss Lucy Bittinger                            25.00


  NEW JERSEY, $5.50.

    Jersey City. Miss S. E. Hawley                             5.00
    Rahway. E. Y. M.                                           0.50


  OHIO, $403.33.

    Akron. Cong. Ch.                                          94.55
    Barnes. G. McF.                                            1.00
    Chardon. “Old Member of Cong. Ch. of Hampden,”
      (weekly contributions)                                   6.00
    Clarksfield. Bbl. of C. and $5 _for Freight,
      for Selma, Ala._                                         5.00
    Cleveland. Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch., $17.50; Mrs.
      J. A. L., $1; Mrs. S. H. E., $1                         19.50
    Fredericktown. A. H. Royce                                10.00
    Grand Rapids. E. W. Ball                                  20.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Ch., _for Emerson Inst._                 3.00
    Kent. Cong. Ch.                                            8.11
    Lexington. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Lorain. Cong. Ch.                                          4.03
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $60;—“Friends,” $13, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._; “Friends,” $2; Dr. Ensign, $2,
      _for Tougaloo_;—Bbl. of C. and $2 _for Freight
      for Selma, Ala._                                        79.00
    Marysville. R. S. Wilcox, $21; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $10, _for Student Aid, Selma,
      Ala._;—R. S. W., $1—Bbl. of C. and books
      _for Selma. Ala._;                                      32.00
    Mecca. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for Tougaloo_             5.90
    Oberlin. Mrs. E. C. C.                                     1.00
    Paddy’s Run. Cong. Ch.                                    20.30
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch.                              13.13
    Ravenna. Ira B. Cutts, to const. Rev. A. M.
      HILLS, L. M.                                            25.00
    Ruggles. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  25.00
    Saybrook. “Friends,” $2; “Friends,” bbl. of
      C., _for Tougaloo_                                       2.00
    Salem. Asa W. Allen                                        2.00
    Sullivan. Mrs. M. McC.                                     1.00
    Tallmadge. H. W. C.                                        0.44
    Toledo. Edson Allen, _for Raleigh, N.C._                   3.00
    Twinsburg. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                12.00
    Washington. Cong. Ch.                                      3.37


  INDIANA, $20.

    New Corydon. Geo. Stolz                                    5.00
    Indianapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                15.00


  ILLINOIS $1,182.69.

    Alton. Cong. Ch.                                          60.00
    Bondville. “A Friend.”                                     5.00
    Chicago. Lincoln Park Ch., $34.10; Bethany
      Ch., $12.45                                             44.55
    Earlville. Cong. Ch., to const. Rev H. D.
      WIARD, L. M.                                            37.75
    Galesburg. Cong. Ch.                                      83.93
    Glencoe. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                  0.25
    Jacksonville. T. W. Melendy, H. L. Melendy and
      M. C. Melendy                                           30.00
    Kewanee. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    Kirtland. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Knoxville. W. A., $1; W. H. H., $1; Mrs. A.
      B., $1                                                   3.00
    Lake Forest. Mrs. W. A. Nichols, $25; Mrs. W.
      H. Ferry, $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               50.00
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                         10.35
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         28.00
    Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                        22.25
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Polo. Robert Smith                                       500.00
    Shirland. Cong. Ch.                                        6.60
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 7.01
    Streator. Samuel Plumb                                   250.00
    Sycamore. ——.                                              1.00
    ——. “A Stranger,”                                         10.00


  MICHIGAN, $223.45.

    Almont. “A few Ladies of Cong. Ch.” by Mrs. E.
      F. Fairfield, $10, _for Lady Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._;—Cong. Ch., $10                         20.00
    Amsden. Mrs. A. M. Spencer                                 2.00
    Bay City. Cong. Ch.                                        9.51
    Blackman. “A Friend.” to const. Mrs. EMILY E.
      MOFFET, L. M.                                           32.00
    Churches Corner. A. W. Douglass                            5.00
    Covert. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Nashville, Tenn._                          10.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                              5.00
    East Saginaw. First Cong. Ch.                             23.25
    Grand Rapids. T. B. W.                                     0.50
    Greenville. Mrs. R. L. Ellsworth, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            5.00
    Hancock. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   7.64
    Hersey. Cong. Sab. Sch., $2, _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._, incorrectly
      acknowledged in May number.
    Homer. J. R. Blake                                        10.00
    Hopkins. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Nashville, Tenn._                                   2.00
    Kalamo. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Romeo. “The Little Sunbeams,” $10; Mrs. E. F.
      Fairfield, $5; Mrs. H. O. Smith, $2; Mrs.
      Wilder’s S. S. Class, $1; H. G., J. C., Dr.
      L., Mrs. H. G., Mrs. J. R., Mrs. J. T., Mrs.
      M. A. G., $1. ea. _for Lady Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._                                         25.00
    Royal Oak. Young Ladies’ Soc., $2; Mrs. Rev.
      C. S. Cady, $1.75; Ladies’ Soc. 80c. _for
      Lady Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                         4.55
    Saint Clair. F. Moore, $10; F. Moore and
      Others, $3                                              13.00
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   5.00
    Wayne. First Cong. Ch.                                    13.00
    Union City. Cong. Ch.                                     24.00


  WISCONSIN, $605.

    Bloomington. Cong. Ch.                                     5.61
    Fort Atkinson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             4.92
    Geneva Lake. Presb. Ch.                                    9.28
    Hartford. First Cong. Ch.                                  6.45
    Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Milwaukee. Spring St. Cong. Ch., $28.35, and
      Sab. Sch., $10                                          38.35
    Racine. Mrs. J. B.                                         3.20
    River Falls. S. Wales, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Rosendale. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 6.70
    Wauwatosa. ESTATE of Richard Gilbert, by J. F.
      McMullen                                               469.49
    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                                  5.00


  IOWA $1,236.25.

    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        25.25
    Cincinnati. Wm. T. Raynolds                                2.00
    College Springs. Cong. Ch.                                 8.45
    Denmark. Cong. Ch.                                        33.00
    Eldora. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                                 1.80
    Grinnell. ESTATE of Charles F. Dike, part of a
      residuary legacy, by Mrs. C. F. Dike, Ex.             1000.00
    Hampton. Mrs. M. P. Boutin                                 2.00
    Keokuk. “M. A. B.”                                         5.00
    Lemars. Cong. Ch.                                         13.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                              17.86
    New Hampton. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                            1.55
    Newton. Cong. Ch., $7.62., and Sab. Sch. $5.62            13.24
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                  5.00
    Oscaloosa. Rev. Asa Turner and Wife, _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            20.00
    Riceville. Mrs. A. B. C.                                   1.00
    Stuart. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                            7.10
    Tabor. Cong. Ch., $70;—Prof A. S. McPherron,
      $5 _for Student Aid, Straight U._                       75.00
    Vinton. Joseph Young                                       5.00


  MISSOURI, $5.75.

    Holden. M. J. Ellison                                      2.00
    Warrensburgh. Rent                                         3.75


  KANSAS, $72.03.

    Burlington. John Morris                                    1.60
    Hiawatha. Cong. Ch.                                        7.63
    Junction City. Isaac Jacobus                               5.00
    Manhattan. Cong. Ch., $7, and Sab. Sch., $10              17.00
    Topeka. Cong. Ch., $16.30, and Sab. Sch., $15             31.30
    Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ                             9.50


  MINNESOTA, $131.78.

    Austin. Cong. Ch.                                         15.02
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 23.95
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
    Winona. Cong. Ch., $74.91, to const. HENRY
      STEVENS, REV. J. H. MORLEY and J. C. BLAKE,
      L. M’s;—First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $2.90
      _for Student Aid, Nashville, Tenn._                     77.81


  NEBRASKA, $3.30.

    Beaver Crossing. Mrs. E. Taylor                            1.30
    Steele City. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00


  COLORADO, $39.40.

    Denver. First Cong. Ch., $24.40, and Sab.
      Sch., $10                                               34.40
    Longmont. Mrs. J. B. Thompson                              5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $0.50.

    San Jose. M. E. B. N.                                      0.50


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $6.75.

    S’kokomish. J. F. P.                                       0.50
    White River. Cong. Ch.                                     6.25


  VIRGINIA, $27.65.

    Hampton. Bethesda Chapel                                  26.65
    Chase City. Mrs. A. W.                                     1.00


  DELAWARE, $8.50.

    Milford. Rev. C. F. Boynton                                5.00
    Felton. Talmon Dewey, $2.50; Mrs. C. F. B., $1             3.50


  TENNESSEE, $407.70.

    Nashville. Fisk University                               236.85
    Nashville. “Mrs. E. S.,” _for City Mission
      Work, Nashville, Tenn._                                  2.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   163.85


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $289.75.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  289.75


  NORTH CAROLINA, $152.98.

    Raleigh. Washington School                                52.00
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., $94.44; Cong. Ch.,
      $6.54                                                  100.98


  GEORGIA, $614.55.

    Athens. W. W. King, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     25.00
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., $244.55; Atlanta U., $137          381.55
    Brunswick. S. B. Morse, (Student A. U.),
      $6;—Risley School, $1, _for Mendi M._                    7.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    65.55
    Savannah. Beach Inst.                                    123.45
    Sparta. Richard H. Carter, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             12.00


  ALABAMA, $431.38.

    Athens. Trinity Sch.                                      30.80
    Childersburg. Rev. A. J.                                   1.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          5.05
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., $116.35; Cong. Ch., $3            119.35
    Montgomery. Pub. Fund                                    175.00
    Talladega. Talladega College                             100.18


  MISSISSIPPI, $58.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University, $42; M. H. S.
      $1;—Rev. G. S. Pope, $15, _for Student Aid_             58.00


  LOUISIANA, $128.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U.                                 128.50


  TEXAS, $3.50.

    Corpus Christi. James K. Polk                              2.00
    San Antonio. G. W. Ware                                    1.50
    —— $5.
    —— “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._              5.00


  INCOME, $46.29.

    —— Avery Fund                                             46.29


  ENGLAND, $32.71.

    London. Mrs. M. E. Mahan                                   8.54
    Newbury. James Frazer, _for Livingstone
      Missionary Hall, Nashville, Tenn._, £5                  24.17


  TURKEY. $10.

    Van. Rev. H. S. Barnum                                    10.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                             14,888.69
    Total from Oct. 1st to April 30th                    $92,526.78

                                            H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                     _Ass’t Treas._

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Halifax, Mass. Rev. GEO. JUCHAU, to const.
      himself L. M.                                           30.00
    Jamaica Plains, Mass. Boylston Cong. Ch.                  25.00
    North Middleborough, Mass. Rev. E. W. Allen               50.00
    Reading, Mass. Bethesda Ch., “W. H. W.”                  250.00
    Rockland, Mass. Mrs. A. F. Kelley                          5.00
    West Hartford, Conn. Charles Boswell                     250.00
    Orangeburgh, S. C. Ladies of F. M. Association             3.00
    ————
    Total                                                    613.00
    Previously acknowledged in Mar. receipts              24,919.22
    ————
    Total                                                $25,532.22

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Augusta, Me. Joel Spalding                                10.00
    Ayer, Mass. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding                          25.00
    Greenwich, Conn. Thomas A. Mead                           50.00
    Clark, Penn. Mrs. E. and Miss Eliza Dickson               10.00
    ————
    Total                                                     95.00
    Previously acknowledged in Mar. receipts               2,106.17
    ————
    Total                                                 $2,201.17

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Columbus, N. Y. “Friend”                                   2.00
    Penn Yan, N. Y. M. Hamlin                                 40.00
    Pasadena, Cal. Rev. R. R. Proudfit                        25.00
    ————
    Total                                                    $67.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Nebraska City, Neb. “A Friend”                            10.00
    Hillsborough Centre, N. H. Cong. Ch. and Soc.             10.00
    ————
    Total                                                    $20.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  AVERY FUND.

    Pittsburgh, Penn. Avery Estate, by Josiah
      King, Ex.                                          $12,000.00

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va. 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 12;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 13; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 5.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 66.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11. _Other
Schools_, 18. Total 37.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 231;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 17; in Africa, 14. Total,
279. STUDENTS—In Theology, 88; Law, 17; in College Course, 106;
in other studies, 7,018. Total, 7,229. Scholars, taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                            73,620 MORE

                Singer Sewing Machines Sold in 1878

                    Than in any previous year.


           In =1870= we sold =127,833= Sewing Machines.
              “ =1878=  “   “  =356,432=    “      “

Our sales have increased enormously every year through the whole
period of “hard times.”

We now Sell Three-quarters of all the Sewing Machines sold in the
World.

For the accommodation of the Public we have 1,500 subordinate
offices in the United States and Canada, and 3,000 offices in the
Old World and South America.

                      PRICES GREATLY REDUCED.

Waste no money on “cheap” counterfeits. Send for our handsomely
Illustrated Price List.

                 THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

                      Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,

          59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                   66 State Street, Boston.


Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money between
this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee
of repayment,

                 Circular Credits for Travellers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the =world=.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                    =$7,400,000= DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders.

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                   =$1,700,000= OVER LIABILITIES

               _By New York Stanford of Valuation._

                _It gives the Best Insurance on the
                      Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.


                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

              C. Y. WEMPLE,
                    Vice-President.

              J. L. HALSEY,
                    Secretary.

              S. N. STEBBINS,
                    Actuary.

              H. Y. WEMPLE,
              H. B. STOKES,
                    Assistant Secretaries.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                         PUBLISH THE ONLY

                     SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and enlarged.
Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For Samples
(loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.


                          LYMAN ABBOTT’S

                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.

                             EDITED BY

          Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev. E. S. LORENZ.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best book for Church Prayer Meetings.=

      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.

                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.

                  A. S. BARNES & CO. Publishers,

                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          DUDLEY’S PATENT

                             DIAGONAL

                           ROAD SCRAPER

                           IS THE BEST.

Weighs but 50 lbs., has Steel Cutter Plate, can be worked square or
at any desired angle, and is rapidly superseding all others where
it is known.

[Illustration]

A Few of Many Testimonials of its Value:

“Works in rough or smooth ground. No one who has used it will be
without it.”—M. Bartholomew & Sons, Goshen, Ct.

“Select-men of the Town of Litchfield, Ct., say: It is the
best Scraper ever invented, and cheerfully recommend it to all
interested in Roads, as calculated materially to lessen the expense
of making and repairing the same.”

“Is twice as good as you represent it. With same labor will do
two or three times as much as any scraper I ever saw. Answers our
fullest expectations.”—H. TUCKER, of Rockville.

“Leaves a road in better shape, and is easier for man and team than
any scraper I ever saw.”—J. S. KINNEY, Washington.

                                                 Send for circular.

                          S. H. DUDLEY,

               Bantam Falls, Litchfield County, Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           GET THE BEST.

                           The “OXFORD”

                          [Illustration]

                         TEACHERS’ BIBLES

                     IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                   At prices to suit everybody.

          Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

                       THOS. NELSON & SONS,

                                       42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        N. TIBBALS & SONS,

                      37 Park Row, New York,

                  30 YEARS IN THE BOOK BUSINESS.

We endeavor to get every valuable work in every department of
Biblical and Theological Literature. For example: We have 400
different works on Bible Evidences, from Augustine down; 100 on
Bible Interpretation; 150 on Homiletics; 200 on Lectures to the
Young and Lectures to Children; also on Prayers, Baptism, Prophecy,
Church History, etc., etc. Send for particulars.

               Sunday-School Libraries a Specialty.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOHN H. HORSFALL,

                          MANUFACTURER OF

         Furniture, Upholstery, Mirrors, And DECORATIONS.

                            WAREROOMS:

               6 & 7 EAST 23d ST. (Kurtz Building),

           3 doors East of B’way, Madison Square South.

                 *       *       *       *       *

You are respectfully asked to call and inspect my Stock, which, for
thoroughness of construction and quality of materials, cannot be
excelled in this city, and at as low a price as good work can be
made. I have on hand beautiful examples of _=Drawing Room, Dining
Room, Library and Bedroom Furniture=_, and am prepared at all times
to submit Estimates and Drawings for ordered work. _=Curtains=,_
_=Lambrequins=_, &c., &c., in great variety of Styles. Exceptionally
fine Hair and Spring _=Mattresses=_ and _=Feathers=_


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  The
  ESTEY
  ORGAN
  IS THE
  BEST!
  THE WORLD OVER.
  Manufactory BRATTLEBORO, VT.]


                          J. ESTEY & CO.

                         BRATTLEBORO’, VT.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


The manufacture of these widely known instruments was begun in
1846, and American enterprise and skill have steadily developed
this business until now it is the largest Reed Organ manufactory
in the world. The unsolicited testimony of the most careful judges
places the =ESTEY ORGAN= at the head of all others of its class.
Send for the new illustrated catalogue.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        BUY THE BEST GOODS

                          BOGLE & LYLES,

              Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place       NEW YORK,

                            Dealers in
                       CHOICE CANNED FRUITS
                  VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,
                          Sole Agents for
                       RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’

                       Extra Yellow Peaches.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
  SUI GENERIS]

                  Mason & Hamlin Cabinet Organs.

_Demonstrated best_ by HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
FOR TWELVE YEARS; viz: at PARIS, 1867: VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO,
1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876; TWO HIGHEST MEDALS at PARIS 1878; and
GRAND SWEDISH GOLD MEDAL, 1878. Only American Organs ever awarded
highest honors at any. Sold for cash or installments. ILLUSTRATED
CATALOGUES with new styles and prices, free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN
CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


       *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

                ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN
           SABBATH SCHOOLS, CHURCHES OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth. 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

     TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                             758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS. Special attention given to
=CHURCH BELLS=.

         ☞ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PURE OLD

                            PALM SOAP.

                          [Illustration]

                      For the Laundry,
                                 The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO OBTAIN THE MISSIONARY.

Enclose Fifty Cents for your subscription (or One Dollar for two
years, or for yourself and some friend), to H. W. Hubbard, Esq.,
Assistant Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York.

If a Life Member or Pastor or S. S. Superintendent of a
contributing church, or an annual contributor of $5 or more to the
A. M. A., order it sent to you on that ground.

Keep us informed of your changes of address, etc.


HOW TO READ THE MISSIONARY.

In these busy days few people read anything all through; but you
can do better than to open at random, read a page and lay aside. 1.
Read the Editorial paragraphs for the latest aspects of our work.
2. Read the titles of longer Editorials and Contributions to see if
they contain anything you want. 3. Read through at least the one
which attracts you most. 4. The General Notes furnish a summary of
facts, opinions, legislation, discussion, and progress concerning
the three races of our care, such as you will not find elsewhere.
5. Glance over headings of Letters from the Field, and you will be
sure to find something you will want to know more about.


HOW TO CIRCULATE THE MISSIONARY.

Mark something which interests you in it, and lend it to your
neighbor.

Read or refer to a fact gleaned from it in your Prayer Meeting or
Monthly Concert.

Secure subscriptions for it in your church or community. We will
send you a list of present subscribers in your town to work from,
if you request it.


HOW TO PRESERVE THE MISSIONARY.

It is often useful for reference. The December number contains
minutes of the Annual Meeting. The February number has our list of
workers. Friends from contributing Churches come to the office for
information, which, nine times out of ten, is pointed out to them
in a recent MISSIONARY.

To preserve and bind them, punch two holes near the back and three
inches from top and bottom, through which put a string and tie
behind; open and add as the monthly numbers come to you. This
makes a simple, cheap, flexible and effective binding, and is not
patented.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                   J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 06, JUNE, 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.