VOL. XXXIII.                                              No. 7.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                “To the Poor the Gospel Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            JULY, 1879.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                   193
    SIGNS OF THE TIMES                                           194
    RESPONSIBILITY OF ANSWERED PRAYER: Rev. J. E. Roy, D.D.      195
    AFRICA IN AMERICA AND AMERICA IN AFRICA                      196
    CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH: Rev. C.   L. Woodworth       197
    GENERAL NOTES                                                198
    OUR QUERY COLUMN                                             201


  THE FREEDMEN.

    THE HAMPTON ANNIVERSARY: By the Editor                       201
    FISK UNIVERSITY——Increasing favor——Closing   days            205
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY COMMENCEMENT                             207
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY COMMENCEMENT                             208
    HOWARD UNIVERSITY COMMENCEMENT                               210
    BEACH INSTITUTE——Year’s Work                                 211
    GEORGIA——NO. 1 MILLER’S STATION——Work——Temperance——
      Superstition                                               212
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS——The Kansas Fever——Le Moyne School        213


  THE CHINESE.

    THE NEW CONSTITUTION AND OUR MISSIONARY WORK                 215


  THE CHILDREN’S PAGE                                            217


  RECEIPTS                                                       218


  CONSTITUTION                                                   221


  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &c.                                   222

                 *       *       *       *       *




                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Wm. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.
    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

should be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Ass’t Treasurer, No. 56 Reade
Street, New York, or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West
Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXIII.     JULY, 1879.       No. 7.

                 *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

The time has come when our schools at the South are closing the
year’s work. In this number will be found communications from
Hampton, Fisk, Straight, Tougaloo, Howard, and Beach. All of them
give reports encouraging and hopeful. The change wrought in those
who go forth from these institutions by their few years of study
and discipline is marvelous, and the contrast in all the course
and influence of their lives with what it might have been may well
satisfy all who have taken part in so good a work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boston anniversary day has come and gone again. The last hour
of the morning was given to the work of this Association. Secretary
Woodworth read a brief report of work. Rev. P. B. Davis, of Hyde
Park, spoke from his observations in a recent tour among our
schools and churches. Rev. Albert H. Heath, of New Bedford, spoke
of this continent as the mens’ battle-ground for the settlement of
the great questions which have never been decided, and argued that,
having the opportunity and the ability, we are under obligation to
help the three despised races.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have no word to say in favor of intermarriage between whites
and blacks in our country, but we desire to say an earnest word
against the laws of Virginia in the South and of at least one State
in the North, which makes a marriage between such parties a cause
of imprisonment, but permits them to live together in illicit
relations unpunished. The best restraint upon such miscegenation
will be by punishing it when unlimited by law, and only allowing it
when it does not violate the law of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few barrels of clothing have been received by us for the Freedmen
in Kansas. We forwarded them to the Kansas Freedmen’s Relief
Association at Topeka, and have received their acknowledgments and
thanks. Governor St. John, who is the President of the Association,
in a recent letter says:

“Between three and four thousand refugees have arrived in Kansas,
and have been distributed to various portions of the State, and I
think, perhaps with the exception of say not to exceed one hundred
of the entire number, they are now making their own living, and
getting along without asking or receiving aid. I am inclined to the
opinion that the rush is over for the present, but will be renewed
again in the fall; meantime, no doubt there will be small numbers
coming in from time to time, but I think, as a general rule, will
not require much aid. There are now between two and three hundred
on the banks of the lower Mississippi desiring to come here,
but the boats refuse to bring them. I think it very likely that
measures will be resorted to that will end in transporting these
people to the North, and in all probability to Kansas, and it is
very likely that within the next few weeks they will have to be
provided for.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the best ways of aiding the poor negroes in Kansas, or
anywhere else, has been devised by Mr. Montgomery, a colored
planter in Mississippi. Visiting Kansas, he bought a section of
land in Wabaunsee county. Four other sections have been divided
into forty-acre tracts, and a colony of about fifty families will
be established upon them. Until the colonists get their little
farms in order, they will be given employment upon Mr. Montgomery’s
640 acres, and will thus be able to earn enough for their support.
The settlers agree to pay $2.65 an acre for their land with 7 per
cent. interest. Could there be a simpler or better way devised of
helping poor immigrants or poor citizens to help themselves?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES.

It seems to be a day of great bequests. While our country and
others as well have been straitened by hard times, fortunes well
planted have been growing silently, and those who have watched over
them have been devising liberal things. The estate of Daniel Stone
of Massachusetts, yields $1,000,000 for educational endowments;
that of Asa Otis of Connecticut, at least $1,000,000 for foreign
missions. Judge Packer of Pennsylvania leaves $2,000,000 to the
Lehigh University; this in addition to $1,000,000 which it cost
to found the institution. Gardiner Colby of Boston directs nearly
$400,000 to be distributed among various Baptist institutions
and societies. Dr. Hugh Miller of Scotland leaves some $140,000
for missionary purposes. Nor can we fail to mention here the
$100,000 which Mr. Robert Arthington of England has given or
offered to British and American missionary societies, of at least
four denominations of Christians, for the planting of missionary
enterprises in Equatorial Africa. The estate of Mr. R. R. Graves
of New York, in addition to large gifts already made, has nearly
$100,000 in process of distribution mainly for work in the South.
These and others like them are significant facts, that from so many
sources there should have been such large appropriations to such
good work.

We are led to look, therefore, to the other end of the line. What
is the motive which has moved these stewards of God to turn their
benefactions in such directions in so large a measure? Rather, we
ask, what is the corresponding providence which has called for
them, or the preparation which has been making far away for their
wise use, the signs of which were not seen, perhaps, by the givers
at the time when they were thus carrying out the Lord’s will? What
is the significance of it all in the divine plan?

Is it not that the world is suddenly opening for missionary work
as perhaps never before in all its history? that in more than one
direction the long twilight which has been slowly creeping over
the eastern sky is breaking in a moment into glorious dawn? that
the seed which has been growing secretly these many days has come
to be the bud, and now is bursting into the flower? Such crises do
come in the history of God’s world, in the progress of the Gospel
of his Son.

Three illustrations of this truth are just now conspicuous——India
is clamoring for the Gospel; missionaries are beset with eager
throngs begging for the bread of life; whole villages are calling
each for a Christian teacher to come and dwell among them and
lead them to the Christ. Thousands have been baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus during the past year. Japan, too, which
succeeded in keeping itself secluded from all interference from
without until so late a day, has taken down its official threats
published at every crossroad against “the Jesus religion,” and,
as it throws away its idol gods, is ready to accept either the
materialism or the Christianity of Europe and America; and Africa
is no longer a region of unexplored darkness, but has been forced
to give up its secrets to the Christian explorer as well as to
the Arab slave-trader, who heretofore alone has shared them with
the aborigines. Africa is known, and already has followed the
death-blow to the internal traffic in human life; missionary
expeditions are winding along its rivers and across its swamps,
and, with the Arab out, the Christian may come in. For us, this
last great continent is of peculiar interest, and its opening
lends a new and wider meaning and reach to the work we have been
patiently doing in the South? Are not these the complementing facts
which stand over against those stated first, and which explain them?

God has brought his church into a crisis by which he will try its
faith and its faithfulness. He has opened the doors wide for its
entrance into new fields. No longer does the missionary have to
push himself into the midst of heathendom; but the cry is heard on
every side, “Come over and help us.” And then the Lord of both the
fields and the fountains has shown us by these illustrious examples
of both the living and the dead, how he looks to the men who hold
his wealth to administer their trusts, and to lead on the hosts
of those who may swell the stream with much or little, as he has
prospered them. Will the church of Christ bear the testing? Let us
hope that these large gifts are only the great drops which tell us
of the coming shower which shall fill all the pools. Nay, rather,
let us pray that this may be the beginning of “the latter rain.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RESPONSIBILITY OF ANSWERED PRAYER.

The obligation which comes from offered prayer is apparent. It
implies a complete subordination of our will to God’s will——a
readiness for any self-denial and effort on our part necessary to
the answer, through whatever trying ordeal that answer may come.
But the process is essential to the result.

Once answered, the prayer brings the additional responsibility of
walking in its light. We find ourselves straggling within the toils
of some disaster. We ask the Lord, “How is this?” He gradually
unfolds the meaning as indicating some transition in His plan for
our life. Having carried us safely through, and having set us
surely in the line of the new departure, He expects us to take up
the full measure of its obligation. When, with Saul of Tarsus, we
are dazed by the new experience and cry out, Lord, what wilt thou
have us to do? we are, with him, to accept the labor and sacrifice
implied thereby. David puts it thus: “I will pay Thee my vows
which my lips have uttered and my mouth hath spoken when I was in
trouble.” Hannah, with her prayer answered in the gift of a son,
must fulfil her vow in devoting him to the service of the Lord. For
a long time God’s people were praying Him to open the way among
the nations for the entrance of the Gospel of his Son. He answered
by setting open the door to every land and to every island of the
sea. It is our duty to enter and occupy. If we do not, we are
grossly disobedient to the heavenly vision; we are found guilty of
deserting in the battle of the great day of the Lord Almighty. The
Christian world now rests under this obligation.

We wrestled with God in prayer for the deliverance of our brethren
in bonds. We cried, Oh Lord, how long! how long! The answer came
by terrible things in righteousness. We had scarcely expected
to see it in our day. Our thought had stopped with the great
burden of emancipation. Our vision scarcely took in the mountain
of obligation looming in the horizon of our answered prayer. We
thought that if we could only see our country delivered from its
crime and shame of oppression, the millennium would be near at
hand. We had not yet taken upon our hearts the burden of lifting up
the emancipated race. We had not yet received our divine commission
to lead this people through their forty years of training into the
citizenship of the republic and of the kingdom of God. But this
was all implied in the answering of our prayer. We asked for this
child of liberty, and now it is but the instinct of nature and
the demand of reason that we meet the obligation of its nurture.
We prayed that the slaves might be set free, and this implies
that we make good the conditions of freedom. In the words of the
martyr-President, they are “the wards of the nation.” So also are
they the children of the Church, given in answer to prayer, to be
nourished into Christian character for service in this their native
land and in the country of their ancestral home.

                                                        J. E. ROY.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA IN AMERICA AND AMERICA IN AFRICA.

  We are glad to print the following letter, from an intelligent
  friend in New England, to a member of our Executive Committee:

MY DEAR SIR:

I have received and read with interest the paper you have sent me
in relation to Africa and the colored people.

It has seemed to me a very remarkable indication of God’s
recognition of His promise, “Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands,”
that the two great events of recent years——the abolition of
American slavery, and the brilliant explorations and discoveries in
Africa, which have become epochs in history——have occurred nearly
simultaneously; and the higher education of the colored young
men and women seems to have progressed in relative proportion to
the further opening up of Africa, with its immense population,
suffering, dying for the Word of Life.

The climate of tropical Africa, taken as a whole, is evidently
fatal to the white man. There is a region about those large
interior lakes, though under the equator, which from its altitude
(4,600 feet above the ocean level) at the Victoria Nyanza, is
represented by Mr. Stanley to be salubrious. But the climate, even
in this most highly favored part of the African continent, is
enervating and ultimately destructive to the life of the white man.
The missions upon the West Coast of Africa have been conducted for
the past hundred years at a fearful sacrifice of the lives of white
missionaries.

We may not forecast events for the Providence of God to follow. We
do our duty when we faithfully perform the work He assigns us. But
I cannot exclude the thought from my mind, that sometime at the
proper time, the children of Africa now natives of our own country,
must be prepared by education and the Spirit of God to go with
hearts of love, laden with the Gospel of Peace, to their own race
in Africa, and elevate them from their degradation and barbarity,
to the liberty wherewith Christ maketh free.

I feel deeply the wrongs which have been perpetrated upon poor,
suffering, abused, down-trodden, defenceless Africa. Her country
has been the foraging field for the violent, the cruel and
bloody-minded for centuries. A dim light now dawns upon it. The
slave trade is nearly, perhaps quite suppressed. A million of
philanthropic hearts are beating high with earnest desire to repair
the wrongs which inhumanity has inflicted upon it. God grant that
the sun of righteousness may soon arise upon that benighted land.

The American Missionary Association is doing a noble work in the
schools it has inaugurated for the education of colored young men
and women to be teachers and missionaries, and should receive
increased subscriptions from our New England States.

                                                             G. M.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.


4. Its Opportunities.

DIST. SEC. C. L. WOODWORTH, BOSTON.

We have now reached the point where attention may be well directed
to the opportunity of Congregationalism for enlargement, and so
for greater usefulness in the Southern States, and especially
among the blacks. If the claim that our faith and polity lie in
the very letter as well as spirit of the New Testament be anything
more than pretense, then it is nothing less than cowardice to
consent that either should be limited by lines of latitude. The
other denominations have spread over the country, and have aspired
to a national name and influence; but Congregationalism, until
within thirty years, had hardly set foot outside of New England.
It had clung to the early home, and lingered among the graves
of the fathers, while other churches were pressing across the
continent. Late in the contest it joined the grand march of the
churches Westward, and has shown what fine work she can do as an
educator and civilizer. Now the door opens Southward, and she will
be recreant to every call of duty, to every impulse of patriotism
and religion, if she does not widen her borders and diffuse her
influence in that direction. The opportunity is before her for
enlargement to the full dimensions of our country, and she should
be satisfied with nothing less. The church of the Pilgrims has a
right to a national name——the South has a right to any good she may
have to bestow.

It has been intimated, indeed, that other churches hold the field,
and that ours has no right to intrude. If the churches on the
ground had fairly done all the work——had enlightened the ignorant,
had lifted the degraded——there would be some place for such a
sentiment. It may seem a cheap and almost contemptible thing to
enter the South through the negro cabins and offer the poorest of
the poor our culture and our faith. But nothing is contemptible
that bears the image of the Son of God or carries His sanction. We
simply follow the spirit of His own command: “If they receive you
not in one city, flee ye into another.” We have no disposition to
discriminate against the whites, but when they discriminate against
themselves we have no alternative but to turn to the blacks. And
perhaps it is as well; for if the whites had opened their hearts
and their homes to receive us, what would have become of the race
that needs us most of all; that showed such hunger for knowledge
and eagerness for teachers as perhaps was never before seen in the
history of races? As it is now, we can lay foundations at the very
bottom of Southern society. It is an opportunity to be useful to
those who have made themselves useful to us.

They see in our teachers and missionaries the practical
illustration of human brotherhood; and they find that just so far
as the doctrines we teach prevail, they are recognized as men. They
only need to know us fully, to turn to us by thousands.

We have an immense advantage in this work, too, because we are
not hampered by any connection with the old colored churches, and
are not tempted to cater to their superstition and confusion in
worship. The temptation to count members in the Annual Report, and
to sweep whole congregations into the church, is very great; but,
fortunately, it has not lain in our path. There were no Southern
Congregational churches, and so there were no churches of our name
for which we were held responsible. It was our work to prepare a
pure and intelligent seed with which to plant the Southern field.
We antagonized no other church; “the land was all before us where
to choose.” The 5,300 laborers we have sent into the South during
these seventeen years were for the negro race; and the 2,000 more
we have raised up out of that race are for the instruction of their
people. The foundations we have laid, therefore, have been broad,
and just those needed to start the race upward.

To those who are intent on merely propagating an _ism_, the results
up to this time may seem small compared with the outlay of men and
money; but to those who look deeper, the results cannot be counted
in numbers of schools or churches; the churches founded represent
but a part of the spiritual outcome. The old churches have been
wonderfully quickened and elevated by the incoming of large numbers
of youths brought to Christ under our teaching; these have carried
back a more intelligent piety and a severer standard of morals.
Such a result was to be expected, and, if the old churches are to
be purified and saved, is not to be regretted. In estimating the
good done, therefore, we must take into account not merely the new
churches planted, but the old ones enlightened and cleansed. Our
mission has been, and may be, largely to leaven the old, while we
build up, over the South, the churches and schools to serve as
lights and guides of the people into the new and nobler future.
We oppose nothing that is good; we come with no Northern name to
antagonize a Southern one; we come as a new spiritual force to help
all true churches, and all good people, in working out the problem
of the negro’s salvation. Our right to go, then, is the right to do
good as we have opportunity; is to take advantage of most favoring
circumstances for enlargement and usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

——A National Colored Convention met in Nashville, Tenn., May 6th,
and continued in session four days. It was a body thoroughly in
earnest and deeply impressed with a sense of the wrongs endured by
the people of whom they were the representatives from all parts
of the South. In an address to the country, adopted by them, they
speak as follows in regard to their political condition: “Wholly
unbiased by party considerations, we contemplate the lamentable
political condition of our people, especially in the South, with
grave and serious apprehensions for the future. Having been given
the ballot for the protection of our rights, we find, through
systematic intimidation, outrage, violence and murder, our votes
have been suppressed, and the power thus given us has been made a
weapon against us.” In regard to the recent emigration they say in
the same address: “The migration of the colored people now going on
has assumed such proportions as to demand the calm and deliberate
consideration of every thoughtful citizen of the country. It is
the result of no idle curiosity or disposition to evade labor.
It proceeds upon the assumption that there is a combination of
well-planned and systematic purposes to still further abridge their
rights and reduce them to a state of actual serfdom. If their labor
is valuable it should be respected. If it be demonstrated that it
cannot command respect in the South, there is one alternative, and
that is to emigrate.”

At the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, at its recent
meeting at Saratoga, the report of the Committee on Missions for
Freedmen, contained the following items: receipts from churches,
$52,921.93; receipts from the State School funds, $4,246.00;
expenditures on account of missions, $40,360.27. There are 48
ordained missionaries (of whom 34 are colored), 9 licentiates, 25
catechists (all colored), and 58 teachers (of whom 36 are colored).
Eight churches were organized last year, and 1,215 communicants
were received. The whole number of communicants is 10,577. The
total amount paid for self-support by churches and schools is
$18,611.55. It was determined not to transfer this department to
the Home Missionary Board.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

——Judge Dundy, of the U. S. Court at Omaha, has made a decision
which, if confirmed by the Circuit Court to which an appeal has
been taken, will greatly change the status of the Indians. It
declares the reservation plan a nullity, and that Indians cannot
be held within certain boundaries. It was made in regard to the
Poncas, who were removed two years ago against their will to the
Indian Territory. A small number returned this spring to Nebraska,
where, though peaceably engaged in agriculture, they were arrested
by Gen. Crook and taken back to the Territory. On a writ of
habeas corpus, sued out for their relief, the judge decided that
the Indian is a “person” within the meaning of the laws of the
United States, and has rights under the laws; that Indians possess
the inherent right of expatriation, as well as the white race,
and have the inalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness, so long as they obey the laws; that no rightful
authority exists for removing by force any of these Poncas to the
Indian Territory, as Gen. Crook had been directed to do, and that
being unlawfully restrained of liberty, they must be discharged.
If this decision be confirmed and the principle established, the
results will be far-reaching.

——A prominent citizen of Southern Kansas asserts that not less than
5,000 white persons are now in the Indian Territory. A despatch
from Independence, dated May 5, says: “Over 150 wagons passed into
the Indian Territory southwest of this point yesterday.”

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

——Gen. Grant, in responding to a cordial reception given him by the
Chinese merchants of Penang, said that he never doubted, and no one
could doubt, that, in the end, no matter what agitation might for
the time being effect at home, the American people would treat the
Chinese with kindness and justice, and not deny to the free and
deserving people of that country the asylum they offer to the rest
of the world.

——The bill introduced into the Senate by Slater, of Oregon, seems
to be of some interest to the Chinaman in America. It provides that
after July 1, 1880, no Chinaman shall be allowed to “engage in,
carry on, or work at any manufacturing or mechanical business, or
to own or lease, carry on or work any mine, or to own or lease any
real estate for any other purpose than that of lawful commerce and
for places of residence.” As if this were not enough, the Chinaman
is forbidden to “work or engage to work as mechanic, artisan,
laborer, waiter, servant, cook, clerk or messenger, or in any other
capacity or at any other kind of labor, skilled or unskilled.” And
there is a heavy penalty inflicted upon the Chinaman or American
citizen who violates it. If such a bill should become a law there
would be nothing left for the Chinaman to do except to climb a tree
and stay there.

       *       *       *       *       *


Africa.

——The London Missionary Society has received advices dated Jan.
23d, from Mr. Dodgshun. Preparations for proceeding to the lake
from Kirasa were begun in June, 1878. Various delays have made
progress very slow, as lack of porters and war between Mirambo
and the Arabs, and Mr. D. had only then reached Unyanyembe.
Meanwhile, three of the six who set out in August, ’77, were left
on the field, and they the juniors of the expedition. Messrs. Hore
and Hutley are at Ujiji. Two students of the Society have been
appointed to join the force——Rev. W. Griffith and Mr. Southon,
M. D. Dr. Mullens, the Foreign Secretary of the Society, offered
himself to lead the new expedition. The Directors allowed him to go
as far as Zanzibar, hoping that it would not be necessary for him
to go farther. Central Africa seems yet to be a great way off.

——The following illustrates the exposure of African missionaries
to suspicion and violence: “At Mukondoku in Ugogo we were within
an ace of being attacked by over 100 of the natives, fully armed,
and thirsting for the blood of the white men. Their only ground
of complaint was that M. Broyon’s little child had lost a toy——an
indiarubber doll——in our camp, which they found, and persisted in
calling ‘medicine to ruin their country!’ When convinced that they
were wrong, and that we had not the slightest wish to injure them,
they only grew the more violent, and told the pagazi to leave us
alone that they might kill us. A heavy payment of cloth smoothed
the way for peace, but we fully expected to have to fight for our
lives, as we had not a single man to be depended on to stand by us.”

——Mr. Mackay, of the C. M. S., at Lake Nyanza, writes that after
his two years’ march he found the goods of the expedition in
safety, but mixed in indiscriminate confusion. Ten days brought
some order out of this chaos. The engines are complete, and almost
everything, though divided into 70 lb. parcels for the journey of
700 miles, is at hand and in place.

——Mr. Mackay speaks thus of the evil of intemperance in Africa:
“Oh, how often will I enter in my journal, as I pass through many
tribes, Drink is the curse of Africa! Useguha, Usagara, Ugogo,
Unyamwezi, Usukuma, Ukerewe, and Uganda too——go where you will, you
will find every week, and, when grain is plentiful, every night,
every man, woman and child, even to sucking infant, reeling with
the effects of alcohol. On this account chiefly I have become a
teetotaler on leaving the coast, and have continued so ever since.
I believe, also, that abstinence is the true secret of continued
and unimpaired health in the tropics. Whoever wishes to introduce
civilization into Africa, let a _sina quâ non_ of the enterprise be
that its members be total abstainers.”

——The expedition, under Dr. Laus, to explore the west side of Lake
Nyassa, returned in December. Livingstonia is proving a city of
refuge to natives escaping from slavery. The health record is good.

——“In Western Africa the climate is still our great difficulty.
It cripples our work by prostrating our men. The Gambia Mission
has been almost entirely deprived of its Missionaries during the
year from this cause, and the River Mission has been obliged to
be suspended. The Committee would gladly diminish, if possible,
these risks, and improve the chances of health, and attention is
being given to this subject; but the need is being felt more and
more keenly every year of adequate and well-furnished institutions,
in which _the African shall be trained to win Africa for Christ._
The education of the girls, the women of the future, is also
most desirable here.”——_From the Annual Report of the Wesleyan
Missionary Society of Great Britain._

——The Church Missionary Society received last year $935,000, and
expended $1,020,000. The Wesleyan Missionary Society reports
receipts, $666,000; expenditures, $786,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR QUERY COLUMN.

1. How do you prevent truancy?

2. How do you prevent tardiness?

3. Do you allow anything but failures in lessons to be deducted
from scholarship?

4. What is your standard in scholarship for promotion?

5. How much time, and in what manner, do you devote to religious
exercises in schools wholly attended by resident pupils?

       *       *       *       *       *


Answers to Queries in June Missionary.

Dr. Johnson’s Dictionary (Latham’s Edition, 1866-74, 4to, 4
vols.), probably surpasses all others in the English book market.
Richardson’s is an accepted standard, especially in matters
of definition and derivation. Walker’s is still a standard in
pronunciation. Of American dictionaries, Webster’s leads in England.

Khedive is pronounced Kay-deeve.

So far as we know, Beaufort, S. C., alone is pronounced Bew-fort.
Other places of the name, Bo-fort.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

Field Superintendent, Atlanta, Ga.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HAMPTON ANNIVERSARY.

  The Negro and the Indian——Co-Education of the Races——Addresses
  by the Rev. Dr. Hoge, of Richmond, and Secretary Carl Schurz, of
  Washington.

By the Editor.

More than the ordinary interest attaches this year to the
anniversary exercises of the Hampton Normal and Agricultural
School, just held. The experiment of negro education has been tried
for the last 16 years, until it is no longer an unsolved problem,
but one of which the once unknown quantities have come to have
an ascertained value. But the question of the educability of the
red man has been one not so conspicuously settled. What has been
accomplished in that direction has been done so far away as not to
have made much impression on the American people. This year, the
institution which has done so much to prove the responsiveness of
the negro to educational training has been engaged in its first
experiment with the Indian. Of its success thus far there can be
no shadow of a doubt. The Indian boys are contented and making
progress, and coming steadily up to a plane on which they can
pursue the regular courses of study. It was said by many at the
outset that the negro and Indian races would not associate with
each other, but the case is as contrary to this as can be. The
Indian boys at first seemed to be somewhat discontented, and Gen.
Armstrong found that they wanted most of all to learn English. “Too
much Indian talk,” they said. He asked them in class one day how
many of them would like to room with the negro boys; every hand
went up. He then went to his senior class and asked them how many
of them would be willing to take in an Indian as a roommate, to
help and teach him. A larger number than was needed of his very
best young men expressed their willingness, and so, instead of
standing aloof, the two races are completely mixed in their rooms
and at table, to their mutual satisfaction. This is a notable
element in the experiment. Some 12 of the Indian boys have joined
the church connected with the Institute.

Is it needful to say a word about the Hampton Institute itself?
Beautiful for situation it certainly is, with its front on the
creek, and only a narrow point of land separating it from the
famed Hampton Roads. Its buildings are simple but effective in
their outline and grouping. Virginia and Academic Halls, and the
new wigwam——the quarters prepared for the 70 Indian students; the
cottages in which the boys live, in families of 30 or more, largely
self-governed; the residences of the Principal and his assistants;
and not least, the great barn, sheltering a fine collection of
blooded stock——and all this on a farm of some 200 acres. It is but
a few years since there were only small and temporary barracks
to accommodate the applicants for admission; now about 200 negro
and 70 Indian students are well provided with dormitories,
recitation-rooms and workshops.

A creditable brass band, composed of students, greeted the visitors
with their cheering strains, well rendered, considering the short
time since practice was begun. Capt. Romeyne keeps the boys, both
black and red, in good military drill, and under firm, though kind,
government, and in their gray uniforms, cheap but comely, they
presented no mean appearance. Work and study are the order of every
day. The brightest and most inspiring teaching the writer ever saw
wakens the intellect to an eager activity; and work on farm and in
shop for the boys, in kitchen and laundry and with the knitting
machine for the girls, both teaches them how to labor, and enables
them to pay a considerable part of the expenses of their living.

The examinations, except of the graduating class, were not written,
but were oral, and on the plan of the daily recitations. The
Indians attracted perhaps the greatest attention from the many
visitors, in the conversation classes, which were conducted with
rare tact and skill. On a table was placed a mass of common plants
and flowers. One of the band of Indians brought only a few months
ago by Capt. Pratt was called up and asked to pick out some grass;
its uses brought out the words eat and horse, and sentences were
formed of these words. Beet, onion, potato and clover were selected
in turn, and their uses brought out by skillful questioning. Then,
in another lesson, working and earning money and spending it were
illustrated, and the language taught necessary to express these
ideas. At the other end of the gradation of studies were the very
creditable recitations of the graduating class of colored students
in algebra, history, physiology and other higher branches; nor
would it do to omit the class in teaching, where the seniors showed
their skill in interesting and instructing the little children of
the Butler Normal School.

In the afternoon the public exercises were held in Virginia Hall,
which was crowded to overflowing. The addresses were manly and
earnest; some of them quite forcible and free in thought and
expression, and dealing with questions affecting their race. It was
quite touching to see a black boy pleading for the extension of the
privileges of education to the Indian, and one of the features of
interest was a simple story of his home life in Indian Territory
by an Indian youth. Music by the band, by a select few, and by the
whole school, relieved the speaking.

But we must not forget to give the prominence due them to the
visitors of the day. Most conspicuous among them was the delegation
of Indians, in blankets and feathers, from Washington. Little
Chief and six warriors with him of the Northern Chippewas were
persuaded to come down to see what was being done for the boys
of their own race. Just how they were impressed by it all, it is
impossible to say, as their faces were covered with their blankets
most of the time, and they acted like a group of shy old women.
Probably they were a good deal bored, though they gave signs of
occasional amusement. But there were other visitors of note. Chief
among these were Secretaries Schurz and McCrary, of the President’s
Cabinet; Senator Saunders and Representative Pound, of Wisconsin;
ex-President Mark Hopkins, of Williams College; the Rev. Dr.
Plumer, of Charleston, S. C., and the Rev. Dr. Hoge, of Richmond;
the Rev. Dr. Armstrong of Norfolk, Va., and Judge Lafayette S.
Foster, of Connecticut. After the diplomas had been presented
to the graduating class by the Rev. Dr. Strieby, of this city,
President of the Board of Trustees, Dr. Hoge was called upon to
address the graduating class, and among other things said:

  “It has been my lot to attend a good many college commencements,
  but I never attended one in all my life where so much honor and
  encouragement were given to those connected with an institution
  as to-day. Two members of the Cabinet of the United States, the
  President of the youngest university of the United States, and
  which bids fair to be one of the grandest (President Gilman, of
  the Johns Hopkins University), judges of our courts, eminent
  professional men, and two of the most venerable gentlemen on this
  continent, Dr. Plumer and Dr. Hopkins——Massachusetts and South
  Carolina uniting to-day to give encouragement to this institution
  and to the labors of those who are so nobly carrying out its
  objects.

  “I cannot stand here to-day in this historic latitude without
  some profound emotions. I should not be a Virginian if I did. I
  cannot stand in sight of Fortress Monroe without remembering our
  fallen fortunes. The last two summers I have been abroad, and I
  have come back believing that there is no land which God has so
  smiled upon as this country. We have no need so great as of a
  stable government. I do not mean of force. No government can be
  stronger than the love of the people for it. You may put great
  iron bands upon it, but there will be a centrifugal power which
  will burst them. There must be centripetal force powerful enough
  to attract the people together in it. If our Government is to be
  like that, may the Lord smile upon it and perpetuate it to the
  last syllable of time.

  “All my life long I have been a friend to one of the classes
  represented here, and now I am grateful that this institution has
  extended its protecting wing over another. I have been something
  of a student of races. I could occupy the remainder of the day in
  telling you of the good qualities of the African race; and there
  has always been a great deal that has touched my heart in the
  character of the Indian people——their love for their ancestral
  lands, their reverence for the bones of their forefathers, that
  decorous reserve which gives such dignity to their bearing. One
  thing which I have always admired in them is this, that when a
  war is over, they never talk about the war that is fought. It
  is not considered magnanimous in an Indian to taunt a fallen
  foe. It seems to me that in our popular assemblies and in other
  assemblies it might be well to imitate the Indian, and not talk
  too much about the war.

  “The Indian who told us the story of his life at home said
  something that went straight to my heart. He didn’t say it very
  forcibly, but the force was in the thing he said. Time was, he
  told us, when he did not know anything about his soul or his
  salvation. One end of this institution is to make the poor Indian
  acquainted with the things which shall help him see God, not in
  the clouds, but in the face of Jesus Christ; and to hear him,
  not in the winds, but in the still small voice of the Spirit,
  speaking peace to his soul.”

The Doctor closed with calling attention to goodness as the
greatest element of success; that no man can afford to succeed by
sacrificing it; illustrating it by reference to a humble girl who
came during the yellow fever scourge to nurse the sick, and who
died a victim to its poisons, and by the life of a colored Baptist
minister who recently died in Richmond.

The Hon. Carl Schurz, Secretary of the Interior, was called upon to
follow. He began thus:

  “I respond to this call not to prolong the exercises of the day,
  nor for purposes of debate. I do not intend to discuss the war. I
  am glad it is over. I only desire to bear testimony that of all
  the speakers of the day, not one has alluded to the war save in
  a most innocent way, and they were the Indian and the reverend
  gentleman who is, I am sure, a most peaceable member of the
  church militant. As to the manner in which civil wars should be
  treated, he and I do not disagree.

  “My heart is elated with this spectacle to-day. Reference has
  been made to the fact that two Cabinet officers are present. I
  assure you that we did not come here for purposes of amusement,
  but to witness elements in the solution of one of the most
  difficult and dangerous problems of our day——the problem of
  blending two races, one of which has been in subjection and the
  other in hostility. We are all filled with feelings of admiration
  and gratitude to Gen. Armstrong and his co-workers here; to
  the State of Virginia, which, by its generous aid, renders a
  service to itself not only and to the colored people, but to this
  whole country; and to the benevolent people North and South, in
  Massachusetts and in South Carolina. In this I see the real end
  of the war and the inauguration of true peace. If I look back
  with satisfaction on anything in my official career, it is that I
  have been instrumental in aiding such a work. I am happy to know
  that the experiment is a success; and I assure you that so far as
  the means and power of my department go, nothing shall be left
  undone to strengthen and enlarge the experiment. The time has
  gone when the Indian can live on buffalo meat and give himself to
  the chase. The time has come when every man must work. All the
  information which comes to us tends to show that not only these
  but other tribes desire education, and that the attempt to give
  it to them is successful.

  “The question is often asked, Will they not relapse into
  barbarism on returning among their own tribes? I am inclined to
  think that this danger is real, unless the education be extended
  to a much larger number of Indians——enough to support each other,
  and so resist the pressure. This is the object to be held in
  view, and which I hope, in part, may be accomplished before my
  term of office expires.

  “I commend this institution. I do not know of one educational
  institution in the country which is more important in its
  tendencies, as well as in its promised results, than this. I hope
  that Virginia will continue to extend her helping hand, that its
  patrons North and South will not withdraw their support, and that
  continued success may attend the labors of the General and those
  who are associated with him in this work. I will only add that
  these sentiments of appreciation of this work, and the desire for
  its enlargement and extension, are most heartily concurred in by
  the President of the United States.”

With a benediction from the venerable Dr. Plumer, the assembly
broke up. The visitors turned toward their homes, and the school
resumed its work, which will continue for three weeks, to the end
of its academic year. I need not say to the friends of the Indian
and the negro, perhaps scarcely to those who care for the welfare
of our own Caucasian race in these United States, don’t forget
Hampton and the institutions of which it is a shining example.

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY.

Early delays——Increasing favor——The five closing days.

MISS ANNA M. CAHILL, NASHVILLE.

Looking back over the past nine months, it seems a long time
since the dark days of last September, when the school opened
under the shadow of the pestilence, and we saw one of our own
students, just returned from his summer work, stricken down by
the fever. The firmness with which the few students then in the
school stood bravely by their work gave some of us a confidence in
their fortitude and faithfulness which, perhaps, we could not have
gained without some such time of trial to develop it. As the autumn
advanced the school began to fill up, though some who came to us
after Christmas from the lower part of Mississippi assured us they
came “as soon as it was safe.” Naturally the decrease in attendance
resulting from the epidemic, was mostly seen in the number of new
students. Those who have fairly started in the work of getting an
education cannot be detained except by absolute necessity; others,
who were thinking for the first time of going away to school, were
easily led to wait another year.

Notwithstanding the delay in getting the school started, one of
the features of the year has been the steadiness in attendance,
especially in the advanced classes. As the result of this
regularity in attendance, the school work has gone on with rather
unusual satisfaction. There has been little to interrupt the
quiet spirit of study that has so much to do with the amount
accomplished; a friendly spirit of rivalry between different
classes and among members of the same class makes it from year to
year more of a disgrace to fall below the standard of scholarship.

The school has been growing in favor with the Southern people. The
presence of a large part of the State Legislature at our public
rhetorical exercise, in March, and the evident pleasure with which
they listened to the young people, indicated an increasing interest
in our success. We find that the aims of the University commend
themselves to the best men of the State.

The anxious question as to how these aims can be carried out, and
the enlarging necessities of the work met, has been partly answered
by the generous offers to the University of $60,000 and $20,000,
which have made this year memorable. It is safe to say that no
visit has ever been made to our school that left in the hearts of
teachers and students more hope and encouragement and thankfulness
than that of the gentlemen who, after inspecting the work of the
school for a few days in the Spring, gave, at the close of their
visit, the intimation of the former gift.

The year has had a religious history peculiar to itself. Without
any thing that could be called revival interest, there has been a
constant turning of the unconverted, and a quiet earnestness on the
part of Christians, that leave us with the feeling that the Spirit
of God has indeed been with us. Beginning with January, there have
been several additions to the college church at every communion
season, and fully as many have connected themselves with other
churches.

As the closing exercises of a school must partake of the general
character of the year, our commencement week was one of much
interest. Our delightful Tennessee climate scarcely affords a more
beautiful week than that in which the commencement occurred.

Beginning with Sunday, five days are occupied with the different
exercises. Examinations continue through Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday. Monday evening is given to the exhibition of the class
finishing the common school normal course; Tuesday evening is
devoted to the Union Literary Society; and on Wednesday evening
the class finishing the preparatory course deliver their orations
and are admitted to college. Thus there is a growing interest
and importance through the entire week, ending with the college
commencement on Thursday.

Dr. Roy reached us on Saturday, and stayed during the closing
week, delivering, on Sunday evening, an excellent address before
the Missionary Society. The baccalaureate sermon was for the first
time preached by President Cravath, who for several years has been
necessarily absent at the close of school. The shadow of death came
once more into our household. One who five years ago came to the
University to take the place of matron, but who for the past year
has been suffering the weariness and pain of a long illness, was,
on the morning of Commencement Sunday, called away from earth.
The simple funeral services mingled strangely with the closing
exercises, but the effect seemed to be only to give a deeper shade
of earnestness to all our work, as one who had loved the work to
the last passed from its labor into rest.

Among the visitors who attended the examinations were the
superintendent and teachers of the white schools in the neighboring
city of Edgefield, who expressed great pleasure at what they heard.

The evening exhibitions are always largely attended, the audience
frequently changing every evening. Quite a large number of white
people can be seen at almost any of our public exercises. The
students of Vanderbilt University take a friendly interest,
or perhaps curiosity, in hearing their darker brothers. The
exercises of the Union Literary Society on Tuesday evening
especially attracted their attention. Five of the students received
certificates, and two of those admitted to college were absent
teaching in Mississippi. The class entering college, ten in number,
is the largest ever admitted to our college course, and we hope
President Cravath’s admonition to have their number complete when
they are ready for their degrees will be carried out.

Of Commencement day the following extracts from the Nashville
_American_, of May 23d, will give the best account:

“The chapel of Jubilee Hall was beautifully decorated. Around
the six iron pillars were twined ropes of cedar, while over the
shield, upon which are the memorable words of Albert Miller, now
a missionary in Africa, ‘Her sons and her daughters are ever on
the altar,’ hung festoons of cedar. Draped along the entire length
of the stage, and hanging in graceful folds, were the Dutch and
American flags, while the British Union Jack stretched along the
side of the room. Above the platform, in the centre, hung the
beautiful portrait of Dr. David Livingstone. On either side were
the portraits of the Earl of Shaftesbury and William Wilberforce.
Between the portraits, in large letters of cedar, were the words,
‘Class of ’79.’ An hour before the time the highways were filled
with the friends of the Institution on their way to Jubilee
Hall.” After giving the opening programme, the account continues:
“Preston R. Burrus, of Nashville, spoke of ‘The Power of Wealth’
with earnestness and good gesticulation, but a little too fast for
the best expression. He was greeted with deserved applause as he
closed. Miss J. H. K. Hobbs, of Nashville, read a well prepared
essay on ‘What shall we Read?’ She read in a loud, clear voice. The
excellence of the matter and the manner of reading enlisted the
close attention of the audience. Austin R. Merry, of Nashville,
spoke of ‘Ideals and their Influence.’ Mr. Merry’s production was
an elegant presentation of the difficult subject he had taken,
and evinced the possession of a pen of no ordinary ability. The
delivery was as vigorous and graceful as the production was well
written.

“Miss Lulu F. Parker, of Memphis, presented an essay on ‘Genius and
Labor,’ but owing to sickness was unable to read it. It was read by
Miss Laura S. Cary, one of the graduates of the Institution, and at
present assistant teacher of Greek.

“The commencement address was delivered by Rev. J. E. Roy, D.
D. Dr. Roy announced as his subject, ‘The Incompleteness of
Individual Talent.’ While there is adjustment of the powers of
the mind——intellect, sensibility and will——these are not always
equally developed. Unity in variety is the law of Nature. As no two
faces are alike, so no two minds are alike. One mind supplements
another; one man fails where another succeeds; the first man
succeeds in some other calling. A Western farmer failed as a farmer
and storekeeper, but became the greatest captain of his age. All
gifts are not combined in one man. Great inventions are the growth
of years and the contributions of many minds. Theology is a growth
developed through the centuries and by many intellects. It is
still open to improvement. This diversity of talent provides for
a division of labor. All occupations are mutually helpful, each
being dependent on the other. Men and women have each their sphere,
or rather hemisphere; the family is the unit of society. The mail
goes to the polls and deposits ‘their’ votes——the votes of the
family. Each man has his own talent. This he should cultivate. ‘Act
well your part, there all the honor lies.’ The address abounded in
striking passages and terse statements.”

“President Cravath then, in behalf of the Trustees of the
University, addressed the graduating class in fitly chosen words,
and gave them their diplomas.

“At two o’clock the alumni dinner, one of the institutions of
Commencement week, came off. About sixty guests, including former
graduates, members of the college classes, and various ministers
of city churches, sat down with students and teachers to an ample
collation. After dinner an hour was occupied in listening to
speeches, which abounded in wit, humor and pathos.

“Thus closed a series of exercises which are regarded by all those
who witnessed them as unusually interesting and successful.”

       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

Commencement——A Local Notice——A Short Year——Needs and Hopes.

PROF. J. K. COLE, NEW ORLEANS.

A class of eight has just been graduated from the classical
department of this University——the largest class yet sent out——of
which seven were young men. Six members of the class pursued the
entire course here; the other two had taken the greater part
of their course at another school, and came here the last year
to graduate. The size of the class and the corresponding large
circle of personal friends excited more than usual interest in the
commencement exercises, which were held Wednesday evening, June
4th, at Central Church. The body of the church was crowded to its
utmost capacity, and many were forced to find seats in the gallery.

It is something entirely new that our school should be noticed in
the local papers, and I shall be pardoned for taking the following
from the New Orleans _Times_ of the 5th inst. After giving the
order of exercises, it says:

“The orations were of high order, and reflected great credit upon
the young men. They all gave evidence of the thoroughness of
training they had received in the University. They certainly gave
promise of honorable success in the life-work to which they had
devoted themselves. The essay and valedictory of Miss Flemming
deserves especial mention. It was well written and gracefully
rendered.”

The singing, says the _Times_, “was exceptionally fine. Professor
McPherron deserves great credit for the patient and thorough
instruction which was manifest in the superior rendering of the
anthems and glees.”

President Alexander conferred the diplomas in a brief address of
commendation, encouragement and advice.

The school year has been too short to accomplish all that was
desirable. Eight months, our usual time, seems a short school
year, but to reduce this one-quarter is almost a disaster; and
furnishing school-rooms and supplying furnaces, out-buildings,
cisterns and much needed plank-walks after school opened, was for
a time a great hindrance. But the end of the year shows, in many
respects, favorable results, and leaves more hopeful impressions
and anticipations for the future.

The need of buildings for a boarding department is as urgent as
ever, but this need we hope may be met by the donation from the
Stone estate. These accommodations will bring in a large addition
from the country of just such material as we desire——young men and
women from the better families who are unwilling to come to the
city and board away from the influences of the teachers.

The unsettled condition of the public schools, too, is likely to
add largely to the number of students here next year.

We can only hope that our good friends at the North will see, as we
in the field see, the importance of not only keeping up our present
work, but of extending it and making it better each succeeding year.

New buildings will certainly bring many new pupils. More pupils
will require more teachers, and more teachers will increase the
expenses of the A. M. A. But _now is the time to do good among this
people_, and we trust the churches who sustain this work will not
be weary in well-doing, but will furnish all the means that are
needed to extend this work wisely.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

Sunday-School Convention——Farm and Normal Work——Compliments.

MISS ORRA A. ANGELL, TOUGALOO.

During my three years’ stay in Tougaloo, there have been many
changes that deserve to be more widely known. One that is fresh
in mind is our Sunday-school convention, held on June 1st. It
was first assembled by our principal, one year ago, at that time
an entirely new and unheard-of affair among our pupils. What a
change was wrought in their estimate of Sunday-school work by
last year’s teachings and convention. The heavy rains of Saturday
last compelled our use of the chapel instead of the grove, and
reduced the number in attendance, yet one of our students made a
journey of fifty miles to be present, and we received word from
others through the county who desired to come. A Sunday-school
Union of our young men having been formed this term, its president
opened the convention, and our principal was appointed chairman of
the session. The forenoon was given to remarks and a temperance
concert by our Sabbath-school. One fruit of the concert ripened
immediately. One of the recitations was an extract from Colfax,
upon the death following drunkenness, and the young man who gave it
came to the office _next morning_ to sign the pledge. Being asked
if it had not been his business to sell liquor, he answered, “Yes,
but I shall bust it up! I felt as if _I_ was bound for death.”
The two months he has spent here have prepared him to make this
decision. The afternoon session from two to five consisted of
addresses by the Faculty and students, followed each by discussion.

The good of the convention was not merely in the considerable
number present giving the people of this county the benefits of one
day’s contact with a modern Sunday-school; but the efforts of our
students will be far more intelligently directed as they disperse
through this State to their summer teaching. Their desire to push
forward their mission work will only be _increased_ by the rude log
churches, benches that tip uneasily, shuttered holes in the walls,
and dearth of Sunday-school papers, books and Bibles. The needs
of their people are becoming more and more plain to them as they
observe the methods and efforts used for themselves at this school,
and the example set causes them to use some efforts for the benefit
of others. They draw their pupils with them on their return here.
The pestilence of last summer kept from us an overflow of students
whom our next term will see filling our rooms. Perhaps the cracked
and leaning walls of our buildings will be severely tried, but all
who wish to study will be welcomed with confidence on our part,
that all needs will in time be met with a supply.

The young people enter on a busy life here, in many respects new
to most of them. Their own hands do most of the farm and in-door
work. We have a field of one hundred acres planted in corn; next on
one side is the sweet potato patch of ten acres; and on a southeast
slope were set strawberry plants last year, that will another
season furnish a supply for some northern market. This spring ten
acres were sown with grass, ten with clover that now feels revived
by the recent rains. The new wire fence is already showing its
merits by keeping in our own stock and shutting out others that
have heretofore grazed in our grove and fields. Our stock is now
of the best breeds, and instead of buying we shall be able to
supply meats for our tables, that already have a variety of early
vegetables from the garden. Ornamental trees have been set out upon
the grounds, and the whole plantation has been brought to better
use and improved appearance.

Less frequent change of teachers, a more regular attendance of
students, and their promotion according to merit, have advanced the
scholarship in this institution. Last summer for the first time
it graduated a class. The present year opened two months later
than usual, and the senior class will study another year before
graduating.

Normal methods have been used this year in the seminary department,
and proved a success, giving promise of better material for
promotion to the preparatory department. The senior class in the
normal department have had one lesson a week in the primary room;
and in addition to this preparation for their work as teachers, all
in the normal department have been formed into a practice class in
grammar, each in turn being teacher of the rest. The examinations
of this week in these and other classes have given pleasing
evidences of the work accomplished.

After the examination closed on Thursday, students in the normal
department have literary exercises, interspersed with music, before
an audience numbering many of the parents and former students, some
of the trustees and other friends of the institution.

At 3 P. M. the President of the Board of Trustees of the State
Normal School and others gave congratulations and sound advice to
attentive and appreciative listeners. The President of the Board
referred to the fact that the State had made no appropriation for
the school for the present year and last, saying it was not from
any lack of interest in the work done here, but simply because
the Board of Trustees found it impossible to perform the duties
imposed by the State, while the school itself was under the control
of another Board of Trustees or Society, and therefore had made
no recommendations to the Legislature. He said, as evidence of
their appreciation of our work, that he would refer to what one
of the members of the Board, who is also county superintendent of
an adjoining county, said at the last meeting of the Board. He
said that the moral influence of the teachers in his county who
are students at Tougaloo is quite different from those coming from
other schools; that almost invariably they start Sunday-schools
as soon as they open their day-schools. He assured the teachers
and pupils and friends present, that they might expect with much
confidence an appropriation to the institution of a few thousand
dollars from the next Legislature, with a visiting committee to see
if it is well expended, and make report directly to the Legislature.

Rev. J. E. Roy, D.D., our Field Superintendent, in his address upon
“Our Country,” gave an immense amount of practical information
in regard to its history, vast area and resources, its wonderful
development during the past century, its present condition and
future possibilities. This address, as also his missionary
address the night before, could not fail to inspire all with true
_patriotism_, and the real gospel spirit.

Thursday evening an exhibition by the preparatory and primary
departments closed the exercises of the week, and the delighted
friends parted, feeling a greater interest than ever in their
institution.

We feel grateful for the general good health and harmony of feeling
during the past year, and we look forward with courage to the
coming year.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Commencement Exercises——Theological Department.

REV. W. W. PATTON, D.D., WASHINGTON.

The educational year at Howard University, Washington, D. C.,
closed with the last week in May. It has been one of success in
all respects. The students instructed in the various departments
were 236. The concluding exercises were largely attended and of
great interest. At the college commencement the audience overflowed
all accommodations, large numbers being compelled to stand, and
various members of Congress who attended went away expressing the
highest gratification at all that they saw and heard. The recent
appropriation by Congress of $10,000 towards the maintenance of
the University in the academic departments, is a great relief and
encouragement, it having received the support largely of both
political parties. The thoughtful Democrats are becoming convinced
that the University is well managed, and is doing a good work,
which could easily be quadrupled with suitable aid. At the recent
annual meeting of the trustees, Hon. Thomas J. Kirkpatrick, of
Lynchburg, Va., appeared for the first time, and at the close
made very impressive remarks as a representative of the old
slave-holders. He was an officer in the Confederate army, and is
an elder in the Southern Presbyterian church. He pledged a hearty
co-operation in our work, and declared the negro race to be a noble
race and deserving of all that could be done for it. This brought
to his feet another trustee, Frederick Douglass, the famous colored
orator, now marshal of the district, who responded with great
eloquence and pathos, and as an ex-slave cordially welcomed the
ex-slave-holder to the common work of sustaining Howard University
as a grand instrumentality for elevating the oppressed negro race.
The scene was touching in the extreme, and ended with a prayer of
thanksgiving by Bishop Brown, of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church.

The Theological Department, which has been for the last two years
largely supported by the Am. Miss’y Association, closed its
educational year on the 30th ult. The theological students have
numbered forty-two, being eleven more than the previous year. Their
number would have been still further increased could we have aided
sufficiently all who were desirous of coming. Endowed and annual
scholarships are a sore need of this as of kindred institutions.
The young men have come from seven denominations of Christians,
into each of which the leaven of intelligence and purity is thus
being introduced. They have applied themselves well, and show
commendable improvement. The most of them, not having enjoyed
a training in Greek and Latin, are fitted for usefulness among
the Freedmen by a prolonged English course of study; others take
the full course pursued in any theological seminary. This year
a class of seven studied Hebrew, and acquitted themselves most
creditably. The anniversary exercises were held in the Fifteenth
Street Presbyterian church (colored), a new and tasteful edifice,
which was filled with an interested audience of both races,
including several clergymen and Judge Strong of the Supreme Court
of the United States. Four young men who had completed their
course of study delivered orations. A Bible was presented to each
by the President of the District Bible Society, and an admirable
closing address was made to the students by Rev. Mr. Dinwiddie, of
Alexandria, Va. Three of the young men go immediately to the care
of churches which await them.

The indications are of a still fuller theological class next fall,
the term beginning September 10th.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE.

Its History——Its Importance——Its Year’s Work.

MR. B. F. KOONS, SAVANNAH, GA.

Soon after the war, schools for the Freedmen were opened at
Savannah in army barracks. In due time a suitable building was
erected, and the school continued under the auspices of the A.
M. A. until 1874, when the city rented the building and assumed
the responsibility of the school. This arrangement continued
until February, 1878, when the building was surrendered and the
city school removed. The day after it was thus left, a stable
standing near took fire, and the flames soon reached the building
and destroyed the upper part of it. It was at once determined
to rebuild and resume the work, strictly under the Association.
During the summer, Pastor Markham remained and superintended the
construction of the new building. When we landed here late last
September, it was approaching completion, and on the last day of
the same month a new corps of teachers began the work of the year.
On the first day over 60 applied for admission, and the number has
gradually increased to 338, in all grades from the Normal down.

There has been nothing specially marked in the year’s work. It has
been one of very quiet, faithful, persistent labor on the part of
both teachers and pupils, and a reasonable degree of success has
attended their efforts.

The following facts may throw light upon the need of such an
institution in this city.

The facilities afforded by the city were not sufficient to fit
the persevering pupils to become teachers and leaders among their
people, hence the need of Beach Institute. The good accomplished
by this school is of a double nature, for the re-opening of it has
led the city, for the present, to add one year more to its course
of study, and to the enterprising it is an avenue to higher schools
and wider culture, and so to greater usefulness.

There are some very efficient teachers in the public schools, but
their hands are tied, first by the limited course of study, and
then by unusual restrictions on their religious influence. There
are two schools for the colored people of the city. In former
years the children have been turned away from these by the score
for want of room, and even during the present year they have been
refused admission in great numbers. We, too, have had all we could
accommodate, and even more than we could do justice to with the
present corps of five teachers.

One of these buildings was purchased by a wealthy citizen, and
by him given to the School Board for a colored school, with the
expressed stipulation that no religious exercises of any character
should be permitted, not even the singing of “gospel hymns.” It
is reported that the same gentleman contemplates the purchase
of the other building, which is rented by the city now, and the
presentation of the same to the city, and, we may reasonably
conclude, with the same restrictions. These stipulations are
displeasing to many of the colored people. Ignorant as some are,
they feel the need of Christian training for their children. We do
not doubt that this restraint is equally unwelcome to many of the
School Board and citizens of the city, but as a corporation they
are involved, and perhaps they are doing the best they can under
the circumstances.

The Catholics have a small school for the colored people, but some
of the parents (good Catholics) have applied for admission for
their children to our school, saying, “I have concluded that the
teaching of the Catechism and but little else is not an education
for my child; I want something better.” It seems that the hold they
are getting upon the colored people of Savannah is rather feeble.

That the position was well taken in re-establishing the Beach,
there can be no doubt, for it was needed as a connecting link
between the city schools and the University at Atlanta, as well as
for the Christian training which it will be able to give to a large
class of the youth of the city.

This week has been devoted to examinations and the closing work of
the year. The greater part of the previous days were devoted to
written work; but it had been announced that in the morning hours
of to-day public oral examinations would be held. At an early hour
a good number of parents and friends showed the interest they have
in their children and the school by coming in to witness the day’s
work. The morning was spent in the various rooms, many of the old
people as well as the children showing a lively interest in the
examinations. At twelve o’clock our commodious chapel was well
filled by an attentive and appreciative audience, to witness the
closing exercises of the school, which consisted of essays from the
fine members of the normal class and recitations and music from the
other departments. After a very enjoyable hour and a half in the
chapel, the various grades passed to their rooms, the promotions
were read, the school dismissed, the good-byes said, the doors
closed; and thus, with its cares and its perplexities, its joys and
its sorrows, its successes and its failures, endeth another chapter
of the great volume of life.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

The Work——Temperance——Superstition.

REV. J. R. M’LEAN, NO. 1 MILLER’S STATION.

Miss Douglass’ coming here has been a blessing to us all, and a
great help to the work. Through her we have been able, as we hope,
to get money enough to finish our church inside. Our congregation
has not been so large as we think it ought to have been, and yet
our work is felt by all the other churches. The Sabbath-school has
been larger this year than at any time before since I have been
here, and we have seen indications of the good it is doing. God’s
word will accomplish that which He pleases.

The day school has been good all the time. We have on the list
about 55; it numbered a month ago 41 daily. Some of the larger
ones have gone out of school to work on the farm. We have had a
strong religious spirit in the school all the year. Some twenty or
more have, as we hope, been converted; five of that number have
been received into this church.

Five of the members of our church, who spent at least a dollar and
a half a week for strong drink when I first came here, have left
it off altogether and say they do not want to smell it now. One of
them yesterday, at our communion, would not partake with us. When
asked why, he said: “I wanted to take it the worst kind, but I was
afraid it would make me want to go to drinking again,” and tears
ran down his face as he spoke these words to Miss Douglass. You can
see from this that some of the people are trying to leave off the
habits of slavery, but it is done with no little effort, for the
habits seem to have become a second nature.

A man who is a Jew, and cares nothing about religion, said to me,
the other day, that he had been here thirteen years, and had never
seen such a change as recently among the people. I am not able to
say what has caused it. I feel sure that much of it has come from
the labor of Miss D.; she has gone to see them in their homes and
read the word to them, and prayed with them, and given them good
tracts to read, and the blessing of God has been with her in the
work.

But there is a dark side to my picture. We have so many Atheists
here that it is very hard to do anything. The man who denies God’s
word is just as much of an Atheist as the one who says there is
no God. We find only a few who _believe_ God’s word. They say
the Bible does not teach us the way to come to Christ, but that
He brings us to Himself through a dream interpreted by some old
ignorant godfather or godmother. These foolish ideas have led many
of the hopefully converted ones to doubt and caused many of them
to go in darkness for weeks, and some of them do not see the light
yet. Some of those who gave their hearts to the Saviour in our
meetings, (and such changes were seen in their actions, that no one
could doubt their being Christians,) before they could join the old
churches must go off and dream, and hear the little voice say, “Oh,
my little one, go in peace, and sin no more.”

I find many of those who have joined this church much worse than
they were before they thought of becoming Christians. The cause
lies in the fact that they have been led to trust in forms and not
to trust Jesus. A knowledge of the Bible is the only thing that
is to save the thousands of my people. Their ministers teach the
same foolish ways of which I have spoken. Nothing but the grace of
Almighty God can lead this people in the way _everlasting_.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

The Kansas Fever——Le Moyne Normal School.

MISS LAURA A. PARMELEE, MEMPHIS.

Memphis has been very little affected by the emigration movement,
but from students who are teaching in Tennessee, Arkansas and
Mississippi, we hear enough to keep us interested.

From a neighboring village several families moved to Kansas in the
winter. They are pleased with their prospects, and send word for a
certain student to hold himself in readiness to come to them and
teach as soon as they can get ready for school.

The following letter is from a member of last year’s class now
teaching in Leota, Miss.:

“The Kansas fever, as it is called here, has reached our section of
the country, and the people are entirely carried away by it. They
quit their crops and sell their stock for little or nothing to get
money to travel on. Fine milch cows and calves are selling for $10
or $12 at the highest. One man bought 125 chickens for $5.

“Having accomplished this much of their intention, about thirteen
or fourteen hundred moved to town on May 2. In the evening, the
white people became excited over the action of the colored people.
They came to town and held a meeting. Then the colored people
became excited over the action of the whites, and made ready to
protect themselves.

“By night there were 2,000 persons in town, all armed. The sheriff
was dispatched for; he came with many others. The next morning he
went to the camp of the colored people and examined their arms. All
but one submitted to his authority. The man drew his gun and the
sheriff drew his pistol. If either of the two had fired there would
have been trouble all around, but, thank God, there was none. This
man was arrested and sent to jail.

“The town is crowded now and is guarded at night (every night)
by the whites. It seems that they will not allow the boats to
interfere and convey these poor people to St. Louis. They have been
waiting on the bank four days. Yesterday (Sunday) it rained very
hard, and the women with their little ones and household goods were
out in all of the storm. We have had very heavy rains; the thunder
and lightning was as if the world were coming to an end. The people
are exposed to the weather, but determined to go to Kansas.

“The whites are doing all they can to get them back to their homes
to stay this year. They go to the camp, talk and coax, but the
people have not yielded yet, and it is doubtful if they will.

“I cannot relate the whole story; it is very long and sad.”

Another letter just received says the people returned to the farms
for this year. Hunger and the necessities of the case compelled
them to yield. Both the writer of this letter and the young man
called to Kansas, expect to return to Le Moyne next year and
graduate.

We do not graduate a class this summer, but shall give diplomas
to a large and well prepared class next season. If we are denied
the privilege——or deny ourselves——of graduating students, we find
ample compensation in the excellent work and character of our young
people. I wonder if Mr. Steele has told you of our five ministers
scattered around in different classes——two Baptist, two Methodist,
one Christian Adventist. Four of the five are settled over churches
and are of excellent spirit, possessing fair ability.

Yesterday the churches had a grand union picnic. A procession
headed by a band of music marched to Estival Park, which has
opened its gates to colored people within the past fortnight. A
few of our scholars were excused to attend, but all the older
students preferred to continue at work and were entirely unaffected
by the excitement. Three years ago, two days had to be given
to Sunday-school picnics——the Thursdays when the Baptists and
Methodists held anniversaries. We think it quite a triumph to have
reached the point of ignoring such events.

We discuss plans for enlarging our work in the industrial
department, and long for dormitories to accommodate the strangers
that come to us. Miss Milton has charge of the sewing class, and
informs you of its success. Next year we hope to have a text-book
on nursing introduced as a regular study. Lippincott & Co. are
issuing a book that meets our wants. Thursdays, after the regular
lecture to the young ladies, recipes for plain and sick cooking are
distributed. There is a demand for recipes for pies, cakes, etc.,
which has to be gratified once in a while.

We recognize the duty of endowing the colleges at the earliest
possible moment, and rejoice that Fisk, Atlanta, Straight and
Talladega can be established more firmly. We would not take
anything from their strength. Certainly they must be maintained,
and we will help them by sending our students abroad as soon as
possible. The young people who come to us are not able to pay
the twenty-five dollars extra that is needed to carry them to
Nashville. They must come here, or not go to school at all.

They will not go to Nashville until they finish the course at Le
Moyne; and the better training we can give, the more will they be
likely to desire instruction in other branches than are allowed
here.

I will in a short time send you report of our library receipts and
expenditures during the year. We did not think one year ago it
could be possible to be in possession of so large and excellent an
assortment of books as now stands upon our shelves. What more we
can accomplish for it remains to be seen.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *

“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW CONSTITUTION AND OUR MISSIONARY WORK.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

The inquiry is raised with much anxiety by Eastern friends, what
will be the effect on our missionary work of the adoption of our
new Constitution.

That the spirit and intent of this instrument are intensely
hostile to the Chinese is well understood. To find it providing
as skilfully and malignantly as possible for forcing them out of
the State will create no surprise. It stands alone, I apprehend,
among all our State Constitutions in singling out one class among
those upon whose industries the State lives, and by whose taxes its
treasury is replenished, and making it the object of restrictive
and oppressive legislation. One whole Section (XIX.) is devoted
to this, and bears as its title “Chinese.” Stigmatizing them as
“aliens who are or may become vagrants, paupers, mendicants,
criminals or invalids, * * * or otherwise dangerous or detrimental
to the State,” it directs the Legislature “to discourage their
immigration by all the means within its power;” “to impose
conditions upon which such persons may reside in the State, and to
provide for their removal from the State” if the conditions are not
fulfilled. It forbids any corporation from employing them “directly
or indirectly in any capacity;” and requires that cities and towns
be empowered by the Legislature to “remove the Chinese beyond their
limits, or to locate them within prescribed limits;” and to “make
and enforce all such local, police, sanitary and other regulations
as are not in conflict with general laws.” These provisions are
broad enough to admit any and every cruelty conceivable to be
practised under the forms of law, and the Chinese cannot, as
heretofore, appeal to our State Supreme Court with any hope of
relief from oppressive enactments. The question is, what will the
result be, and what can we do about it?

If a man values highly his reputation for sagacity, he does well
to be careful how he prophesies; and if anywhere such caution
is needed, surely it is here in California; but as I have no
reputation to be anxious about, I will tell how the prospect looks
to me.

1. There can be no question that these provisions, carefully
framed though they are, are in conflict with the Constitution
of the United States, and with not only our present treaty with
China, but any other treaty that could possibly be framed. Of
course, all this may amount to nothing until the question of their
constitutionality has been passed upon by the U. S. Supreme Court;
but it seems to me that the interests involved are so many and so
great that soon an issue must be made and be pressed through to
decision. This done, that whole section——vile blot that it is on
the fair fame of America!——becomes void, unless, indeed, the whole
land can be dragooned by Californian politicians, overriding its
treaties and trampling under foot the most sacred axioms of its
civil polity——dragooned into a timid, restrictive, barbarous policy
which we taught China years ago to discard. I do not believe this
can be done. I have faith in a free people among whom the leaven of
Christ is at work——faith that no question can get _settled_ among
them till it is settled right, and that however selfishness and
oppression may triumph for awhile, their “latter end shall be that
they perish for ever.”

2. If, however, the laws enacted in virtue of these new provisions
are made to work, there cannot but be a large exodus of the Chinese
from California. They will be starved out. We have come to the
proud distinction of having, as a State, introduced starvation
into our organic law. Those who can go, must go; and those who
have not the means of travelling must starve or be removed at
State expense. But as to the effect of that exodus, God is giving
us beforehand an impressive object-lesson. The negro is scarcely
more essential to the industry of the South than the Chinaman is
to that of California. Let this exodus be large and simultaneous,
and the backbone of business here is broken. There will be harvests
that cannot be reaped, because the Liverpool price of wheat will
not pay the cost of harvesting. There will be mills and other
manufacturing establishments idle, because the manufactured goods
can be laid down here from New England or Old England cheaper than
we can produce them. There will be mines deserted, unless white men
are found to work at Chinamen’s wages; for who wants to run off his
gold-bearing dirt and thereby run himself off into bankruptcy? The
hundreds of little businesses which, by the aid of the Chinese,
yield men a small return, must be abandoned, for the higher wages
will absorb the profits and the capital besides.

But, it may be said, white men have prospered elsewhere without
the aid of the Chinese, why not in California? No doubt they can
prosper here, but only as a new and lower level for American labor
is found. Prices must fall, and the work must be steadier and
harder than now it is apt to be. You see, perhaps, a good side to
this in the frugality and industry to which it will compel our
children; but my expectation is, that when this discipline begins
to make us sore, when the real facts are forced upon men’s vision,
then these provisions of our new Constitution will, by common
consent, become inoperative, and Chinese labor or its equivalent
will be welcomed back again.

I venture such predictions, but whether they prove true or not,
this thing is certain, the Chinese still _are here_; and while
they remain our work remains. If the time is short, so much the
more urgent must we be in pressing upon their attention the Gospel
of Christ. If the enmity against them rises with its opportunity
and crowds them to the wall, so much the more must they hear from
us the voice of Christian kindliness, commending to them Him who
was the friend of publicans and sinners. If they are to be driven
back to their own land, we must be the more earnest to let them
know——not by our words only, but by our deeds rather——that it is
not Christianity but the lack of Christianity that has exiled
them; and we must see to it that as many as possible go to be
self-sustaining missionaries, telling the story of redeeming love.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.


DEAR LITTLE ONES:

I know you would all like to hear about a sweet little girl who
moved a big, big mountain out of my way a few days ago.

“How did she do it?”

“Was it a real mountain?”

“Who was she? and, and ——”

If you all keep asking questions, how can I get a chance to
answer them? And then you don’t begin at the right end with your
questions. Who was she? ought to have been the first, and it’s
the very last. Never mind, we will take them backwards. Let’s see
how many there are. There are three, counting either way. Now if
you all sit as still as nine little white mice all in a row, I’ll
answer every question. First, who is she? Her name is Clarissa
Smith, and she is as black as a little blackbird, and has to look
just as the wee birdies do to our dear Father in Heaven for her
daily bread. I am sorry to say that she is not pretty to look
at, but it’s a fact. Her clothing is old and ragged, she has no
shoes and no hat, though the round basket she carries on her head,
peddling berries or vegetables, makes a broad enough one, for that
matter.

Now for question number two, Was it a real mountain?

Yes, it was a real mountain; far more real than one of earth and
stones. It was one that has a habit of getting between us and
the light of God’s sweet love, and its name is _Discouragement_.
Sometimes it gets between little girls and their sewing and makes
them say, “Oh, dear me, I can’t do it!” Sometimes it piles itself
upon a little boy’s book and makes him say, “I never can learn this
lesson.”

The third question is, How did she do it? With a song. How was
that? Well, upon this particular morning I was feeling it weighing
down upon my heart and making me wonder whether it was any good to
visit people who were hungry and full of care, unless I had the
money to relieve their wants. You see, the mountain had made every
thing so dark that I couldn’t see Jesus. Now, as I walked on I
heard a child’s voice behind me calling, “Strawberries——sweet, ripe
strawberries——fresh, ripe strawberries,” going by; and then, after
an instant’s pause, the voice came again, but this time it said:

    “More love, O Christ, to Thee;
    More love to Thee.”

I waited until she came up to me; and then, after we had spoken and
shaken hands, I asked her as we walked together, why she put those
few lines in her call.

“Cause _it helps me_ and ’members me of Jesus,” was her answer.

“Why do you want to be reminded of Jesus?” I asked.

“Cause Him died so I could go to Heaven.”

“Why do you want to go to Heaven.”

“To see Jesus,” was the prompt reply.

We parted at the corner of the street, Clarissa going on, and I
standing to listen until her song died away in the distance. Then I
turned to find the ugly mountain gone and beautiful Faith resting
where it had been so lately.

How many of you, I wonder, are going to become mountain movers from
to-day? Remember, a loving word, a gentle act, a little bit of
self-denial on your part, may move some ugly mountain out of your
brother’s or sister’s or companion’s road, and make the holy angels
glad because you love Jesus.

Do not forget, when you kneel down to pray, to ask Jesus to bless
me, and give me every day more love to himself, so that I can have
more and still more for all of you.

    Lovingly your friend,
                       LILLIE E. BARR,
    _Missionary of the American Missionary Ass’n_.




RECEIPTS

FOR MAY, 1879.


  MAINE, $193.34.

    Bangor. First Cong. Ch. to const. REV. S. L.
      B. SPEASE, L. M.                                        40.43
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Brunswick. Marshall Cram                                  10.00
    Calais. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.34
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           30.00
    East Orrington. Cong. Ch.                                  2.36
    Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.00
    Gilead. Rev. H. R.                                         1.00
    Newfield. Mrs. N. C. A.                                    1.00
    Portland. Plymouth Cong. Ch., to const. REV.
      HERBERT W. LATHE and JAMES CRIE, L. M’s.                68.31
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        17.90


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $231.05.

    Chester. C. S. G.                                          1.00
    Chichester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                      0.75
    Derry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student,
      Hampton Inst._                                          20.00
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $67.55;
      “Member of First Parish,” $10                           77.55
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.89
    Keene. Miss E. R.                                          1.00
    Kingston. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $6.75; Rev. J.
      Chapman and wife, $6                                    12.75
    Laconia. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   3.77
    Milford. Peter and Cynthia S. Burns                       30.00
    Orfordville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.00
    Pembroke. Rev. D. G.                                       1.00
    Portsmouth. North Cong. Ch.                               53.34
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Wilmot. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00


  VERMONT, $361.67.

    Bakersfield. Miss E. M. Barnes, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           19.79
    Bellows Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.00
    Cambridge. Dea. Solomon Montague                          10.00
    Clarendon. Mrs. Wm. D. Marsh, $100, to const.
      MISS LUCY N. BOWEN, MISS M. NEWHALL, and
      MISS H. E. GILBERT, L. M’s; Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $12                                              112.00
    Danby. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     1.22
    Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                15.00
    East Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            8.10
    Fayetteville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              5.00
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.37
    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.66
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $12.50; and Sab.
      Sch., $11.30                                            23.80
    Orwell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                15.44
    Pomfret. S. C.                                             1.00
    Saint Albans. Mrs. S. F. Stranahan, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    7.50
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Thetford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $27.54; Rev.
      J.M., $1                                                28.54
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. FRED
      C. GRAVES, L. M.                                        30.00
    Wells River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           32.25


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,037.77.

    Amesbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              12.82
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Cong. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    12.00
    Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         3.29
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $45.35; Henry
      Taylor, $5                                              50.35
    Barre. E. C. Sab. Sch., to const. GEO. E.
      ALLEN and P. H. BABBITT, L. M’s                         60.00
    Beverly. Dane St. Sab. Sch., _for Student,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Bolton. “A Friend,” _for Pupils, Atlanta U._              30.00
    Boston. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       455.82
    Boston. Russell Sturgis, Jr., $25, _for
      Pupils, Atlanta U._;——Mrs. E. P. Eayrs, $10;
      Union Ch., _for Freight_, $3; “A Friend,” $1            39.00
    Boston Highlands. Eliot Cong. Ch.                        104.01
    Braintree and Weymouth. Union Ch. and Soc.                25.00
    Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15;
      Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and
      $2 for _Freight_; Mrs. P. C. Browning, $10;
      Mrs. J. S. Upham, $3                                    30.00
    Brookfield. Evan. Cong. Ch.                               60.00
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Aux. of Pilgrim Ch., 2
      boxes of C. _for Mendi M._
    Chelsea. Mrs. M. E. J., 50c.; Mrs. P., 50c.;
      —— 2 Bbls. of C.                                         1.00
    Conway. Cong. Soc. to const. MRS. CATHARINE
      ADAMS and S. BAXTER ALLIS, L. M’s                       66.40
    Curtisville. C. L. D.                                      1.00
    East Braintree. Circle of Ladies, $36, _for
      Pupils, Atlanta U._;——R. A. F., 50c.                    36.50
    East Bridgewater. Union Ch. and Soc.                      18.89
    East Weymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.13
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               21.66
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              24.16
    Florence. A. L. Williston, for John Payson
      Williston, deceased                                     25.00
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            44.00
    Grafton. Evangelical Cong. Sab. Sch., $13.10
      and Bedding, _for Pupils, Atlanta U._                   13.10
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              62.35
    Holliston. S. T.                                           0.72
    Housatonic. Housatonic Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 21.51
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         31.27
    Lancaster. ESTATE of Sophia Stearns, by W. W.
      Wyman, EX.                                               7.00
    Lanesville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.00
    Lee. H. M. C.                                              0.50
    Leicester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       21.00
    Lowell. Mr. and Mrs. J. M. Moore (of which
      $300 _for Chinese M._, and $60 to const.
      ALBERT MONROE MOORE and JAMES AUGUSTINE
      MOORE, L. M’s)                                         500.00
    Lowell. Eliot Cong. Sab. Sch.                              5.30
    Littleton. Otis Manning                                   25.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Pupils,
      Atlanta U._                                             26.30
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.22
    Newburyport. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     21.24
    North Beverly. Mrs. Rebecca Conant                         5.00
    Northborough. “A Friend”                                   5.00
    Northbridge Centre. Cong. Sab. Sch.                        3.25
    North Easton. Miss Helen Ames, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Norton. Young Ladies of Wheaton Sem., _for
      Pupils, Atlanta U._                                     21.00
    Paxton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                11.00
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              5.37
    Reading. Rev. W. H. Willcox, _for Pupils,
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    Rockport. Mrs. Nancy Brooks                               10.00
    Salem. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $68.85; “A
      Friend,” $5                                             73.85
    Sherborn. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc. and Sab.
      Sch.                                                    20.00
    Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch.                             7.00
    South Dennis. Cong. Ch.                                    9.70
    South Braintree. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          12.00
    South Egremont. Cong. Ch., $22; D. D., $1                 23.00
    South Framington. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                86.00
    South Weymouth. “Friend”                                   0.50
    Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        190.45
    Sunderland. J. M.                                          0.50
    Templeton. J. L.                                           1.00
    Uxbridge. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch., to const. CHAS. H. WALKER
      and MRS. ALLEN BURBANK, L. M’s                          70.00
    Watertown. Corban Soc., 2 Bbls. of C.
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   19.00
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Miss. Ass’n., Bbl. of
      C. and $2 _for Freight_                                  2.00
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch. (proceeds of a Fair)
      $33; Cong. Ch. and Soc., $12.02                         45.02
    West Brookfield. MRS. HARRIET A. WHITE, to
      const. herself L. M.                                    30.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      80.46
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            96.88
    Worcester. Union Ch., $77.45; Salem St. Ch.
      and Soc. (Mon. Con.) $22; Central Cong. Ch.
      (ad’l) 80c.; Mrs. Elizabeth Grassie, $10;
      Mrs. S. E. Bailey, $2                                  112.25
    —— “A Friend”                                              1.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $315.74.

    Providence. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     300.00
    Westerly. Pawcatuck Cong. Ch.                             15.74


  CONNECTICUT, $1,157.43.

    Birmingham. Cong. Ch. (of which $25 from “W.
      E. D.”)                                                 49.02
    Canaan. “A Mite”                                           1.00
    Cornwall. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                       15.85
    Darien. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    East Haddam. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     34.50
    East Woodstock. ESTATE of Miss Hannah Smith,
      by John Paine, Ex.                                     200.00
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.54
    Gilead. Cong Ch.                                          19.00
    Greenwich. I. P.                                           0.50
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 16.00
    Hadlyme. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
    Hartford. A. W.                                            1.00
    Hebron. First Cong. Ch., $20.32; L. W. R., $1             21.32
    Killingworth. A. V. E.                                     0.51
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                                     21.88
    Middletown. Third Cong. Ch., to const. WILLIAM
      SOUTHMAYD L. M.                                         30.00
    New Haven. North Ch. $137.12; College St.
      Cong. Ch., $51.87                                      188.99
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                    6.74
    Plainville. “A Friend,” to const. CHARLES W.
      MOODY, JOSEPH EDMONDS and JOHN LEOPARD, L.M’s          100.00
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                  55.77
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch, $118.64;——Bible
      Class Second Cong. Ch., $24, _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._;——First Cong. Ch. $90.70,
      to const. DEA. JACKSON GORDON and CHAS. E.
      HARRIS, L. M’s                                         233.34
    Saybrook. Second Cong Ch.                                 11.75
    Simsbury. By Mrs. McLean, _for Atlanta U._                 2.00
    Scotland. Cong. Ch.                                       11.25
    Suffield. First Cong. Soc.                                12.91
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      25.56
    Willimantic. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                       25.00
    —— “A Connecticut Clergyman”                              20.00


  NEW YORK, $2,395.58.

    Antwerp. First Cong. Ch.                                  16.20
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., E. R.
      Kennedy. Supt., _for a Lady Missionary_                100.00
    Brooklyn. J. Davenport, $50; Park Cong. Ch.,
      $5.71                                                   55.71
    Bergen. ESTATE of J. M. Hitchcock, by A. E.
      Hitchcock, Ex.                                         289.54
    Berkshire. First Cong. Ch., $17.80; Levi Bail
      $2                                                      19.80
    Binghamton. Cong. Ch.                                    100.00
    Buffalo. Miss. I. M. S.                                    0.50
    Champion. Cong. Ch.                                        5.34
    Danby. First Cong. Ch.                                    12.00
    East Bloomfield. ESTATE of Miss Phebe Gauss,
      by C. W. Bradley, Adm’r, to const. MRS.
      HORACE TAYLOR, MRS. MAURICE FIELD, MRS.
      HARRY GODDARD, MRS. JAMES COLLINS, LORIN H.
      BRUNSON, AUGUSTUS BUELL, JOHN A. GAUSS and
      ROBERT F. CODDING, L. M’s                              250.00
    Fort Edward. W. F. G.                                      1.00
    Greenwich. Proceeds of Claim on Cong. Ch.
      Property                                               668.44
    Groton. Storrs A. Barrows                                 30.00
    Jamestown. Mrs. S. A. Bly’s Sab. Sch. Class,
      $4.22, and “Friends” in Cong. Ch., $4.03                 8.25
    Lake George. Rev. Henry S. Huntington ($5 of
      which _for Chinese M._)                                 10.00
    Lenox. Amos S. Johnson                                     5.00
    Mexico. Mrs. J. M. Brown, $1.50; Mrs. J. K.
      S., $1; J. D., 50c.; G. T., 25c.                         3.25
    Newburgh. JOHN H. CORWIN, $30, to const.
      himself L. M., also Box of Papers                       30.00
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle Church                     531.39
    Nineveh. Reuben Lovejoy                                  200.00
    Oak Hill. Mrs. Caty Hall                                   5.00
    Oswego. First Cong. Sab. Sch., and H. L. Hart,
      $25, _for Student Aid, Straight U._——Cong.
      Ch. M. C. Coll., $3.79                                  28.79
    Oxford. Presb. Ch.                                         2.12
    Prattsburgh. “H. A. H.”                                    5.00
    Prottham. F. E.                                            0.25
    Wellsville. First Cong. Ch.                               13.00
    West Farms. Rev. A. Wood, pkg. of books and
      papers
    West Yaphank. “Mrs. H. M. O.”                              5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $11.50.

    Bound Brook. Cong. Ch.                                     5.50
    Montclair. Mrs. J. H. Pratt’s Class in Cong.
      Sab. Sch., _for a Student, Talladega. C._                6.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $149.25.

    Hyde Park. Thomas Eynon, to const. REV. E. B.
      EVANS, L. M.                                            32.00
    North East. B. T. Spooner                                  5.00
    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch., to const.
      DEA. WILLIAM CAMPBELL, DEA. SAMUEL A.
      JOHNSON, and LEONARD O. SMITH, L. M’s                  112.25


  OHIO, $586.60.

    Braceville. “S. P. I.”                                     1.00
    Bryon. S. E. Blakeslee, _for Foreign M._                   5.00
    Burton. Cong. Ch.                                         18.57
    Claridon. “E. C. T.”                                       1.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. S. A. Bradbury                            25.00
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch., to const PROF. JOHN
      SHORT, REV. JOHN JONES, REV. E. I. JONES,
      WALTER CRAFTS, and REV. HENRY F. TYLER, L.M’s          149.07
    Columbus. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                  8.44
    Freedom. Cong. Ch., $4.20; H. K., $5; “J. C.
      B.,” $5                                                 14.20
    Huntsburgh. “Friends,” by E, L. Miller, _for
      Ind. Sch., Talladega, Ala._                              3.00
    Leatherwood. M. D. J.                                      1.00
    Madison. “Earnest Workers,” _for Student, Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            30.00
    Mansfield. First Cong. Ch., to const. CHAS. B.
      JAMESON, L. M.                                          31.53
    Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                                 73.65
    Middlefield. “L. S. B.”                                    5.00
    Nelson. Mrs. Julia A. Clark                               30.00
    Newark. “A Friend,” $60; Mrs. J. C. Wheaton,
      $10, to const. MRS. MATILDA MCCRORY. L. M.              70.00
    Oberlin. Oberlin Freedwoman’s Aid Soc., $75,
      by Mrs. W. G. Frost, Treas. _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._;——“A Friend,” $5,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._;——L. F., $1                  81.00
    Painesville. Ladies’ Soc., by Mrs. Cornelia H.
      Greer. Pres., _for Missionary at Miller’s
      Station, Ga._                                           30.00
    Saybrook. “Friends,” _for Freight_                         1.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., Quar.
      Coll                                                     6.14
    Willoughby. Mrs. A. K.                                     1.00
    —— “A Friend”                                              1.00


  INDIANA, $20.

    Crawfordsville. Prof. C. Mills and Wife                   20.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,309.52.

    Champaign. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                25.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch.                                 474.00
    Chicago. South Cong. Ch., $11.79; W. S., 50c.             12.29
    Elgin. Sab Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Galesburg. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $30, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._;——“A Friend,” $15                 45.00
    Kewanee. Rev. J. F. L                                      1.00
    Morris. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                   1.00
    Normal. Cong. Ch.                                          6.70
    Oak Park. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Polo. Robert Smith                                       500.00
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch. $120.38; First
      Cong. Ch., $36.25;——Ladies’ Aid Soc. First
      Cong. Ch., $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             181.53
    Tonica. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00


  MICHIGAN, $70.76.

    Almont. Mrs. A. R.                                         1.00
    Benzonia. Rev. D. B. Spencer                               3.00
    Detroit. Fort St. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                      6.00
    Litchfield. Shining Light Mission Band of
      Cong. Sab. Sch.                                          6.00
    Olivet. Miss P. A. Stone, $5; Cong. Ch. Mon.
      Con. Coll., $4.29                                        9.29
    Pentwater. H. R.                                           1.00
    Salem. Summit Missionary Aux., by Mrs. A.
      Vansickle                                                5.40
    Solon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     1.00
    Vermontville. First Cong. Ch.                             30.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                         8.07


  WISCONSIN, $221.

    Beloit. Second Cong. Sab. Sch. $15.90; Ladies,
      _for Freight_, $2                                       17.90
    Columbus. Olivet Cong. Ch.                                13.00
    Cookville. Cong. Ch.                                       5.65
    Fulton. Cong. Ch.                                         10.35
    Hartford. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                 1.00
    Liberty. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                      30.00
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           8.50
    Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch., to const. HENRY PAYSON
      GILLETT and MISS MARY S. EARLS, L. M’s                  71.10
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                      17.00
    West Salem. Cong. Ch.                                     16.00
    Whitewater. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for a Pupil,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Wilmot. Cong. Ch.                                          2.50


  IOWA, $176.09.

    Atlantic. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  7.03
    Burlington. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., $25,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._;——Miss M. L., $1             26.00
    Davenport. Cyrus Pitts                                     5.00
    Durant. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
    Fort Madison. Francis Sawyer                              15.00
    Gilmau. Cong. Sab. Sch., $5; Rev. F. H.
      Magoun, $2                                               7.00
    Keokuk. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Nashville, Tenn._                           31.75
    Manchester. W. G.                                          1.00
    McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                       21.31
    Milton Junction. Cong. Ch.                                 6.00
    Waltham. ESTATE of Miss Emeline Williams, by
      Wm. Mason                                               50.00


  MISSOURI, $27.50.

    Breckenridge. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    North Springfield. First Cong. Ch.                        17.50


  KANSAS, $10.45.

    Atchison. Cong. Ch.                                       10.45


  MINNESOTA, $41.35.

    Afton. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                         3.50
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $21.50; Rev. Edwin
      S. Williams, $10, by W. Williams                        31.50
    Morris. First Cong. Ch.                                    1.35


  COLORADO, $15.50.

    Denver. A. R. B.                                           0.50
    Pueblo. L. Sperry                                         15.00


  UTAH, $5.

    Uintah Valley. Miss E. C. Ayer                             5.00


  OREGON, $6.

    Salem. John J. McFarland, $5; R. McC., 50c.;
      A. B., 50c.                                              6.00


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $13.50.

    S’kokomish. Cong. Ch. of Christ                           13.50


  TENNESSEE, $168.65.

    Memphis. Le Moyne School, $168.15; Prof. A. J.
      S., 50c.                                               168.65


  NORTH CAROLINA, $176.39.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch.                                  20.90
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., $150.80; Cong. Ch.,
      $4.69                                                  155.49


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $260.25.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., $257.50;——Cong. Ch.,
      $2.25, _for African M._; A. W. F., 50c.                260.25


  GEORGIA, $525.33.

    Atlanta. Storrs School, $233.55; Atlanta
      University, $98.50                                     332.05
    Brunswick. S. B. Morse (ad’l)                              9.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    38.75
    Miller’s Station. Miss E. W. Douglass                     10.47
    Savannah. Beach Inst.                                    129.85
    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., $2.31; “Sons and
      Daughters of Jerusalem,” $1.90; J. H. H. S., $1          5.21


  FLORIDA, $30.

    Saint Augustine. Rent                                     30.00


  ALABAMA, $313.92.

    Athens. Trinity Mission Soc., _for Mendi M._               4.70
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    101.05
    Montgomery. Pub. Sch. Fund                               175.00
    Talladega. Talladega College                              33.17


  MISSISSIPPI, $39.90.

    Grenada. Sab. Sch., by Miss A. Harwood, Supt.              6.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University                             33.90


  LOUISIANA, $136.

    New Orleans. Straight University                         136.00


  INCOME, $25.83.

    —— Avery Fund                                             25.83


  ENGLAND, $24.40.

    Bishop Auckland. Joseph Lingford, £5                      24.40


  HOLLAND, $14.50.

    Amsterdam. G. P. Ittmann, Jr., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            4.50
    Scheidam. Missionary Committee, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             12,071.77
      Total from Oct. 1st to May 31st                   $104,598.55

                                             H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                     _Ass’t Treas._

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    East Woodstock, Conn. John Paine                          $5.00
    Mecosta Co., Mich.                                       181.50
                                                          —————————
        Total                                                186.50
    Previously acknowledged in April receipts             25,532.22
                                                          —————————
        Total                                            $25,718.72

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    New Haven, Conn. Amos Townsend                           $20.00
    Mexico, N. Y. Edward Halsey                                1.50
    Newark Valley, N. Y. “A Friend”                           10.00
    Prottham, N. Y. Joseph Copps                               1.00
    Xenia, Ohio. Mrs. Sarah S. Monroe                          5.00
    Homer, Ill. Cong. Ch.                                     13.10
    Lodi, Mich. “Friends”                                     93.00
    Fulton, Wis. Cong. Ch.                                    15.00
    College Springs, Iowa. Cong. Ch.                          11.28
                                                             ——————
        Total                                                169.88
    Previously acknowledged in April receipts                 67.00
                                                             ——————
        Total                                               $236.88




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and to diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made in this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.


FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_——In Va. 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 12;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 13; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 5.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 66.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.——_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11. _Other
Schools_, 18. Total 37.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.——Among the Freedmen, 231;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 17; in Africa, 14. Total,
279. STUDENTS——In Theology, 88; Law, 17; in College Course, 106;
in other studies, 7,018. Total, 7,229. Scholars, taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches——the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa——a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required——in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                      CHEAP AND EFFICIENT AID

                      FOR COLORED PREACHERS.

             (_From Weekly Witness, June 19th, 1879._)

We ask the attention of our patriotic and philanthropic Christian
readers to the letters from colored preachers which we publish
to-day. These letters show the great acceptability and usefulness
of the _Witness_ to colored preachers, and we hope they will induce
many to send them a gift so highly appreciated. For every dollar
sent to the colored ministers’ fund, we will send the _Weekly
Witness_ to a colored preacher for one year. The first year of this
effort we obtained the addresses of upwards of 2,000 preachers, to
whom we sent the _Witness_. The whole number of preachers is said
to be about 5,000. The second year we only sent it to preachers
who asked for it, and only about 800 did so. Several have since
written regretting that the paper was stopped. It would have been
continued had they signified their desire to receive it. We think
it likely that with the present excitement concerning emigration,
many more could be reached, besides renewing these 800 as their
time expires. Will our friends keep this fund supplied, that we may
again advertise for the addresses of colored preachers wishing to
receive the _Witness_? The best and perhaps only way of reaching
the colored people of the South with instructive and elevating
reading matter is through their religious teachers; and, as will
be seen from the letters, they make a good use of the _Witness_ in
that way.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  _To the Editor of the Witness._                   CULLODEN, GA.

DEAR SIR: Allow me space in your columns to acknowledge my thanks
to our Northern friends, that they have interest enough in us to
furnish the colored ministers here with the _Witness_; this is a
grand way to diffuse Christian intelligence among a down-trodden
race. May God bless them and you. You shall have my prayers for
your success. I see that my subscription will expire on the 15th;
please continue my paper for another year.

                                   I am yours, etc.,
                                                  A. J. WILSON.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  _To the Editor of the Witness._                   ANNISTON, ALA.

DEAR SIR: I spent three sessions in Talladega College and
Theological Department. During the three months’ vacation of each
year I taught school at Anniston, Ala., my present location. During
this time the President of the Woodstock Iron Co. had an eye upon
my work. They have shown their sympathy by the erection of a neat
little cottage, which has done its part as a parsonage. Besides,
they pay a portion of my salary for teaching. I have charge of the
colored school of this town. I commenced labor here in April, 1875.
Since that time many have reformed and become stalwart Christian
men and women. I claim only to have been an instrument in God’s
hands to the salvation of souls.

Now to the dear friend who sends me the _Witness_. You may rest
assured that your donation has not been as pearls cast before
swine; it is as bread upon the waters, and if it doesn’t return to
you in this life, it certainly will greet you in the far better
land. I prize the _Witness_ next to my Bible. It has been to me
strength in weakness, light in darkness, a means of peace in times
of trouble; in short, it has been food to my soul.

_The Witness_ is valuable to me in a two-fold sense. First, the
motive which prompted the giver; second, the vast amount of
information it contains which I could not find or get elsewhere. My
only wish and constant prayer are that every colored preacher on
the globe may have the _Witness_. I am fraternally yours in Christ,

                                                P. J. MCENTOSH,
                 Pastor First Congregational Church, Anniston, Ala.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                                    POWERS SHOP, LAURENS CO., S. C.

DEAR EDITOR: I have been kindly furnished with your valuable paper
since last August to the present time. I am certainly grateful for
the kindness of the friend that paid for it. May God bless him
ten-fold. Inclosed in this you will please find an order for your
valuable paper, _The Weekly Witness_. I induced six young gentlemen
to pay twenty-five cents each, thereby raising the required sum.

May God bless you and your papers, for they are doing much good.
I will do you the good I can. Let the friends in the pulpit who
receive the _Witness_ work for it, and work now.

                               Yours in Christ,
                                           B. F. MARTIN (Colored).

The above are samples of many letters that we receive. Single
copies of _Witness_ sent free on application.

                                          JOHN DOUGALL,
                                            7 Frankfort St., N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                         PUBLISH THE ONLY

                     SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and enlarged.
Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For Samples
(loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.


                          LYMAN ABBOTT’S

                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=,
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.

                             EDITED BY

          Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev. E. S. LORENZ.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church Prayer Meetings.=


      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.

                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.


                  A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,

                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           NEW EDITION.

                          [Illustration]

                       WEBSTER’S UNABRIDGED.

                   1928 Pages. 3000 Engravings.

                    Four Pages Colored Plates.

                Now added, a =SUPPLEMENT= of over

                  =4600 NEW WORDS and Meanings=,

including such as have come into use during the past fifteen
years——many of which have never before found a place in any English
Dictionary.

                         ALSO ADDED, A NEW

                      Biographical Dictionary

                       of over =9700= NAMES

of Noted Persons, ancient and modern, including many now living,
giving Name, Pronunciation, Nationality, Profession and Date of
each.

        Published by =G. & C. MERRIAM=, Springfield, Mass.

                               ALSO

             Webster’s National Pictorial Dictionary.

                1040 Pages Octavo. 600 Engravings.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           GET THE BEST.

                           The “OXFORD”

                          [Illustration]

                         TEACHERS’ BIBLES

                     IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                   At prices to suit everybody.

          Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

                       THOS. NELSON & SONS,
                              42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        The Book of Psalms.

                ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN
           SABBATH SCHOOLS, CHURCHES OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_,
for convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo,
Limp Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth. 70 cts. per
copy, $56 per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

  TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers.
                                            758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN

                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

           $4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders.

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                    $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES

               _By New York Standard of Valuation._

               _It gives the Best Insurance on the
                      Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

              C. Y. WEMPLE,
                    Vice-President.

              J. L. HALSEY,
                    Secretary.

              S. N. STEBBINS,
                    Actuary.

              H. Y. WEMPLE,
              H. B. STOKES,
                    Assistant Secretaries.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,

          59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                   66 State Street, Boston.


Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money between
this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee
of repayment,

                 Circular Credits for Travellers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         JOHN H. HORSFALL,

                          MANUFACTURER OF

                  Furniture, Upholstery, Mirrors,

                         And DECORATIONS.

                            WAREROOMS:

               6 & 7 EAST 23d ST. (Kurtz Building),

           3 doors East of B’way, Madison Square South.

You are respectfully asked to call and inspect my Stock, which,
for thoroughness of construction and quality of materials, cannot
be excelled in this city, and at as low a price as good work can
be made. I have on hand many beautiful examples of =_Drawing Room,
Dining Room, Library and Bedroom Furniture_=, and am prepared
at all times to submit Estimates and Drawings for ordered work.
=_Curtains_=, =_Lambrequins_=, &c., &c., in great variety of
Styles. Exceptionally fine Hair and Spring =_Mattresses_= and
=_Feathers_=.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PURE OLD

                            PALM SOAP.

                          [Illustration]

                        For the Laundry,
                                The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        BUY THE BEST GOODS

                          BOGLE & LYLES,

              Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place       NEW YORK,

                            Dealers in

                       CHOICE CANNED FRUITS

                  VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,

                          Sole Agents for

                       RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’

                       Extra Yellow Peaches.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  PALAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
  SUI GENERIS]

                  Mason & Hamlin Cabinet Organs.

_Demonstrated best_ by HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
FOR TWELVE YEARS; viz: at PARIS. 1867; VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO,
1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876; TWO HIGHEST MEDALS at PARIS 1878; and
GRAND SWEDISH GOLD MEDAL, 1878. Only American Organs ever awarded
highest honors at any. Sold for cash or installments. ILLUSTRATED
CATALOGUES with new styles and prices, free

MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          CHURCH CUSHIONS

                            MADE OF THE

                       PATENT ELASTIC FELT.

             For particulars, address H. D. OSTERMOOR,

           P. O. Box 4004.        36 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

  Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.
  Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.
  ☞ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          DUDLEY’S PATENT

                             DIAGONAL

                           ROAD SCRAPER

                      THE BEST. THE CHEAPEST.

Weighs but 50 lbs., has Steel Cutter Plate, can be worked square or
at any desired angle, and is rapidly superseding all other Scrapers
where it is known.

[Illustration]

                        Read the following:

One says: “It will do more work than two of the common kind.”

Another: “It is worth more than all the old kind that can be made.”

“I would not take 25 dollars for mine, if I could not get another.”

“With a yoke of oxen and boy to drive, I can scrape and finish up
in five hours as much road as I can with any scraper known to me in
ten hours, beside doing it better and easier both for myself and
team.”——J. DAVIS, Hartford.

“For working roads it will soon supersede the old scoop. I consider
it one of the best simple inventions of the age.”——G. P. BELDEN,
Dover Plains.

“Leaves a road in better shape, and is easier for man and team,
than any scraper I ever saw.”——J. S. KINNEY, Washington.

                                                  Send for circular.

                           S. H. DUDLEY,
               Bantam Falls, Litchfield County, Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


YESTERDAY’S WORK.

We point to the record of results of our work among the Freedmen
during the last fifteen years, as indicating a degree of progress
and an amount of fruitage rarely equaled in the same length of
time. We base our claims for generous gifts, now and in the years
to come, upon this showing, confident that this is the best
argument we can make. Is it too much to claim to have been faithful
over a few things, or to ask that we be trusted with what may be
needful for the many which are at hand?

       *       *       *       *       *


TO-DAY’S NEED.

The pressing need of to-day may be seen from the following
_appeal_, which has appeared in some of the religious papers:

“The end of the school year of the American Missionary Association
is near at hand. Its Teachers and Missionaries must soon return
North, and will need the balance of their small salaries to enable
them to do so. This necessary demand makes a special drain upon
our treasury, and we, therefore, earnestly appeal to our friends
to enable us to meet it without debt. We hope that churches whose
collections occur now will make them as large as possible and remit
promptly; and we ask our friends, in whose heart is a warm love for
the cause, to come to our relief with special contributions for
this emergency. In behalf of the Executive Committee,

                                 M. E. STRIEBY, _Cor. Secretary_.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TO-MORROW’S WANT.

Looking ahead, we see that the coming claims upon us must be
greater than those of the past. The signs of the times indicate
that the Lord’s work is to be done upon a larger scale in the near
future; the progress, made and making, in our schools, and the call
for enlargement in our church work, will make increasing demands
upon us, until the time shall come when they shall be more largely
self-supporting than it is possible for them to be now. We have
done much——we are doing more——we must expect to do a still greater
work. Give us the means, and plan large things for us in the days
to come.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
priming, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                           J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                          56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 07, JULY, 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.