VOL. XXXIII.                                              No. 8.


                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                           AUGUST, 1879.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING                                               225
    PAINS OF RETRENCHMENT                                        225
    FREEDMEN’S MISSIONS AID SOCIETY                              227
    MISSIONS IN CENTRAL AFRICA                                   228
    EDUCATION OF FREEDMEN                                        229
    CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH--ITS RELATION TO THE
      AFRICAN RACE                                               230
    DEATH OF A TEACHER                                           232
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                         232
    GENERAL NOTES                                                233


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ATLANTA UNIVERSITY--Tenth Anniversary                        235
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE--College, Farm and Seminary                237
    BEREA COLLEGE--Crowded Commencement                          238
    S. C., ORANGEBURG--School Closing--Religious Life            240
    GEORGIA, MCINTOSH--Call for a Lady Missionary                240
    GEORGIA, FORSYTHE--Temperance and Religion                   241
    ALABAMA, FLORENCE--Corner-Stone of a Church Laid             241
    TENNESSEE--Teachers’ Institute                               242
    TENNESSEE--By-ways of Tennessee                              243


  AFRICA.

    MENDI MISSION--Explorations--Industrial Work                 245


  THE CHINESE.

    NOTES AND CLIPPINGS: Rev. W. C. Pond                         246


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    MY HOME IN INDIAN TERRITORY                                  249


  LETTERS TO THE TREASURER--Words of Cheer                       250

  RECEIPTS                                                       251

  WORK, STATISTICS, WANTS, &C.                                   254

                 *       *       *       *       *




                             NEW YORK.

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.
    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV.M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

should be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Ass’t Treasurer, No. 56 Reade
Street, New York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West
Washington Street, Chicago, Ill.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XXXIII.      AUGUST, 1879.         No. 8.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


Our readers will see, on the last page of the cover, that the next
Annual Meeting of the Association is to be held the last week of
October, in the city of Chicago. We suggest to our Eastern friends,
or those from the far West, who have in their plans a visit to that
city within the next three months, that, if possible, they delay
their going until that time, that they may prove to our friends of
the interior their interest in the work, and add to it the impulse
of their presence.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PAINS OF RETRENCHMENT.

We do not propose a treatment of this topic in the abstract, to
tell of the internal pressure for retrenchment from the collapsed
condition of our treasury, or of the outcries which accompany the
red line made by the surgical knife. We simply lay before our
readers the facts in regard to our latest efforts in this direction.

We have had a school for fourteen years at Athens, Alabama.
Miss M. F. Wells has been the principal from its beginning, and
has been one of our most faithful and most successful teachers
and missionaries. Miss Underwood has been her assistant for two
years, and Rev. Horace Taylor has been pastor of the vigorous and
enterprising church which has grown up by the side of, and indeed
out of, the school. Some 150 scholars have been in attendance at
the school, and its work has been more and more satisfactory year
by year.

We had a building there which was, however, in bad repair: its
walls had been propped up these last months, and it was becoming
really unsafe, so that it must be abandoned or replaced. But to
erect a suitable and permanent building would cost $5,000, and we
had no such sum to expend; and the question came to be, Shall we
build, or close the school and transfer the teachers to some other
field? Reluctantly this latter decision was made:--indeed, we
did not make it; it was made for us. We could not build, and the
decision was sent on to Athens.

On the first of July, Miss Wells wrote from a sick bed, of the
shock which this decision gave to her, though it had been intimated
beforehand. She said:

We thank you cordially for the delay in the announcement of your
decision, for had it come in the midst of our closing exercises,
students and teachers would have been unfitted for the work upon
them.

Our examinations continuing through four days were largely attended
throughout, a crowded house greeting us every day.

The general voice of the people was: “Examinations grow better all
the time;” “This is the best we have ever had;” “I will send _all_
my children the _first day_ next year, and not keep them out for
_anything_;” “Bless the Lord for this school;” “It makes me cry
for joy when I see what it has done for our people;” “We are _all_
going to help build a new house;” “Will start a brick-yard next
week, if you say so, right in these grounds;” “_All_ will help;”
“Even the idle boys on the street will gladly lend a hand;” etc.,
etc.

On the whole, our examinations and closing exercises were more
satisfactory _to us_ this year than ever before. There has been a
deeper earnestness in study, and a higher grade of scholarship has
been reached.

On the day following, Miss Underwood wrote:

It is pitiful to witness the grief of the people. In the faces
of young and old one seems to read, “A calamity has fallen upon
us.” Some of them go silently about with bowed heads and spirits,
“clothed in sackcloth and ashes.” Others say, “We will arise and
build; surely the Lord will help those who help themselves.” The
universal feeling is that the school _must_ not close and _Miss
Wells must not go_. Without consulting her, they have called a
mass meeting for to-morrow night, to see what can be done towards
the erection of a new building. You will be promptly notified of
results.

On the 4th of July, Mr. Taylor, pastor of the church, wrote as
follows:

That night, at a lecture at the Court House, I read a note from
Miss Wells announcing your decision. The people were much pained.
The open rejoicing of many of the white people hurt the colored
people more than anything else. They asked me, “Can nothing be done
to prevent this?” I told them I thought not, for the orders were
positive. “If we build the school-house, can Miss Wells stay and
the school go on?” I said I didn’t know about that, and asked them
if they knew what they were talking about; that a school-house such
as ought to be put up there would cost $5,000? They said, “We can
do it, and we will do it.” So I telegraphed you, “If people put up
school building, will school be maintained?” That night, Wednesday,
was our preparatory lecture. The people decided to hold a meeting
Thursday night, and notice was given at preparatory lecture; so
last night the church was filled by an earnest, quiet audience.
Colored men were elected chairman and secretary. A committee of
five colored men was appointed to draft resolutions, of which the
following is a copy as nearly as I can remember:

“Whereas the maintenance of Trinity School is necessary for the
education of the colored people of North Alabama, therefore be it

“_Resolved_, 1st. That we hear with deep sorrow the decision of the
American Missionary Association to discontinue the school, sell
the property, and send the teachers to other points. 2. That we
earnestly request the American Missionary Association to reconsider
this decision, and permit Miss Wells to remain at the head of the
school. 3. In order to enable the school to be kept up, we propose
to put up a good substantial school building, and as an assurance
of our purpose and ability to do this we forward the following
subscription list.”

The resolutions were immediately and unanimously adopted. Two men
then spoke with trembling voices and tears in their eyes, and in
thirty minutes names were taken with pledges to the amount of
$2,196. We then checked the movement, and explained that $5,000
was necessary, but that we had raised the $2,000 we wished to
raise there. A unanimous vote authorized me to make the report
of the meeting to the American Missionary Association, and that
they wished the house and lot to be held forever for the education
of the colored people of North Alabama; that if the American
Missionary Association would permit them to buy the land at a
reasonable price they would do it; or the American Missionary
Association might hold the land and the people the house, neither
to sell out without the consent of the other. An old blind man
said, “An old blind horse ain’t good for much, but when you get
him into the tread-mill he is as good as any other; so when you
get to making brick I will turn the crank to draw the water.” We
got another $100 subscription and immediately adjourned. This
morning I have received another subscription of $12, making in all
$2,308. I ought to have mentioned that a committee of seven was
appointed to solicit subscriptions on the streets. If you say so,
the school-house shall be completed January 1st, 1880. I earnestly
request that the petition be granted.

At the last meeting of our Executive Committee these letters were
read. All were deeply moved, and the response was hearty and
unanimous, _Let them arise and build_, and the funds needed for the
continuance of the school shall be appropriated and paid. We cannot
stop such a work. We cannot refuse such a plea. Why, the educating
power of this movement upon the colored people of that place, and
its effect, perhaps, upon the white population as well, is worth
ten times the money involved in both the building and the school.
And yet we are told that the blacks are becoming indifferent to
education.

And now, dear friend, you who are thinking how the Lord has not
prospered you quite as much as he did a few years ago, when you
have read this, will you not put back that $100, or that $1, you
were going to take from your usual gift to us, that such work as
this may go on? It is your retrenchment that compels ours.

       *       *       *       *       *


FREEDMEN’S MISSIONS AID SOCIETY.

The annual meeting of our English Auxiliary took place at Union
Chapel, Islington (Rev. Dr. Allon), June 6th. The Earl of Aberdeen
presided. The Rev. Dr. O. H. White read the general report of work
done in the United States and to be done in Africa. The Rev. J.
Gwynne Jones presented the financial statement. The total receipts
had been £5,270; £4,727 had been expended in direct mission work,
and the balance in hand was £205. £3,000 had been promised by
Mr. Arthington, of Leeds, towards the establishment of a mission
in Central Africa. The American Missionary Association had fully
considered the proposal and deemed it practicable, and they desired
now to raise another £3,000 in this country, trusting that they
would be able to command funds in America for carrying on the work,
if its outfit should be substantially secured here.

Miss Jennie Jackson, of the Jubilee Singers, then sang one of
their plaintive hymns, after which the presiding officer addressed
the meeting, referring to his personal observation of the slave
trade in Africa. The Rev. Dr. Moffat followed, saying that he had
been the servant of Africa for sixty years. Since he went out as
a missionary in 1816 he had been incessantly engaged in advancing
the Redeemer’s kingdom in Africa. He had had many opportunities of
witnessing what the Gospel could do in Africa, and he could testify
that it was the salvation of every one that believed. Mr. J. B.
Gough then spoke in his usual entertaining and forcible way.

On the motion of the Rev. Dr. Allon, seconded by the Rev. Dr. F.
Billing, the following resolution was adopted:

  That this meeting desires to express the deep sense it entertains
  of the favoring providence of God in connection with the
  education of the emancipated slaves of America, for teachers
  and missionaries to their own race, and also in connection with
  the mission work accomplished by some of the society’s students
  (ex-slaves) on the West Coast of Africa. And this meeting
  would renewedly record its conviction that in the Christian
  education of the Freedmen we are working in the line of a
  special providential arrangement for a native agency for the
  evangelization of Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSIONS IN CENTRAL AFRICA.

At the recent anniversary of the London Missionary Society, the
Rev. W. F. Clarkson, B. A., of Birmingham, made the following
remarks upon Missions in Central Africa:

“And now, turning to Central Africa, what a solemn responsibility
has been thrown upon the Church of Christ in connection with that
vast continent! True it is that the North of Africa has been
connected with European history ever since Europe had a history,
and Egypt, especially, is rich in associations of the most remote
antiquity. South Africa has been colonized by modern European
nations, and the East and the West Coasts have furnished the
material for that iniquitous slave trade in which Christian nations
have not been ashamed to join hands with Mohammedans in order to
rob their fellow-men of their liberties.

“But all this has touched only the fringe of this vast continent,
and the interior has been practically unknown. Look at the maps of
a few years ago and you will see blank spaces, relieved only by
imaginary rivers and unverified mountains, and the letterpress of
the geography books was just as meagre and as unsatisfactory. I
chanced to light upon a school geography, the other day, published
in 1847, in which this was the description given: ‘The interior
of Africa is little known. The climate is so bad that the few
Europeans who travel there generally die before they return.’ And
it concluded by saying: ‘Most of the inhabitants are negroes.’ I
think that the young people of to-day may congratulate themselves
that they have not to study the text-books of thirty years ago--at
any rate, on this question. I need not remind this meeting how,
by the labors of eminent geographers and explorers and, not the
least, missionaries, this reproach has been rolled away, and
Africa promises to be as widely known as is Asia. But it is more
to the purpose of this meeting to express the admiration and the
thankfulness with which we witness the Church of Christ, of divers
denominations, taking up the solemn responsibilities thrown upon
her, and addressing herself to the evangelization of Africa.

“The Church Missionary Society advancing to Lake Nyanza, the Scotch
Church taking possession of Lake Nyassa, the Baptist Missionary
Society establishing itself on the banks of the Congo; and, not to
mention other kindred societies, our own London Missionary Society
advancing to Lake Tanganyika--are so many distinct columns of the
great invading army which has gone forth to rescue Africa from the
power of the prince of this world, and to bring it into subjection
unto Christ. Surely this is the dawning of the day which David
Livingstone rejoiced to see and was glad. And I hope that I may
take upon myself, in your name, respectfully to congratulate our
venerable father and apostle, Dr. Moffat, upon the advent of a time
so rich in promise, and so glowing with hope, for that Africa which
he has so long and so lovingly served. The report has spoken to us
in forcible terms of the anxieties of the directors concerning the
establishment of this Central African Mission, and I think you will
feel that nothing shows that anxiety more clearly than the action
of the directors in regard to the offer of Dr. Mullens, that they
should have accepted that offer and dispatched him, if not to the
front, at any rate to the base of operations for this new campaign;
and he will carry with him to Zanzibar our best wishes and our most
earnest prayers in the enterprise which he has so promptly and so
generously undertaken.

“I think nothing can exaggerate the seriousness of the enterprise
to which we, as a society, have committed ourselves in connection
with Central Africa. To have to travel 600 or 700 miles, every
mile of it measured out by the weary tread of human feet, and to
be accompanied by 200 or 300 porters, not simply to carry your
luggage, but even to carry the very money with which you have to
pay your way, is no holiday excursion; and to have to deal with
native chiefs of difficult and capricious tempers, with differing
and oftentimes opposing interests, demands qualities of the
highest statesmanship. To establish a mission like that of Lake
Tanganyika, the lake itself being of the length of the distance,
say from London to Carlisle, and twenty miles broad, with all its
shores lined with populous villages--to establish a mission in
such a centre of such a district demands an energy and a zeal and
a patience equal to those of the greatest missionaries that have
ever lived; and to do this, with the certain loss of the comforts
and conveniences of civilized life, and with the equally certain
risk of losing life itself, demands a heroism equal to that of the
ancient martyr. All honor to the brethren who have responded to the
demands of Christ, and have given themselves to this sacred work.
We sympathize with those that are living and working, and we shall
never forget those that have laid down their lives in this blessed
service. Dr. Black in the South, Lieut. Smith in the North, and our
own J. B. Thomson, and others who have fallen with them in this
warfare--shall not the Church of Christ register them, each one, in
the roll of heroes and of martyrs, by whose immortal example she
will seek to stimulate the generations to come?”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE EDUCATION OF FREEDMEN.

Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe has contributed two articles with the
above title to the June and July numbers of the _North American
Review_, tracing the history of this work, and giving a valuable
summary of its present status.

We reprint a brief paragraph and the six general propositions, of
which the facts given are offered as the proof:

“For years patriots, statesmen, conscientious and Christian men,
had toiled and agonized over the inscrutable problem, _How_
could slavery be abolished without ruin to the country? Madison,
Jefferson, Washington, all had their schemes--all based on the idea
that after emancipation it would be impossible for the whites and
the blacks to live harmoniously together. Sudden emancipation was
spoken of as something involving danger, bloodshed and violence;
and yet, as no one could propose a feasible system of preparation,
the drift of the Southern mind had come to be toward indefinite
perpetuation and extension.

“Our emancipation was forced upon us--it was sudden; it gave no
time for preparation; and our national honor forced us to give not
only emancipation, but the rights and defenses of citizenship. This
was the position in which the war left us. We had four million new
United States citizens in our Union, without property, without
education, with such morals as may be inferred from the legal
status in which they had been kept; they were surrounded by their
former white owners, every way embittered toward them, and in no
wise disposed to smooth their path to liberty and competence.

“That in such a sudden and astounding change there should have been
struggle and conflict; that the reconstruction of former slave
States, in such astonishingly new conditions of society, should
have been with some difficulty, wrath and opposition; that there
should have been contentions, mistakes, mismanagements, and plenty
of undesirable events to make sensation articles for the daily
press, was to be expected.

“But wherever upon God’s earth was such an unheard-of revolution in
the state of human society accomplished with so little that was to
be deprecated?

“For in this year, 1878, certain propositions of very great
significance bear assertion, and can be maintained by ample proof:

“1. The cotton crop raised by free labor is the largest by some
millions that ever has been raised in the United States. That
settles the question as to the free-labor system.

“2. The legal status of the negro is universally conceded as a
_finality_ by the leading minds of the South.

“3. The common-school system has been established throughout the
Southern States, and recognized in theory by the wisest Southern
men as to be applied impartially to whites and blacks.

“4. All of the large religious denominations are conducting
educational movements among the Freedmen on a large scale. There
are scattered through the Southern States, under the patronage
of different denominations, thirty-nine chartered and endowed
institutions for the higher education of colored people as
teachers, ministers, physicians, farmers and mechanics. Besides
these, there are sixty-nine schools of a lower grade. It is
calculated that in the last sixteen years twenty million dollars
has been contributed and invested in the work of educating the
Freedmen.

“5. Leading and influential men at the South are in many cases
openly patrons of these educational efforts. Several of these
institutions have been generously assisted by the States in which
they are founded. The last reports of all these institutions
represent them as in a successful and flourishing condition.

“6. The colored race is advancing in material wealth and
prosperity.”

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.


4. Its Relation to the African Race.

DIST. SEC. C. L. WOODWORTH, BOSTON.

Beyond any sentiment of honor, or of ambition to do our share of
the immense work thrown in an hour upon the churches of this land,
is the higher aim to introduce our faith and our polity to the
African race. Not only is it our reproach that we have been, almost
exclusively, confined to a small part of the English-speaking
people, but we shall deserve our littleness if we consent to be
limited to this nation, or even to this continent. The world needs
the principles we have in trust, and will not reach its best until
it attains them. And, now, before us is an open field, rich in
resources of life and wealth, all untilled. One-sixth of the human
family waits to be moulded by Christian influence. A continent
bares its bosom and asks Christianity for her strongest and best.
Why should the Church, which took possession of _one_ continent
and gave it the most benign institutions earth ever saw, hesitate
to lay hold of _another_, and plant it with the good seed of the
kingdom?

There is something immensely stimulating in the thought of
breaking forth after a lost race. All we need is an infusion of
the enterprise which guided the Pilgrims to Plymouth Rock. A new
continent for Christ is what we need to take up as our watch-word,
and pass along the lines till our membership is fired with a
holy zeal to win its 200,000,000 unto the Lamb that was slain.
And if we were intent on this, how easy it would be to connect
the work _here_ with the work _there_. If, when the door opened
into the South, we had gone in with our plans to save the African
race, we could hardly have done differently from what we have.
We have planted our schools and our churches in the very centres
of population and of influence. We have a large force of young
men and women in our schools, and our churches are constituted
almost wholly of young Christian scholars. How easy it would be
to turn the whole tide of their study and thought and influence
towards Africa! There is in the African mind of the South now a
strong drawing toward the land of their fathers. The schemes of
colonization afloat all through the South show it. The hundreds
of young men and young women banded together in our schools and
churches to go to Africa as teachers or as preachers, if the way
shall open, show it. They only need the guiding intelligence to
undertake to plant on Africa’s shores another Plymouth Colony and
Massachusetts Bay.

And this opportunity comes to the Congregational church and finds
it well prepared to enter on the training of Christian scholars
and preachers for this work. Our churches on the ground are few in
number, but filled with young, fresh, intelligent, pure material,
and co-operate with our schools to bring forward the teachers and
leaders of the African race. Is it all chance that puts us in this
position and gives us this advantage in laying the foundations of
education and religion for another race and another continent?
God’s plan may include _black_ as well as _white_ pilgrims, and
it may be ours to impart the pilgrim spirit and prepare the men
who shall make a new Africa, as our fathers made a new America.
This is possible to us as a church, and we ought to work towards
it with unflagging zeal. We can only lose our advantage by our own
neglect and lack of enterprise. We are in the front of workers for
Africa. Eight or ten of our young Christian scholars are already
on African soil. They send back a call for reinforcements, and the
reinforcements will be ready as soon as our churches furnish the
equipments and give them marching orders. The work may be long and
rough; our fathers found it so here. Congregationalism is used to
that. Indeed, she does best when on the strain. She is grand when
she leads the forlorn hope. Easy, comfortable, self-pleasing life
is not the atmosphere in which she grows tough, sturdy, courageous
and aggressive. Show her something to do for Christ, something
calling for sacrifice, some mighty battle to be fought for her
King, and she will cover herself with glory.

Out at the front--among the ranchmen, herdsmen, miners, soldiers,
savages--she is at home. This Southern work, which has taken the
feet of her toilers as near the thorns, and their heads as near
the crown of martyrdom, as any work of the century, has shown her
splendid qualities. Her faith and meekness, love and heroism, have
won her praises even in the gates of her enemies. And now we ask
her to make the whole African race the object of her endeavor. This
is the mission offered to her; let her not decline it. Let her lead
the hardest and perhaps the grandest movement in modern missions.
The young colored scholars of the South have learned to trust her,
and they will follow her.

Now is the time: Africa swings wide open her long barred gates;
commerce and science are moving to possess the land; foundations
are being laid for the centuries: let the church that can build so
wisely and so well, build this new temple of a regenerated Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF A TEACHER.

It is with painful regret that we are obliged to record the
untimely death of Miss Laura S. Cary, one of the teachers of the
Fisk University. She was the daughter of John J. Cary, Esq., of
Nashville, well known as cashier of the Freedmen’s Savings Bank,
and as a trustee of the Fisk University from its organization.

Miss Cary pursued the full course of study at the University,
and was graduated with honor in the class of 1877, receiving the
degree of A.B.; after this she engaged in teaching in the classical
department as an assistant to Professor Spence.

She was very attractive in person, cultured in manners, dignified,
quiet and winning. Her character as a Christian was unobtrusive and
consistent. As a teacher she was proficient, kindly and patient,
adding to exact scholarship a grace of demeanor and a voice of such
rare sweetness as to attract constant attention to it. In her death
the institution has lost one of the most valuable members of its
corps of workers, and the African race a representative of rare
merit and promise.

She died of typhus fever, June 28th, after an illness of ten days,
aged 23.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

RALEIGH, N. C.--After the closing of the Conference, Pastor Smith,
with the assistance of Rev. Mr. Peebles, of Dudley, held special
services for three weeks. The church was greatly revived. Two
young men have been received into the church. Others have been and
are interested. The congregation is increasing, especially in the
attendance of young men.

GREENWOOD, S. C.--The Brewer Normal School, under the care of Mr.
J. D. Backenstose, closed, June 26th, a successful year’s work.
Examinations and exhibition were very creditable and largely
attended. The annual address was delivered by the Rev. F. E.
McDonald, on “Culture.” Ministers of other denominations, graduates
of the school, and many prominent citizens, showed by their
attendance, and expressed in words, their deep interest in the work
and gratification with its results.

ATLANTA, GA.--The teachers and students of Atlanta University
contributed about $75 at their monthly missionary meetings during
the past year, and have employed that sum in aiding the work of
the National Temperance Society, from which they have received a
large supply of the best temperance literature. As nearly 150 of
the students are at present engaged in teaching summer schools,
and nearly all enter into the temperance work, they will find
such a supply a valuable help, and can give it wide and effective
distribution. About an equal sum was given at weekly school
meetings, and will be sent to aid mission work among the Indians.

A State Teachers’ Association was organized in Atlanta, during
commencement week, by the young colored teachers of Georgia.
There was an attendance of more than one hundred, and all parts
of the State were represented. The proceedings were dignified
and appropriate, and wise and useful plans were set on foot for
future action. A large portion of the participants were graduates
of Atlanta University, and were in attendance upon its closing
exercises.

Rev. S. S. Ashley has resigned the care of the First Church in
Atlanta, and Rev. Geo. E. Hill, of Marion, Ala., is supplying the
pulpit during the summer.

WOODVILLE, GA.--The Sabbath-school is growing, and God is with
us. It is in a better condition now than ever before since its
organization. Last Sunday we had both white and colored people,
who came seven miles to our Sunday-school. The day-school has
never been as prosperous as it is this year. Truly we ought to be
thankful. Our Sunday night meetings have been crowded for some time.

NEW ORLEANS, LA.--A very complete manual of the Central
Congregational Church, neatly printed, is in our hands. The order
of admission and of administration of the church is very complete.
The present membership is 149. Rev. Walter S. Alexander has been
pastor of the church as well as President of Straight University
for the past three years.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Indians.

From a recent report to the Department of the Interior, we extract
the following items of information in regard to our Indian
treaties, which may be to many as novel as they are striking:

  DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,                               }
  OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, WASHINGTON, _April 28, 1879_.   }

TO THE HONORABLE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, Washington, D. C.

SIR: By reference to the treaties now in force with our nomadic
tribes, it is found that a clause, in like terms, in reference to
education, appears in seven (7) of our most important ones, while
manifestly the same spirit of educational help from the Government
pervades them all.

One of the clauses referred to is as follows (see revision of
Indian treaties, page 132, Treaty with the Cheyennes and Arapahoes,
1868):

“Article 7.--In order to insure the civilization of the tribes
entering into this treaty, the necessity of education is admitted,
especially by such of them as are or may be settled on said
agricultural reservation, and they thereby pledge themselves to
compel their children, male and female, between the ages of six and
sixteen years, to attend school; and it is hereby made the duty of
the agent for said Indians to see that this stipulation is strictly
complied with; and the United States agrees that for every thirty
children between said ages, who can be induced or compelled to
attend school, a house shall be provided, and a teacher, competent
to teach the elementary branches of an English education, shall
be furnished, who will reside among said Indians and faithfully
discharge his or her duties as teacher.

“The provisions of this article to continue not less than twenty
years.”

These treaties were all confirmed in 1868, and, as will be seen,
the educational clause is respectively limited to twenty years.
The _intent_ was unquestionably to gather into schools _all_ of
the children of the tribes who became parties to the treaties. By
reference to the last annual report from this office, it will be
found that the total population of the tribes having this clause
in their treaties, on the date of that report, was about 71,000,
and their children of school age numbered 12,000; and that ten
years after making these treaties, of this great number of children
entitled to educational privileges at Government expense, only 944
were really provided for.

The following extracts from said report have a direct bearing upon
this subject, and merit special attention in this connection:

“Experience shows that Indian children do not differ from white
children of similar social status and surroundings, in aptitude or
capacity for acquiring knowledge; and opposition or indifference to
education on the part of parents decreases yearly; so the question
of Indian education resolves itself mainly into a question of
school facilities.

“But the figures contained in the tables herewith fall far short
of indicating a purpose on the part of the Government to make this
question one of speedy solution.

“At a low estimate, the number of Indian children of school-going
age, exclusive of those belonging to the five civilized tribes
of the Indian Territory, may be placed at 33,000. Of these, not
less than 8,000 could, within a short time, be gathered into
boarding-schools, except for the fact that the teachers are yet to
be employed, the school buildings are yet to be erected, and the
funds for both, and for feeding and clothing the scholars, are yet
to be appropriated.

“The whole number of children who can be accommodated in the
boarding-schools now provided at the various agencies is only
2,589. To these may be added 5,082 more, who can find room in
day-schools--those expensive make-shifts for educational appliances
among Indians,--making a total of only 7,671 Indians who have
yet been placed within reach of school facilities. And when it
is considered that the fifty youth who spend from one to _three_
years in a boarding-school, must step from that into the social
atmosphere created by 500 youth and 2,500 other members of the
tribe who are still in ignorance, it can readily be seen that the
elevation of an Indian tribe is being attempted by a method at
least as slow as it is sure; and that what should be the work of a
year will be protracted through a decade, and the work of a decade
through a generation.

“In many cases this policy is not only short-sighted, but in direct
contravention of treaty stipulations, as, for example, the treaty
of 1868 with the Kiowas and Comanches (heretofore noted). The
one boarding-school at the Kiowa and Comanche Agency, which will
accommodate 75 pupils, is filled, and the other 425 children are
waiting their turn. To comply with treaty stipulations with these
two tribes would more than absorb the entire fund appropriated for
the civilization and education of all the Indians in the Indian
Territory, exclusive of the five civilized tribes. Even more
glaring violations of educational clauses in Sioux treaties might
be cited.”

The experience of the Department has been that the best results are
obtained by a removal of the children from all tribal influence
during the progress of education, so that educators can command all
the time and attention of their pupils.

Youth so educated return to their tribes as teachers, interpreters
and examples in farming, etc.; and if properly sustained and guided
thereafter, prove far more effective guides than whites of the same
capacity.

Nothing is more essential than that Indian youth, while passing
through school, should have thorough instruction in some practical
branch of labor that will meet their needs for obtaining a
livelihood after leaving school.

                Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                            E. J. BROOKS, _Acting Commissioner_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

The Tenth Anniversary--Commencement--Alumni Meeting--Going Forth to
Work.

REV. C. W. FRANCIS, ATLANTA, GA.

The tenth anniversary of Atlanta University, which has just
occurred, was an occasion of special interest to all its patrons
and friends. The fact that the school was closing a year of
prosperous work, during which a larger attendance than ever had
been secured and maintained, and that evidences were multiplied
of increasing confidence and respect on the part of all classes
of people in the State, so that opportunities for usefulness were
never greater, while generous gifts had recently come to provide
needed facilities for the work, together with the real merit of the
exercises and the large attendance of graduates, gave all a feeling
of satisfaction which did much toward making the week one of great
pleasure.

The exercises were introduced by a thoughtful and instructive
sermon on the Sabbath, addressed to the graduating classes by the
Rev. Mr. Bumstead, in which he set forth the occasion and motives
for a high standard of attainment in life according to “the pattern
shown on the Mount.”

Three days of examination followed, which were attended by a board
of examiners, appointed by the Governor of the State, and by a
committee of citizens, invited by the Board of Trustees, and a
large number of patrons and friends. The chairman of the Board of
Examiners, a prominent editor of the State, who has attended these
exercises in his official capacity for six successive years, spoke,
in an address to the students at the close, of his increasing
satisfaction with the progress in education exhibited, and the
substantial work done, with the spirit and management of the
institution, and the zeal and skill of the students in their work,
in different communities. He assured them of the liberality and
friendliness of the people, and pledged the hearty co-operation of
the State authorities and leading citizens with all their efforts
at self-improvement, and for the elevation of the poor and ignorant
so long as the present high standard of doing good was maintained.
For all their work in these directions thus far, he had nothing but
praise to give.

The Commencement exercises upon the last day were brief, sensible
and entertaining. Five young men were graduated from college and
two young women from the normal course, and degrees were conferred
upon six young men who were graduates of three years’ standing. The
music was a pleasant feature of the occasion, being well selected
and well rendered. A report, which was highly commendatory,
was read by Rev. J. M. Martin, D.D., of Atlanta, who had been
in attendance upon the examinations by request of the Board of
Trustees.

The gathering of the graduates in their meeting in the afternoon
was the most striking feature of the occasion, as it was their
first formal meeting, and secured the attendance of a large portion
of them, and was marked by the warmest expressions of devotion
to the school, its aims, discipline and culture, and affection
and gratitude for its instructors. A singularly sober and earnest
feeling pervaded their utterances, and it could plainly be seen
that the conflicts of life in the difficult work nearly every one
has taken up, have led them to appreciate as never before the
value of work done for them here.

A finely framed portrait of Pres. E. A. Ware was presented by
them to the school, as an expression of their appreciation of his
sacrifices and devotion to its interests, as well as a testimonial
of personal affection.

The next day witnessed the busy scenes connected with the departure
of more than 150 young people, who, for the most part, go to teach
summer schools of three months’ duration throughout the country
regions of the State. There is something peculiarly interesting in
the separation and departure of a large company of young people
anywhere, but a special interest belongs to this occasion. These
go with such a simple faith to difficult work among strangers,
with so few facilities and so many obstacles of many kinds; and
yet they seem to win favor, even from those naturally opposed to
their work: they find places open for them, gather schools in
churches, log-cabins, or brush arbors, make furniture, black-boards
and charts, give lectures, lead Sunday-schools, Bible classes and
meetings, teach ministers and elders, and become “all things to
all men,” that they may save some from the degrading bondage to
ignorance, superstition and sin in which they find the mass of
those for whom they labor. It is rare that any are unable to find
schools through lack of money to travel and friends to aid them,
but the absence of any efficient system of schools makes the burden
heavy, and brings to a few sad disappointments. But the fact that
so many young people, with no experience and little money and few
friends, accomplish every year such a great work, seems to prove
that the hand of the Lord guides and protects them, and that His
purpose is to make them a leavening power at the base of society in
this State, to regenerate and bless and save the whole mass.

The religious work of the year has been prospering, twelve having
united with the school church, and more than as many more, who were
hopefully converted here, being expected to unite with churches
at their homes. All the members of the graduating classes are
professing Christians, as has been the case with all who have been
graduated thus far. The opportunities and possibilities for good
were never greater nor the outlook more hopeful; and we may well
set up at the end of the year another stone of witness and say,
“Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.”

We append the following statements from the Editorial
correspondence of the Macon _Telegraph and Messenger_:

This institution has been conducted with singular wisdom and
propriety, and has already proved an inestimable blessing to
the colored people of Georgia. Gradually, but surely, all the
prejudices of the whites have been overcome, and the predictions
of many that it would eventuate in a mere nursery of Radicalism
and hate to the superior race, have not been justified by the
facts. On the contrary, we have the testimony of our own School
Superintendent, Mr. B. M. Zettler, that some of the most efficient
and conservative teachers in the Bibb County schools were educated
at the Atlanta University. Moreover, he favors the appointment, by
the various Boards of Public Education, of teachers of their own
race for the colored children of the State, in every instance where
they show themselves competent.

Accordingly, we find from the official report of President Ware,
that of the fifty-one alumni of the University, forty-two have
engaged in teaching as a profession, while three are pastors
of churches, two theological students, and one, Nathaniel D.
Harris, of Washington, D. C., is pursuing the study of law. Of the
teachers, four only have located beyond the limits of the State.

In addition, over ninety of the more advanced pupils employ their
time during vacation in teaching.

The institution is in a more flourishing condition than at any
previous period of its history. Its matriculates number two hundred
and forty, representing ten different States and forty-seven
counties in Georgia. The trustees hold sixty acres of valuable
land adjoining the college edifices, which is in itself a splendid
endowment. The other revenues cover $8,000 per annum from the
State of Georgia, tuition fees (only $2 per month), and donations
usually amounting to $2,500 from charitable institutions at the
North. But recently the trustees have had quite a windfall from the
Stone estate at Malden, Mass. The widow of Mr. Stone, who, by her
husband’s will, was made the almoner of his bounties, has given
$50,000 to the University. They have fallen heir also to another
sum exceeding $10,000, from the estate of the late R. R. Graves,
of New York, who had previously donated a valuable library to the
University.

With these subsidies it is proposed to erect immediately another
College building between the two present structures, to cost
$40,000, and a large addition to the Girls’ Dormitory, which will
include a dining-room capable of seating 300 pupils. The estimated
cost of this improvement is $15,000.

The library of the Institute comprises 4,000 volumes, most of them
excellent selections, with a balance on hand in cash of $700 for
further augmentation, derived from the interest on the permanent
library endowment, which is $5,000.

It will be seen from the above that the Atlanta University is on
the high-road to prosperity.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

The College, Farm, and Theological Seminary.

REV. TEMPLE CUTLER.

Talladega is beautifully situated among the hills of Alabama. It
reminds one somewhat of Andover, Mass., only the hill on which the
college stands is not as high. There is, however, the same outline
of mountains in the distance, and the same soft light falling on
the village nestling below, hidden among the rich foliage of trees.
Talladega is by far the prettiest site for a college that I have
seen in the South. Nature has done her part in fitting up the place
for purposes of instruction. There is every incentive to mental
improvement that nature can afford. If man will do his part, we
may expect to find here one of the most important of those springs
which are sending forth streams of moral and mental influence
through all the wastes of this south country.

A week spent here has been exceedingly enjoyable. The teachers are
an agreeable set of finely educated gentlemen and ladies, who spare
no pains to make one’s stay a pleasant one. The hospitality is not
made burdensome either to host or guest, but one quietly falls into
the routine of life, and feels immediately at home.

There is a farm here of about 180 acres of land, most of which is
under cultivation, called the Winsted Farm. This is being rapidly
reclaimed from the waste of former mismanagement. The difference
between Northern and Southern agriculturists is, that the land is
improved under the former management, and wasted under the latter.
In New England it is a sure sign of shiftless husbandry when the
land runs out year by year. In the South there are but few farms
or plantations that are not becoming poorer every year. The effort
is begun on this farm to restore fertility, and in a few years
we may expect to see a fine specimen of Northern enterprise in
the products of its hitherto barren acres. The students work the
farm in part payment for their education. How far this industrial
department is going to succeed financially is a question that must
wait for an answer. It is easy to theorize about the advantages
of such a measure, but the surest proof that the pudding is good
is found in the eating of it. One thing is certain: four or five
hours a day of work in the hot sun does not fit a young man to bone
down to real hard study. It takes a good deal of the remainder of
the day to get rested and ready for work. It sounds pretty to talk
about a man’s catching up his book between works, and so using up
the odds and ends of time, _a la_ Elihu Burritt; but unfortunately
there are not a great many Elihu Burritts left, and I am afraid
they are not indigenous to this climate, nor found among boys and
girls in these schools. It is a question whether we can afford to
run a farm and school together. The drain on both the treasury of
the college and the physical powers of the student must be taken
into our calculations.

The collegiate exercises of the school were creditable to the
students and their instructors. The examination exhibited the usual
enthusiasm of these students in their studies. The day is past when
we need to parade proofs that the negro has a brain capable of
improvement. We can now quietly assume that the color of a man’s
skin does not necessarily affect his mental calibre, and there
we may leave it. I must say, however, that I have not attended a
closer and more satisfactory theological examination in many a day
than that of the nine theological students who will graduate from
Talladega next year. I have attended examinations in seminaries
and associations and councils, and been through several such
trials myself, but I never was present at one that gave me better
satisfaction than this. If all our theological teachers will pass
over to us men as thoroughly posted in the fundamental doctrines
of the Bible as these young men appeared to be, we will gladly put
them into the ministry. Prof. Andrews has solved the question of
the practicability of a theological department in this school. We
have henceforth no excuse for putting men into the ministry who
cannot answer the questions usually propounded to candidates for
the sacred office.

The public appointments of this week embraced literary exercises
by the Soronian Society on Monday evening, public exercises of
the Model School on Tuesday afternoon, and College Address in
the evening: Wednesday, graduating exercises of the theological
department at 2.30 P.M., and at 8 o’clock, prize declamations
and essays, closing with a spelling match: on Thursday, 10 A.M.,
the graduating exercises of the higher Normal department; at 2 P.M.,
an exhibition of the agricultural department; and at 8 P.M.
a concert by the Musical Union closed the week. I was not able to
remain through all the exercises of Thursday. Those that I attended
were of a high order, and compared favorably with similar exercises
of the same grade in other schools.

The attendance of the citizens from the town through all the
public exercises was a very pleasant feature. Talladega has made a
deep and lasting impression on the white people. They acknowledge
the good work that it has done and is doing, and believe in the
possibilities that are before it.

Last fall, arrangements were made for an Industrial Fair, which
called together some of the best specimens of work done by colored
men and women in this State and a part of Georgia. This, probably,
gave more impetus to the industrial enterprise of the people than
anything that has been done since freedom. May the good work go on.
That is just what we want to see--the people waking up to do their
level best.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEREA COLLEGE.

A Commencement Crowd--A Mixed School--Free Speech--Self-Support.

PRESIDENT E. H. FAIRCHILD, BEREA, KY.

Wednesday, June 25th, was a beautiful day. The dust had been laid
by a grand shower the evening before, and the whole day was cool
and bright.

At half-past seven in the morning the neighboring people began to
enter the college campus, a beautiful grove of forty-five acres. At
half-past nine, when the exercises commenced, they were bringing
extra seats into the tabernacle, a rough but very substantial and
commodious building, which accommodates two thousand people.

At half-past ten there were thought to be three thousand in and
about the tabernacle, and nearly a thousand horses on the ground.
As Berea embraces but eight hundred inhabitants, including students
and infants, it appears that more than two thousand came from
abroad.

But what came they out for to see? An exhibition of an impartial
school in the centre of Kentucky. Sixteen students--twelve young
men and four young ladies--delivered orations and essays. Only
three of these were colored. This disproportion is accounted for
partly by the fact that the great demand for colored teachers calls
colored students away before they reach the higher classes. But it
was partly accidental. It has never occurred before, and probably
never will again. The colored students outnumber the white.

There were ten graduates--six from the classical department, three
from the scientific, and one from the normal.

Two-thirds of the audience were white. A large portion of them were
mountain people, but many were from the blue-grass region. The
colored people generally gravitated to one side of the building,
thus keeping up their country customs and gaining the approbation
of their white neighbors. This is one of the relics of slavery.
Generations must die before either white or colored people will
feel like treating each other as equals. As master and slave they
made no objection to the closest contiguity; as equals they cannot
eat in the same dining-hall, though forty feet apart. This feeling
has nearly passed away in Berea, as was perfectly manifest in a
social farewell gathering of about three hundred of both races at
the ladies’ hall in the evening. Equal rights, to the full extent,
will never be enjoyed till this feeling is extinguished.

“Democracy Restored” was the subject of one oration, delivered by
the only democrat in the institution. It was cheered by ex-rebels,
and the college gained popularity among them for its liberality.
Some of them thought the Faculty must have hired him to deliver
his harangue to make a show of toleration. One young son of the
democracy decided to attend the school. It will be a good place
for him. The author of the oration has two years yet to study, and
trying years they will be for him. His party had better get his
faith insured.

The graduates are all professing Christians, though one has had his
faith somewhat shaken, as was shown by his oration. He would be
glad to study theology at an orthodox seminary. He is a son of the
mountains, and an honest, earnest thinker, and a superior scholar.

The effort of the college to get on alone, without aid from the
American Missionary Association, taxes all its energy and faith;
but, thanks to God and its faithful friends, the past year it
has not been left to suffer. The erection of the new chapel will
commence immediately, though the necessary means are not all
secured.

Berea College is a miracle of God’s grace and power. No other being
could have established such a school, in such a community, with
such instrumentalities, and made it such a power.

In this voting precinct of five hundred voters, where whiskey
has reigned for many years, three-fourths of all the inhabitants
have signed the Murphy pledge. Arrangements are made for a grand
temperance rally on Friday, the 4th, which, it is confidently
believed, will fill the tabernacle to its utmost capacity. Berea,
a beautiful spot by nature, is growing more and more beautiful
every year. It is a charming place for a college, and nothing but
poverty prevents a thousand youth from flocking here for education.
Expenses are very low: Tuition, $9 a year; board, $1.50 a week;
free tuition for ninety pupils; yet many students must leave,
unless they can contrive a cheaper way to live, and find work to
meet their small expenses.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH CAROLINA.

School Closing--Religious Life.

REV. W. L. JOHNSON, ORANGEBURG.

Our scholastic year closed on the 5th inst. Appropriate exercises
were held at the “Independent Hall.” There was a very large and
respectable audience of the children’s parents and white citizens
who felt interested in our work. The exercises began about 8
o’clock, consisting of declamations, orations and music. After the
exhibition, Rev. Professor Larrence, of Claflin University, by
an eloquent address, in which he paid a splendid tribute to the
value of learning and the excellence of the A. M. A. schools, its
Principal and teachers proceeded to make the presentation of six
silver-plated vases and beautifully ornamented butter-dishes to
as many pupils. Those gifts were awarded by the Superintendent.
Five were given for sustaining perfect examinations, and one for
excellence in delivering a declamation. The whole affair was closed
by a bountiful collation for the children and friends of the school.

During the term we have maintained religious meetings among the
children, several of our scholars taking part by offering prayer.
It has been a pleasure to see others mourning to know Christ as
their Saviour. The neighboring ministers have, in general, been
present, and expressed deep interest in our undertaking, besides
impressing valuable lessons and pious sentiments upon the minds of
the children.

Six pupils taught this year, in the free schools of Orangeburg
County, an aggregate of 575 children, and were very acceptable
to trustees and patrons of the schools. The whole number of days
taught by them is about 375.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.


A Revival--Call for a Lady Missionary.

REV. FLOYD SNELSON, M’INTOSH, LIBERTY CO.

We have had, and are still having, a precious work of grace. On
Sunday, the 25th, our communion season, nearly a thousand people
were present. The weather was very delightful, and everything else
connected with the occasion. Sixteen persons, hopefully converted,
united with the church. The church is much encouraged, and its
future looks very hopeful. I am almost broken down in this long
and hard pull, still I believe that with this interest around me I
could go on five months longer.

In summing up the converts during this campaign we find twenty at
Cypress Slash, 14 miles above in our new field, and thirty-five
here, making fifty-five in all. Most of these are not only young in
grace but young in years, being from eleven to twenty. Therefore,
in order to make them successful and useful Christians, I deem it
very necessary to give them uncommon care. A special meeting of a
social and religious nature is held Friday evening of each week in
my house for them, and each one is required to take a part and is
made to feel at home.

A Literary Society is also held at the church on the second and
fourth Wednesday evenings of each month. In the former meeting much
is sometimes said to correct the errors of home life. The necessity
of this arises from the secluded situation of their parents and
themselves from the white people. They were not at all situated
like those in the upper part of the State among the whites, whose
ways they generally imitate, but were left to themselves, with no
training except such as was given by overseers and drivers.

This important work is, therefore, left still undone. My wife did
what she could in this line before we left for Africa, but since
our return her health has been such that she has not been able to
do anything. This work is of so much importance, and in such a
promising field, that I now _earnestly_ ask, Will not some one of
our churches or Sunday-schools send us a lady missionary who can do
it?

       *       *       *       *       *


Actions and Reactions--Temperance and Religion.

WM. F. JACKSON, FORSYTHE.

Our school year closed May 30th, with encouraging results.

This was the first year of real systematic work in the Academy, the
building having been finished too late to open at the beginning of
last school year.

There is a growing interest in the work. Upon the close of the war,
the schools established by the American Missionary Association were
everywhere crowded with our people thirsting for knowledge: in the
whole South the feeling for education ran high, so that the zeal of
the Freedman for education became proverbial. But this proved to be
not so much zeal as blind impulse. It is not so now. By a bitter
experience, our people have been brought to see the errors of the
past. Their present ideas respecting education plainly show this
discovery. The people of our community feel that they and their
children need it to make them useful. In our school were three
women and two men of advanced age, who were diligent in studying,
and compared favorably with younger pupils in their advancement,
and who are now exerting their influence to bring in others, that a
permanent class of aged persons may be formed. Again, many parents
have sent children to school to me, evidently for no other purpose
than to have them cared for; but now, some of these same parents
express a different purpose, viz., to have them prepared for the
duties of life. Then, too, there is a public spirit in favor of a
better and higher education, manifested in the efforts now being
made to establish here an African Methodist Episcopal College and a
Methodist Episcopal High School.

Our pupils have been very regular in attendance compared with past
years. There have been 113 students in school during the year, many
of whom came from the adjoining counties, and will go out to take
schools for the summer. There has been much earnest study done by
these pupils, who seem determined to surmount the difficulties
which present themselves. They have been encouraged to organize a
Temperance society, which they manage themselves with credit. This
organization is doing much in the school and community to encourage
those who are striving to be temperate.

Amid all the flattering results of the year not much could be
considered gained were it not for the great revival of religion
among the pupils of our school. In April, very many became serious
about their souls. They made earnest inquiries after the way of
life. The Lord poured out his spirit in copious showers upon these
precious souls, and nine were happily converted and added to the
church. Thus we feel that God has richly blessed our labors, and
that His approving smile rests upon us.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Corner-Stone of a Church Laid--The School Work.

REV. WM. H. ASH, FLORENCE.

This week has been a blessed one for us. On Saturday last the
corner-stone of the new chapel was laid, and on Sunday appropriate
services were held. It was an occasion long to be remembered.

On the walls, at the front of the building, was erected a temporary
platform, and on it a table. In the centre of it was a Bible and a
large vase of beautiful flowers; back of this were seats for the
speakers, and at the right was seated the choir.

The Rev. M. L. Frierson, of the Presbyterian Church, opened the
services by reading the second chapter of Nehemiah, and led in
prayer. The Choir then sung “What shall the harvest be?” The clerk
of the church read the list of articles which were to be placed in
the box prepared for the corner-stone, which has this inscription:
“First Congregational Church, A.D. 1879. A.M.A.”

Next in order was an address by Hon. W. B. Wood, who said that he
was a Methodist and a sectarian, too, but he loved _all_ who loved
the Lord Jesus Christ. We are not of the same denomination, but
Paul said, Be ye brethren. He said that the times were better,
that some old fogies would have us believe that we are not as
progressive as they were 40 or 50 years ago, but his experience
was, that we are moving onward, for he, as a judge, did not have as
many cases to decide as he had five or six years ago. Not that the
people were afraid of the punishment of the law, but controlled by
the power of the Gospel and its morality.

He said that he took pleasure in aiding to build churches, that
he had an interest in every church of Florence, and that if a
subscription book should be carried around and his house passed he
would feel slighted; and he advised all present to aid in behalf of
the church.

He said that he believed he could speak for the entire white
population, that they, in sympathy, would encourage every good work.

Rev. Mr. Frierson also spoke. After a collection was taken, “Ye
Christian heralds, go proclaim salvation in Immanuel’s name,” was
sung by the choir, and the benediction pronounced.

On Tuesday the examination of the school took place, and on
Wednesday night the exhibition occurred. We had many visitors
during the examination, and on the night of the exhibition our
building, used for church and school, was filled to overflowing;
all around the building, at the windows and doors, there were many
who were eager to see and hear the exercises.

It is the first year of school work in connection with the church.
At the beginning of the year we had three scholars; at the end we
closed with thirty-five.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Teachers’ Institute--Practical Education.

The Shelby County Teachers’ Institute or Convention was held in
June. In regard to it the editor of the Memphis _Appeal_ writes:

The teachers of the colored schools of the city and county deserve
especial commendation for the interest they take in the leading
educational questions of the day, and for the efforts they are
making to reach wise and correct conclusions, and if we may judge
of the nature of their entire proceedings and discussions from
the paper on practical education presented before the Institute
yesterday, and printed in another column of this morning’s
_Appeal_, the Institute has certainly been a success in point
of ability. It is not often that teachers take the initiative
in educational reforms, but we are glad to notice here that a
company of teachers speak boldly and plainly in favor of a more
practical course of study for the preparatory and common schools
of the country. We would call the attention of educators and
school boards to this paper, and urge that some system be devised
for our schools, whereby the simpler of these plans, at least,
be at once carried into effect with the opening of the schools
in October. The actions and words of this Institute have an
especial significance, coming as they do from the teachers of our
colored schools, themselves belonging, with few exceptions, to the
colored race. They certainly indicate a commendable earnestness in
matters pertaining to the educational interests of the country and
community, and they richly merit the encouragement and co-operation
of all good citizens.”

The paper referred to was by Miss Laura A. Parmelee, of the Le
Moyne School, and, after a historical sketch of much value, ended
with the following recommendations:

  After careful inquiry into the various methods adopted
  by different schools, your committee feels justified in
  recommending: That in every school-house a room be furnished
  with mechanical appliances, where, for an hour each day, the
  boys and young men may receive lessons in the art of handling
  tools and methods of work, under the direction of a practical
  workman; that all girls spend three-quarters of an hour daily
  in learning to do plain sewing, to cut garments neatly and
  economically, and to judge of the value and appropriate use of
  fabrics commonly made into clothing; that the first lessons in
  free-hand drawing be given to every student, and classes for
  further instruction organized for those who display special
  aptness for the work. One competent teacher could attend to
  this branch in all the schools, and still have time to assist
  in private schools, if desired. A plan of co-operation in
  these extra branches would greatly lighten the expense, while
  stimulating healthy competition to excel on the part of pupils;
  that the older girls study the science of nursing from a regular
  text-book, reporting to the teacher for criticism and advice
  their own experiences in neighborly watchings with the sick. Your
  committee note, with pleasure, an awakening interest in this
  subject, and would endorse the “Hand-Book of Nursing,” arranged
  and prepared by the New Haven training school for nurses, as a
  suitable work to be introduced for this purpose. In connection
  with the usual study of physiology, there should be discussions
  as to proper foods and best methods of their preparation. That
  in city and country schools, young children be encouraged to
  observe the habits of animals and plants; that no school-house be
  considered complete without a small microscope, and at some time
  in the course of study, the usual reading books be laid aside
  for a series of child’s books of nature, treating of the first
  principles of botany, philosophy and zoology; that all methods
  of teaching bend toward educating the senses to observe quickly
  and accurately, the mind to think independently, and the hands to
  work dexterously.

A cordial letter from the Hon. W. H. Fonte, Superintendent of
Schools, closed with the following words:

  Especially, I may add, do I desire to encourage and forward
  in every way, every plan or purpose which has for its object
  the elevation and progress of the colored race, believing with
  Frederick Douglass, that “without intelligence there is no
  independence, without independence no leisure, without leisure no
  progress.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BY-WAYS OF TENNESSEE.

In February, 1878, we printed a letter from our Bro. Cutler, in
which he spoke of a young girl who wanted to get an education, but
who was entirely without means. He procured for her half enough
to keep her at study for a year, started her on her course, and
pronounced her “the happiest girl in the land.” The following
description of her first field and work as a teacher will certainly
interest those who aided Tennie Morford, and, we think, many
others.--EDS.:

There is situated in the eastern part of Tennessee a beautiful,
lonely, little valley, called the Sequatchie Valley. It is sixty
miles long and five miles wide, containing about four hundred
inhabitants. This is one of the by-ways of Tennessee, or, as it
seems to be, from the condition of the people, Africa at home. It
is hedged about with mountains, and its inhabitants scarcely hear
of any other place than their own valley. They are very ignorant,
and their chief occupation is farming.

I spent my last vacation among them, and tried to teach and show
them the need of an education. There were persons who were forty
and sixty years old who could not count a hundred. Scarcely any of
them had seen a steam-boat or car. They know only of the wilds of
Sequatchie, where they have spent their lives. Near the head of the
valley was my place of work, principally inhabited by drunkards of
both colors, who spent their Sabbaths in intoxication and in the
use of profanity. Their places of enjoyment were three still-houses
about half a mile apart, where the price of their labor was given
in liquor.

On my arrival at Pikeville I was conducted to a little house on
the main street, where I remained one week. I was examined three
days after my arrival. My examination seemed very simple, and I
received first grade certificate. During that time it was noised
abroad that school would open Monday, June 10th. Bright and early
Monday morning I commenced my summer’s work; but as I met only
twelve bright faces I felt somewhat discouraged, and was beginning
to think that I would go elsewhere if I did not have more next
week. To my surprise, by that time I found nineteen, and felt
more reconciled. After I had taught a while I visited some of the
children’s parents, and found that every body wanted to go to
school, both young and old. Every one began to show an interest,
and the number of scholars grew to fifty-seven, a few of whom
had been to school before, while the others were only making a
beginning. My most advanced pupil studied only the Third Reader
and the Elementary Speller, which was considered by him quite an
education. The most of them said that they did not want to go
any higher than the Speller. Others only wanted to get as far as
“publication.” In one case a lady came and brought a little girl
to me who did not know the alphabet, and asked me to get her to
“baker” as soon as possible, for she wanted her, as they say, to
“help to lay by crop.” She said that if she got as far as “baker”
she would be half through the Speller, which she considered half
of an education; but I told her that that was only laying the
foundation for the great work intended for them to do. They had
often heard of schools, and half realized that they had minds to be
cultivated, but not until last summer had they become interested
in the real work of learning. They had a very good school-house
for dry weather, but when it rained we had to shelter ourselves
the best we knew how. The house would seat about sixty scholars
comfortably, and was beautifully situated on a small hill called
“Cedar Bluff,” which was surrounded by large oaks.

The people do not have very much preaching, but when they do have
it it must be by daylight, on account of the white people stoning
them at night. The colored people are still living as slaves, and
are afraid to live otherwise. The laborers do not work by the day,
as they do here, but as they are told. They get up about three
or four o’clock in the morning and work until about midnight,
and sometimes later if their employers desire to have the work
finished. This is what they consider a day’s work. They have the
same idea about teaching. They wanted that I should teach from
sunrise to sundown. They know nothing of the eight or ten hour
system of labor.

Those who live along the highways of trade and culture in our
State, that are participating in the active work of the world,
would scarcely believe that some parts of their own State are
half civilized if they did not occasionally see it; but one has
only to cross the Cumberland mountain to find his mistake. The
Sequatchie Valley is only catching a ray of light now and then from
the sunrise. When the sun comes up in the east it is first seen
by those who live on the mountain tops and those who live in the
highest places; but it keeps rising until it shines on valleys and
plains. So with the morning that has dawned upon the people of the
South; it is first grasped by those on the highways, and then it
begins to shine into the hidden corners until all shall be lighted.
What can be expected of the children of the next generation if
their parents are not more than half civilized? We need educated
parents, so that the children may be properly trained. In order
to do this we must go into these by-ways of our State and sow our
seed, though it be on untilled soil. I think that the time is fast
approaching when the public school system, carried out by earnest
teachers, shall reclaim these valleys, and make them an honor to
the State instead of haunts of ignorance and vice.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MENDI MISSION.


Explorations into the Interior, etc.

REV. ALBERT P. MILLER, GOOD HOPE STATION.

I am traveling more or less to see the interior of this extensive
country, going up certain rivers and visiting towns and villages
on the way. I visited the Bargroo country last week, and hope to
leave in the morning for Kaw-Mendi, to see what are the prospects
of useful work for the Mission in that part of the country. Many of
the old places formerly held by the Mission I shall try to visit
before the rainy season proper sets in. We are getting things
somewhat in shape, and hope to push into the interior as soon as
practicable. Dodo is open to us; Cunkananny, also, on the very
frontier, no mission station having ever been established nearer
them than Avery. Bros. Anthony and White are to-night with us; will
leave to-morrow for Avery. Bro. Anthony is well, and is getting on
very well in his new field of labor. He takes right hold, and seems
to be in dead earnest. Bro. White is also well. I find that we
shall be obliged to get a large quantity of goods from some source
or other with which to purchase logs, as two saws will soon be
running in the mill, which will come in to help us. We are all very
well save the doctor, who has been ill of late, but is now up. Pray
for us.


The Industrial Work--General Impressions.

ELMORE L. ANTHONY, AVERY STATION.

I am well and all right. I had a slight pain in my head yesterday
for the first time since I have been in the country, and that
came from being in the sun too much. Everything seems to be going
forward. I am doing the best that I can.

The mill has been repaired. The bottom logs were decayed; the ends
of some of the posts were also decayed. There is considerable
work to do yet. One of the saws started this week, and the other
one will start soon. Bills for lumber are coming in. We can find
sale for all the good lumber that we can saw. Logs are coming in;
business seems to be opening. We had the shoot that leads the water
from the vat or receptacle to the turbine wheel enlarged, which
will, I think, give the water greater propelling power, and, of
course, give the circular saw greater velocity. I am having the
coffee farm cleaned, and will have the trees pruned next month, as
I understand that is the time. I am doing just as you said.

The religious work seems to be improving, though I have not been
here long enough to tell much about it. The industrial department
is about all one man can attend to if he will do his duty.
Brothers Jackson and White have the church and school. I help in
the Sabbath-school. Having seen the condition of the people,
I would say, if you had the money, send _one hundred thousand
missionaries_ to different parts of Africa at _once_, and have
them establish missions and tributaries. This country is baptized
in ignorance, vice, poverty and old customs. Humanity is entirely
below description. There are hundreds, yes, thousands of persons
here that have not a string of clothing to their names. All the
natives do is to sow and reap; they know nothing about cultivation
whatever. Now, why keep missionaries away, when Christ has said,
“Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations”?

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber. Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES AND CLIPPINGS.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

It is unnecessary, and, of course, in the space at command it
would be impossible, to give at length my correspondence with
teachers and pupils connected with our schools; but I must ask you
occasionally to make room for brief “notes and clippings.”

Whatever concerns our Chinese helpers bears with great weight on
our work. Their teacher writes: “I think my pupils are very much
in earnest, and study the Bible with no mere desire of finding out
what there is in it, or of advancing themselves in the knowledge of
our language--as some intimate the Chinese do--but with an earnest
purpose to learn God’s ways and follow His commands, and to fit
themselves to teach others the blessed truths which they themselves
have come to believe. It seems to me they must make excellent
missionaries; they appear to realize so fully the sad condition
of their heathen friends, and are so simple and unquestioning in
their faith in the God revealed to them by our Bible. All their
teaching and preaching is the love of Christ, and what we should do
in return for such love. I am puzzled what to do about the texts
[passages of Scripture which I give them week by week to prepare
outlines of discourses from. W.C.P.], for no matter what is the
subject of them they are sure to run into the _one thing_ that
seems to fill their minds.” But that is the one thing needful.

The difficulties of which our teacher at Petaluma writes, are
encountered to a greater or less extent everywhere. She says: “No
Chinese ever attend the school except from one company. [Two of
the now famous ‘Six Companies’ are represented among the Chinese
of Petaluma. The rivalries and mutual antipathies of members of
these companies are often very intense, leading sometimes to
pitched battles. In Petaluma they keep the peace; but no efforts
of teachers or helpers have yet succeeded in getting Chinese of
both the companies into one school. W.C.P.] The scholars are, also,
house-servants or laundrymen, and are constantly changing places,
and a great deal of the time have nothing at all to do. If they
had work we could keep them. If the times would improve the school
would improve. The scholars like the school, and are much more
friendly and cordial to me since Hong Sing [the Chinese helper]
came, because now I am better understood. But while they are
constantly shifting about to get employment, I am afraid the good
accomplished cannot be very great.”

This is illustrated by the following from a teacher in the Oakland
School: “I was hearing a scholar who had been in the school about
a week read in his primer. We came to the sentence, ‘Christ died
for us,’ and I asked him ‘Who was Christ?’ To my astonishment, he
knew nothing of him. In the plainest way possible to me, I gave
an account of Christ’s life and death. He seemed interested, but
told me that he had never been at Sunday-school. The next night
I noticed him reading with the helper in the Testament, and he
became regular in his attendance at Sunday-school. Losing his
position, he was obliged to go away to get work. I was very sorry,
for I had great hopes that he would soon become a Christian. This
teacher adds: ‘It is gratifying when you ask one who has seemed
somewhat dull, Who is God? to see the face brighten and the hand
point upwards; and if you go still further and ask, Do you love
God? a smile plays upon the features and the reply is, ‘Oh, yes.’
A prayer-meeting is held each Wednesday evening, in which manifest
interest is taken. After the close of the school the pupils often
remain and read together the Scriptures written in Chinese. Each
Friday evening I tell them a short story from the Bible, and try to
take from it some truth which they may remember. I should be deeply
grateful could I write of more being brought into the kingdom of
God. The work is encouraging; and while sometimes we reap the
fruits of others’ labors, so others shall reap the fruits of ours.”

Of course the Gospel leaven working in this mass of heathenism
induces more or less of fermentation. Our Christian Chinese are
often engaged in discussions with their heathen friends. I took
brief notes of one such, as afterwards reported to me. I am glad
to say that the assailant of the truth in this dispute has since
been converted, and is now a member of my church. The heathen, who
had long been a pupil in Bethany School, and a close reader of the
New Testament, said to our brother, “Your Bible itself says we must
not put new wine into old bottles. China is an old bottle; new
wine will burst it.” The reply surprised me by its apt and correct
interpretation of the text referred to: “Not so. You cannot put the
new wine of Christ into the old bottles of Chinese teachings and
worship, it will burst them; but you can put it into Chinese hearts
and it will save them.” “But you say,” continued the objector,
“that a little water on the head washes sins away. I wash all over
three times a day, and not take my sins away.” “Not so,” replied
Hong Sing, “water cannot take sins away; but water means that God’s
Spirit poured upon our hearts, Christ’s blood sprinkled on our
souls, takes our sins away.” “But people come to the Lord’s Supper
and then go away, do wrong, gamble, smoke opium.” Neither admitting
nor denying this, Hong Sing told and interpreted with perfect
correctness the parable of the net cast into the sea. The last
objection was this: “You Christians say that you go to the Lord’s
table and drink his blood and eat his flesh. Would you eat your
mother’s flesh and drink her blood, if she were dead?” Hong Sing’s
reply will be easily surmised by my readers. I wish that I could
give word for word the broken English, and could reproduce on paper
the animation with which this conversation was related to me; but
the limits of my space forbid, even if otherwise it were possible.

=The Story of Lee Jin as told by Jee Gam.=--“Lee Jin was a young
man twenty-three years of age, a nephew of Lee Young. For more
than three years previous to his death he had been a member of
a Chinese society of freemasonry, and also a member of Lock Shan
Tong. This latter is a school or society where the doctrines of
Confucius and other Chinese sages are professedly taught; but, in
reality, this society has been formed for no other purpose than to
prevent any more Chinese from becoming Christians, and to entrap
those who have already become Christians. During his connection
with the above-mentioned society he was one of its most active
members, and one of the strongest opposers of Christianity. He
did not content himself with setting forth his opposition at his
own place and outside Christian institutions, but often carried
it into our Christian association. His argument was nothing but
pride and self-glory. As a Jew boasted of his father Abraham, and
felt proud because his race was the chosen people of God, so he
himself was lifted up. He said: ‘The middle kingdom is the true
celestial empire. She is the realm of literature. She is the nation
of rites. Great and powerful are her people, and especially her
ancient personages, whose great deeds no language is sufficient to
describe.’ He endeavored to display his learning by quoting what he
had learned from the books of his sages, ‘I have heard of men using
the doctrines of our great land to change barbarians, but I have
never yet heard of any being changed by barbarians, etc.’ But when
his arguments were overcome he would say, ‘Well, I am a Chinaman; I
have Confucius; I worship the gods of my own country. If Jesus is
the God of the barbarians, let him be worshiped by them, and not by
Chinese.’ So his heart was hardened like that of Pharaoh, until, at
last, he fell sick. During his illness the Lord, with His wonderful
power, revealed the folly of his pride, and the consequences of
his self-righteousness and evil deeds, to his then opened eyes.
He trembled with fear and said, ‘Oh, what a great sinner I am!
What a miserable offender of Jesus! Do send for Lee Hain and Jee
Gam. Tell them to come immediately and pray for me.’ His uncle,
Lee Young, was struck with astonishment when he heard these words,
and saw this great change in his nephew. He said in reply, ‘Do you
really want Jee Gam and Lee Hain to pray for you?’ ‘Yes,’ was the
reply. ‘Why not pray to the gods you always worship?’ ‘Oh, they are
dead idols. They are of no use. They could not save me from the
punishment of my sins.’

“We were sent for accordingly. When we reached there he begged us
to forgive him for his opposition against us for preaching the
Gospel of the Saviour, whom he had begun to love. We prayed for
him, and asked him to repeat the words after us, which he did
with a tone of true repentance. Oftentimes after this he asked
his uncle and his younger brother to pray for him. His heathen
friends deserted him to the care of these Christian relatives, but
after his death, when we had taken charge of the body to give it
Christian burial, they came and wished to perform some of their
heathen rites. We would not permit it; and, rather than take back
their offerings, which would bring them bad luck, they burned them
before the door. We accompanied Lee Jin to the cemetery, where we
had procured a suitable lot, and then we sang a hymn and offered a
prayer before committing his body to the dust. We believe he is now
safe in heaven.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


The following “short talk” was made by Etahdleuh Doanmoe (“Boy
Hunting”), at the anniversary at Hampton. He is one of the St.
Augustine Indians now studying there:


My Home in Indian Territory.

“I am a Kiowa Indian boy twenty-three years old. My home is in the
Indian Territory. My people are not much civilized. They live in
houses made of skins of the buffalo. They like to hunt and fight.
When I was a little boy I did not see many white people. The Kiowas
moved camp often to keep near the buffalo, and we lived on buffalo
meat and berries all the time. We had no bread, no coffee or sugar.
We boys talked all the time about hunting the buffalo, going to
fight the Utes, Navajoes, or Pawnees, and most about fighting the
white people or stealing horses. The old Kiowas talked all the time
to us about fight or hunt the buffalo. Sometimes the men would go
off and bring back scalps of white men and women, or Indian men and
women; then we had a big dance. This was all I heard and all I saw,
and I thought it was good, so I will be a big fighter and a good
hunter too, and may be I get to be a big chief. When I was about
fifteen years old I killed my first buffalo with a bow and arrow. I
had no gun. Then I was called a man, because I could kill buffalo.
Then I went with the young men to fight the Utes and Navajoes and
steal horses. I was in three fights with the Utes and two with
the Navajoes. All this time I wore a blanket or a buffalo robe,
and liked to have my hair long, and paint my face and wear big
rings in my ears. I did not know anything about God, or churches,
or schools, or how to make things grow from the ground to live
on. Four years ago there was a big war. The Kiowas, Comanches and
Cheyennes fought the soldiers all winter. The buffalo were nearly
all gone, and the Indians got very hungry. The horses worked hard,
and it was so cold the grass was poor, so they got very weak, and
we lost many in fights with the soldiers. Then the soldiers came
to our camps and we had to run away and leave our lodges, then the
soldiers burned them. We all got very tired and hungry, and the
women and children cried, so the chiefs said we will go into Fort
Sill and give up. We met Captain Pratt in the Wichita Mountains.
He had some Indian soldiers and two wagons loaded with bread,
sugar and coffee. He gave us plenty, and we gave him all our guns,
pistols, bows and arrows, shields and spears. That night we had a
big dance because we had plenty to eat. I went to Florida. Then
I first began to learn something about the good way, and I find
Indian’s way very bad; so I thought I will never live Indian’s way
any more. Captain Pratt was our good friend. He taught us many
things and showed us the white man’s road. We stayed in Florida
three years, and then some of the Indians went back home, but the
young men wanted to stay east and get a good education. We came
to Hampton. We have been here one year, and we study hard and are
learning to work and be men. We like it. I see that every white boy
and girl, and every black boy and girl can go to school, and that
is the way they get ahead of the Indians. Indians have no chance.
You give all Indian boys and girls schools and teachers like you
have, and Indians will do better.”

       *       *       *       *       *




LETTERS TO THE TREASURER.

       *       *       *       *       *


  We give a few extracts from letters recently received expressing
  interest in and motives for pressing our work, and containing
  substantial contributions to its continuance. We could print many
  such letters every month if we had room for them:

  I inclose a pocket-piece (a gold half-dollar), held and valued
  for many years, to pay subscription to THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
  for one year.

                   Respectfully,                        I. M. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  My little son, the morning he died, on being asked what should be
  done with the little money he had so carefully invested in the
  new four per cent. $10 certificates issued April 1st, said his
  father should have it to distribute as he thought best among the
  benevolent societies, and I send you one-third of it, and the
  balance to the Board and Home Missions.

  This is very precious money. Put it where it will do the most for
  the cause.

                                                        A. L. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Inclosed find draft on the American Exchange Bank for $200, my
  subscription to your society for the Freedmen for the year 1879.
  I have heretofore given $100, but it seems to me very important
  that the Freedmen should be educated as fast as possible. As many
  of the educated men as possible should be kept in the Southern
  States to assist in educating the colored people and helping them
  to stand up for their rights.
                                                           R. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Inclosed please find $5 for the American Missionary Association.
  As I am now nearly ninety years old, this, in all probability,
  is my last contribution to this good object. With my prayers for
  this and every object of Christian benevolence,

                   I am yours truly,                       C. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  The other day, when I thought that our loved American Missionary
  Association was in debt, when I thought that our kind Father in
  heaven had given us such overflowing crops in the past season,
  and blessed us in every department (almost), it struck me that
  there was something wrong in the supporters of the noble cause.
  Well, let the time past suffice that we have been slack; let us
  come up to the work.

  Please find inclosed $25 for the old debt, $15 to constitute (in
  part) two life members of the American Missionary Association,
  and oblige yours,

                                                       A FRIEND.

       *       *       *       *       *

  In the _Congregationalist_ of last week, I noticed your “Appeal”
  in behalf of the American Missionary Association, to which I
  respond by inclosed draft for $24, pension for one quarter, for
  service in the War of 1812.

  An abolitionist from my first consideration of the enslaved in
  our country, induced by the movement and utterances of the great
  agitator--now happy, I trust, in his reward--I still feel that,
  though their chains are broken, they are objects of sympathy and
  aid in their anxiety and effort to become intelligent and useful
  citizens. There is no department of benevolent effort to which I
  more cheerfully contribute.

                   With respectful regards,
                        Yours truly,                       O. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _From Grenada, Mass._

  Inclosed find six dollars ($6), which you will please accept
  from our Sunday-school as a thank-offering for what the American
  Missionary Association has done for us in the past. We would
  gladly have made it more, but the pressure of so many conflicting
  claims made it impracticable. We are just now paying for a new
  organ.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JUNE, 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $80.82.

    Bangor. Rev. James H Crosby, _for Fisk U._               $10.00
    Bridgeton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.56
    Buxton Centre. Mrs. M. G. Hill                             2.00
    Calais and Milltown. Sab. Schs., $1; also Ten
      six burner Chandeliers, _for Emerson Inst._              1.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        8.10
    Houlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Lewistown. Pine St. Cong. Soc.                            29.16
    Mechanic Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         2.00
    Otisfield. “Friends”                                       4.00
    Portland. Williston Cong. Ch., $10; West Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $3                                           13.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $106.11.

    Colebrook. Cong. Sab. Sch., $13.70; “E. C. and
      Wife,” $2                                               15.70
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $30.25, and Sab.
      Sch., $12.39                                            42.64
    Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.00
    New Preston. Presb. Ch. and Soc.                          19.52
    South Newmarket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        3.25
    Short Falls. J. W. C.                                      1.00
    Temple. Isaac Kimball                                      5.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.00


  VERMONT, $341.52.

    Benson. Miss J. Kent                                       2.00
    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.75
    Bridport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.00
    Cornwall. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $41.68; Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $14; Miss A. W., $1; Miss L. C.
      W., $1                                                  57.68
    East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         26.00
    Ferrisburg. “A Friend”                                     0.50
    Ludlow. Mrs. L. M.                                         1.00
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            27.43
    McIndoes Falls. Dea. W. R. M.                              1.00
    Montpelier. Bethany Ch.                                   13.66
    New Haven. Cong. Ch.                                      35.50
    Saint Albans. Mrs. J. Gregory Smith                       10.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Fairbanks & Co.                         125.00
    West Randolph. Mrs. S. W.                                  1.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,147.31.

    Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              42.15
    Andover. West Parish Sab. Sch.                            10.00
    Boston. Old South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     203.18
    Boston. Mrs. E. C. Ford, $25; Central Cong.
      Ch. (ad’l), $5                                          30.00
    Beverly. Dane Street Ch. and Soc.                         41.76
    Braintree. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       12.50
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Sab. Sch., $15; Mrs.
      L. A. Darling, $2.50                                    17.50
    Boxford. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Straight U._                                            10.00
    Brockton. “A Friend”                                      20.00
    Charlestown. Ivory Littlefield.                           25.00
    Chelsea. Central Cong. Ch., $11.59; Miss M.
      H., 50c.                                                12.09
    Concord. ESTATE of Edward P. Parker, by
      Margaret J. Parker, Ex.                               1000.00
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   1.00
    Danvers. Missionary Circle, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             30.00
    Dorchester. “A Friend”                                    10.00
    Dracut. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          16.00
    East Medway. Mrs. P. D.                                    0.50
    Gardner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Greenfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      10.66
    Greenwich Village. Daniel Parker.                          5.00
    Groton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          66.71
    Hanover. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.00
    Haverhill. Ladies, _for Freight_                           3.05
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.04
    Hopkinton. Mrs. P. J Claflin                             150.00
    Hubbardston. Miss E. Cutler                                2.50
    Lawrence. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        10.00
    Longmeadow. Ladies Benev. Soc.                            13.80
    Little River. A. Doolittle                                10.00
    Lynn. Central Ch. and Soc., $18.25; First
      Cong. Ch and Soc., $4.90                                23.15
    Lynnfield Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       8.35
    Marlborough. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     28.00
    Marshfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      47.74
    Mattapoisett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.27
    Melrose. By C. N. Chapin                                   3.50
    New Bedford. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     70.00
    Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         18.50
    Newburyport. ESTATE of Ann M. Cross, by
      Richard Tenney, Adm.                                   300.00
    Newton Upper Falls. Miss R. P. Ward                       20.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.50
    Northampton. “W.”                                        100.00
    Norton. Trin. Cons. Ch. and Soc.                          35.00
    Oakham. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Princeton. Ladies, by A. H. Whitteker                     12.00
    Reading. Bethesda Cong. Ch., $102.18, to
      const. REV. WILLIAM B. ELY, DEA. HIRAM
      BARRUS, and CHARLES N. NOWELL, L. M.’s; E.
      F. S., 50c.                                            102.68
    Royalston. Albert Brown                                    2.00
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., $190.40, to
      const. MRS. EMMA T. CLARK, OLIVER CARLTON,
      and WALTER K. BIGELOW, L. M.s; A P., 50c.              190.90
    Scituate. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 6.37., and Sab.
      Sch., $6.43                                             12.80
    Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        7.25
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    South Hadley. Teachers and Pupils of Mount
      Holyoke Seminary                                        50.00
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
    Springfield. Olivet Cong. Ch.                             19.45
    Springfield. _First Ch._ Marvin Chapin and
      Mrs. Ed. Palmer, $5 ea; Mrs. Dr. Smith, Miss
      Mary Brewer, and Mrs. Dr. Calkins, 3 ea.;
      Nelson C. Newell and Ed. C Rogers, $2 ea.;
      Mrs. H. F., S. C. R., Mrs. E., Mrs. S. R.
      N., A. J. S. and Mrs. L. S., $1 ea.; Others,
      $3.--_South Ch._ Geo. Merriam, $2; Mrs. R.
      D. and Mrs. H. B., $1 ea.--_Olivet Ch._ Mrs
      W. H. B., Mrs. A. B. F., and Mrs. A. H., $1
      ea.; Others, $1.75;--Mrs. H. Bailey, $2;
      Mrs. L. R., $1, by L. S. D.                             43.75
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, _for
      Washington Sch., Raleigh, N. C._                        10.00
    Tewksbury. Mrs Geo. Lee, _for Straight U._                10.00
    Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.00
    Walpole. Mrs. C. F. Metcalf.                               5.00
    Ware. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            17.25
    Westfield. First Cong. Ch.                                10.91
    West Roxbury. South Evan. Ch. and Soc.                    58.25
    West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch., $27;
      First Cong. Ch. $9                                      36.00
    West Warren. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            3.00
    Whately. Cong. Ch.                                         5.62
    Winchendon. No. Cong. Ch. (adl)                            5.00
    Wrentham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,550.47.

    Birmingham. 2 Bbls. of C., by Mrs E. B.
      Bradley; Chaplin Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.00
    Colchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $57.29,
      and Sab. Sch. $4.71                                     62.00
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                       50.00
    Dayville. Sab. Sch.                                        1.00
    East Woodstock. ESTATE of Geo A Paine                     10.00
    Ekonk. Miss E. W. Kasson                                  10.00
    Ellington. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. JOHN
      T. MCKNIGHT and S. THOMPSON KIMBALL, L. Ms              58.96
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch. _for Tougaloo U._                     9.75
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      MRS. SAMUEL BISHOP, L. M.                               45.80
    Greensville. Cong. Ch.                                    19.50
    Hartford. Mrs. Sally Gillett, $30, to const.
      A. C. HODGES, L. M.; Wethersfield Ave. Sab.
      Sch., $9.78                                             39.78
    Kent. Cong. Sab. Sch., $34.50, to const. L. P.
      BISSELL, L. M.; First Cong. Ch., $15.12                 49.82
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch.                               25.00
    Mansfield Centre. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.               10.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch.                                  74.87
    Middletown. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      51.60
    New Britain. Young Ladies’ Society, _for
      Freight_                                                 5.00
    New Haven. Mrs. James P. Dickerman, $100;
      Alfred Walker, $5; Taylor Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $6.50; “A Friend in Center Ch.,” $2              113.50
    North Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          27.85
    New London. TRUST ESTATE of Henry P. Haven (of
      which $300 _for Fisk U._, $250 _for Hampton
      N. and A. Inst._, $200 _for Tillotson N. and
      C. Inst._, $100 _for Berea College_)                 1,500.00
    New London. First Church of Christ                        67.88
    North Stonington. D. R. Wheeler, $10; Dea.
      Chas. Wheeler, $5; Cong. Sab. Sch., $10.50              25.50
    Norwalk. Cong. Ch., $16; Lewis J. Curtis, $5              21.00
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch. (ad’l), $100;
      Othniel Gager, $24                                     124.00
    Rocky Hill. Cong. Ch.                                     18.36
    Rockville. Bible Class, Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Straight U._                                            31.00
    Rockville. Rev. Giles Pease                                5.00
    Sherman. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 4.00
    West Meriden. Edmund Tuttle, to const. MISS
      ELLEN R. HOUGH, L. M.                                   30.00
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch.                                  13.50
    Westville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.00
    Woodbury. South Cong. Sab. Sch.                           10.00


  NEW YORK, $2,499.99.

    Ballston Spa. ESTATE of Titus M. Mitchell              1,873.89
    Barryville. Cong. Ch.                                      2.38
    Brentwood. Elisha F. Richardson                           15.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, $20; Mrs. G. A.
      Low, $2.50                                              22.50
    Candor. Cong. Ch.                                          4.43
    Chapinville. Joseph C. Griggs                             26.00
    Copenhagen. Cong. Ch., $11.44; “W. B. M.,”
      $5.56                                                   17.00
    Deer River. Cong. Ch.                                      3.55
    Geneva. Mrs. Emeline Smith, Hattie D. Smith                6.00
    Gloversville. Cong Ch. and Soc.                          211.09
    Hamilton. O. S. Campbell and Mrs. S. K.
      Bardin, $5 each; Mrs. E. K. P., $1                      11.00
    Holley. “A Few Friends,”                                  12.00
    Homer. Cong. Ch.                                         132.16
    Jefferson. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                         4.00
    Lisle. Cong. Ch.                                           2.35
    Lumberland. Cong. Ch.                                      4.62
    New York. Mrs. C. P. STOKES, $90 ($30 _of
      which to const. herself a L. M._; and $50
      _for Atlanta U._);--Erastus New, $50, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                               140.00
    Pekin. Abigail Peck                                        5.00
    Watkins. S. G. and N. M., 50c. each                        1.00
    ---- ----                                                  6.00


  NEW JERSEY, $17.

    Harlingen. Mrs. L. D. Tompkins                             5.00
    Newark. Mrs. Susan Denison                                 2.00
    Stanley. “A Friend,” by Rev. C. P. Bush, D.D.             10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $16.75.

    Clark. S. P. Stewart                                       2.00
    Pittston. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                 14.75


  ILLINOIS, $394.91.

    Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                        58.13
    Chicago. New England Ch. Sab. Sch., $32.60,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._; New Eng. Ch.
      M. C. Coll., $15.09; Rev. A. M., 50c.                   48.19
    Dover Cong. Ch., $26.56; Woman’s Miss. Soc., $2           28.55
    Galva. First Cong. Ch.                                    21.65
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch., $41; Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      $18.06                                                  59.06
    Geneva. E. W. Town                                        10.00
    Glenwood. Rev. L. S. Williams                              3.00
    Kewanee. Milo Doty                                        10.00
    Lyonsville. Cong. Ch.                                      5.25
    Naperville. Rev. Edward Ebbs                               5.00
    Northampton. R. W. Gillian                                 5.00
    Oneida. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Payson. Cong. Ch. ($25 of which from J. K.
      Scarborough)                                            29.50
    Princeton. Cong. Ch., $41.84, and Sab. Sch.,
      $9.02                                                   50.86
    Quincy. Joshua Perry                                      10.00
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        4.55
    Rockford. Ladies of First Cong Ch., $12, _for
      Student Aid_;--“La Matinée” $1.67; Mrs. R.
      T. 50c.                                                 14.17
    Saint Charles. Cong. Ch.                                  12.00


  OHIO, $276.49.

    Andover. Cong. Ch., $3.29--incorrectly ack.
      from Mass. in July number.
    Austinburg. “Friends” ($2.45 _for Freight_ and
      $1.05 _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._), by
      Rev. J. K. Nutting                                       3.50
    Brighton. Cong. Ch. $3.70; A. S. $1                        4.70
    Chagrin Falls. Earnest Workers _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       10.00
    East Cleveland. Mrs. M. Walkden, _for African
      M._                                                      2.00
    Elyria. First Presb. Ch., $83.70; Mrs. L. T.
      50c.                                                    84.20
    Gomer. Cong. Ch.                                          56.90
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Ch. _for Emerson Inst._                  0.50
    Lenox. Horatio Tracy                                      10.00
    Medina. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             8.00
    Nelson. J. S. H.                                           1.00
    Sandusky. “A Friend”                                      40.00
    Tallmadge. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $19.69; Rev. L.
      S. Shaw, $5                                             24.69
    Wadsworth. Geo. Lyman                                     20.00
    West Andover. Cong. Ch. $19--incorrectly ack.
      from Mass. in July number.
    Wilseyville. “A Friend”                                   10.00


  MICHIGAN, $113.94.

    Benzonia. First Cong. Ch.                                 22.50
    Charlotte. First Cong. Ch.                                61.44
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                    5.00
    Grand Rapids. “Friends.”                                   7.00
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                       7.75
    New Haven. Cong Sab. Sch. _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                              5.05
    Romeo. Miss T. S. Clark, $5; Mrs. Reed’s S. S.
      Class, 20c. _for Lady Missionary, Memphis,
      Tenn._                                                   5.20


  WISCONSIN, $24.21.

    Brandon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   5.50
    Fox Lake. Cong. Ch.                                       14.21
    Genoa Junction. Cong. Ch.                                  4.00
    Racine. S. M. D.                                           0.50


  IOWA. $99.66.

    Anamosa. Cong. Ch. $9.13, and Sab. Sch. $4.07             13.20
    Centre Point. Cong. Ch.                                    1.50
    Cincinnati. L. B. Holbrook                                 5.00
    Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Danville. Mrs. Harriet Huntington                          5.00
    Earlville. Cong Ch.                                       10.00
    Grinnell. Prof. F. P Brewer, _for Washington
      School, Raleigh, N. C._                                  5.00
    Humboldt. L. K. Lorbeer, $2; Mrs. L. A. W., $1             3.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch. $22.60; and Sab. Sch. $15            37.60
    Toledo. Cong. Ch.                                          4.36
    Winterset. Mrs. Esther Burroughs                          10.00


  KANSAS, $10.00.

    Quindaro. Rev. E. L. Hill                                  5.00
    Waushara. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00


  MINNESOTA, $44.14.

    Alexandria. Q. L. Dowd                                     5.00
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      30.12
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                  9.02


  COLORADO, $18.27.

    Colorado Springs. Cong. Ch.                               18.00
    Idaho Springs. A. R. J.                                    0.27


  CALIFORNIA, $562.50.

    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                        562.50


  TENNESSEE, $163.50.

    Chattanooga. Cong. Ch.                                     1.75
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   161.75


  NORTH CAROLINA, $100.65.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch.                                  23.85
    Wilmington. Normal School                                 76.80


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $271.19.

    Charleston. Avery Inst.                                  269.10
    Charleston. Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._                      2.09


  GEORGIA, $574.18.

    Atlanta. Storrs School                                   205.85
    Atlanta. Atlanta U.                                      113.25
    Brunswick. Risley Sch., _for Mendi M._                     1.34
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                    60.90
    McIntosh. Richard Waring, $3; N. J. Norman and
      J. Ashmore, $2 each; J. O., L. D., P. W. and
      J. W. R., $1 each _for Dorchester Academy_              11.00
    Savannah. Beach Inst., $159.24; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $2.60; “A Friend,” $20                           181.84


  ALABAMA, $306.86.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          8.51
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    123.35
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $538.70.

    Forest. Alfred Strong, _for Tougaloo U._                   5.00
    Tougaloo. Pub. Sch. Fund                                 500.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., $31.45;--I. C. Barnes,
      $2.25, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                   33.70


  LOUISIANA, $214.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U., $164.50; Cong. Ch.,
      $50                                                    214.50


  CANADA, $5.50.

    Sherbrooke. Rev. A. Duff                                   5.50


  SCOTLAND, $200.

    Glasgow. Mrs. Ann McDowall, _for a Teacher_              200.00
                                                          ---------
    Total                                                 12,678.17
    Total from Oct. 1st to June 30th                     $117,276.72

                                              H. W. HUBBARD,
                                                     _Asst. Treas._

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Lee, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            100.00
    Jersey City, N. J. “A Friend”                             30.00
                                                            -------
    Total                                                   $130.00
    Previously acknowledged in May receipts               25,718.72
                                                           --------
    Total                                                $25,848.72


  FOR TILLOTSON NORMAL AND COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    East Windsor, Conn. Miss Semantha Wells                   25.00
    Hartford, Conn. Roland Mather                            100.00
    New Britain, Conn. J. A. Kelsey                            1.00
    New Haven, Conn. Mrs. T. D. Wheeler, $30;
      Atwater Treat., $10                                     40.00
    Princeville, Ill. MRS. CLIVE L. CUTLER, to
      const. herself L. M.                                    30.00
                                                           --------
    Total                                                    196.00
    Previously acknowledged in April receipts              2,201.17
                                                           --------
    Total                                                 $2,397.17

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Saint Albans, Vt. Mrs. J. Gregory Smith                   10.00
    Andover, Mass. Students of Phillips Academy                3.00
    Sherman, Conn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.19
    Jefferson, N. Y. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                   2.00
    Langsingville, N. Y. Mrs. M. T. Fletcher                   5.00
    Ludlowville, N. Y. Sydney S. Todd                          5.00
    Chicago, Ill. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of New Eng.
      Cong. Ch.                                               25.32
    Jacksonville, Ill. Rev. Eli Corwin                         5.00
    Woodworth, Wis. Cong. Ch.                                  7.00
    Dover, Iowa. Mrs. C. P. Atkinson                           5.00
                                                           --------
          Total                                               74.51
    Previously acknowledged in May receipts                  236.88
                                                           --------
        Total                                               $311.39

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Union Falls, N. Y. Francis E. Duncan                     $15.00
    Previously acknowledged in April receipts                 20.00
                                                           --------
          Total                                              $35.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

  E. PALACHE, Treasurer.

  _From March 20th to June 20th, 1879._

    1. From Auxiliary Missions:
      Petaluma (Miss M. C. Waterbury)                        $15.00
      Sacramento (Chinese)                                    30.00
      Santa Barbara:
      Chinese Collection                         $15.00
      Annual memberships (Gin Ah Foy, $2; Yee
        Ling Foung, $2; Gin Ah Toy, $2; Gin
        Ah Soo, $2; Gin Ah Sing, $2; Gin Ah
        Foo, $2)                                  12.00
                                                 ------       27.00
      Stockton:
        Mrs. M. C. Brown                           2.00
        Chinese                                    5.50
                                                 ------        7.50
                                                             ------
          Total                                               79.50
    2. From churches:
      Oakland (First Cong.)                                   12.00
      San Francisco:
        First Congregational                      30.00
        Third Congregational                       5.50
        Bethany Congregational                     7.50
                                                 ------       43.00
                                                             ------
          Total                                               55.00

    3. From individuals:
      Grass Valley, Mrs. H. Scott                              2.00
      Rio Vista. Mrs. A. J. Gardner                            1.00
      San Francisco:
        A. J. S., _for Barnes’ Mission House_      5.00
        Rev. John Kimball                         10.00
        Messrs. Balfour Guthrie & Co.            100.00
        S. Williamson, Esq., of Liverpool, Eng.   50.00
        Alexander Balfour, of Liverpool, Eng.     50.00
        Messrs. C. Adolphe Low & Co. (two
          donations)                              45.00
        Hon. F. F. Low                            25.00
                                                 ------      285.00
                                                             ------
          Total                                              288.00

    4. From Eastern Friends:
      Amherst, Mass., Mrs. Rhoda A. Lester (a
        thank-offering)                                      100.00
      Bradford, Mass., Miss E. M. Benson                      10.00
      Groveland, Mass., Mrs. E. Merrill                        5.00
      Norwich, Conn., Mrs. Sarah A. Huntington
        (_for Barnes’ Mission House_), to const.
        REV. L. T. CHAMBERLAIN a L. M.                        25.00
                                                             ------
           Total                                             140.00
                                                             ------
           Grand Total                                      $562.50

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_--In Va. 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 12;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 13; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 5.
_Africa_, 1. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 66.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.--_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 11. _Other
Schools_, 18. Total 37.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.--Among the Freedmen, 231;
among the Chinese, 17; among the Indians, 17; in Africa, 14. Total,
279. STUDENTS--In Theology, 88; LAW, 17; in College Course, 106;
in other studies, 7,018. Total, 7,229. Scholars, taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 100,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work in the South. This increase can only be reached by
_regular_ and _larger_ contributions from the churches--the feeble
as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES, for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa--a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below.

  NEW YORK     H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON       Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21, Congregational House.
  CHICAGO      Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars
in trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required--in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                       THE CHRISTIAN UNION.

                  HENRY WARD BEECHER,} Editors.
                  LYMAN ABBOTT,      }


“_I find that by reading the Christian Union carefully one can
keep well informed upon all that is worth knowing in current
events._”--GAIL HAMILTON.


                      CHOICE SUMMER READING.
                         A SPECIAL OFFER:
                   _THREE MONTHS FOR 50 CENTS._

  During the Summer the following attractions will be presented:

                       SUMMER OUT OF DOORS.
             A Series of Short Seasonable Sketches by

  CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER,
  ROSE TERRY COOKE,
  CHARLES L. NORTON,
  F. H. CONVERSE,
  JOHN BURROUGHS,
  AND OTHERS.


                   WHAT IS IT TO BE A CHRISTIAN?
                An answer to the great question by

  THE REV. PHILLIPS BROOKS,
  THE REV. JOHN HALL, D. D.


                 THE STREET LABORERS OF NEW YORK.
    In a Series of Interviews with themselves, phonographically
                            reported by
                         GEORGE ELLINGTON.

                           SHORT STORIES
                                BY

  CONSTANCE FENIMORE WOOLSON,
  ROSE HAWTHORNE LATHROP,
  MARY E. C. WYETH,
  LOUISE STOCKTON,
  SUSAN COOLIDGE,
  ELIOT McCORMICK,
  AND OTHERS.

                               POEMS
                                BY

  MARY AINGE DEVERE,
  EDGAR FAWCETT,
  MILLIE W. CARPENTER,
  ELAINE GOODALE,
  MRS. S. M. B. PIATT,
  JOSEPHINE POLLARD,
  JOEL BENTON,
  CHAS. F. RICHARDSON,
  M. E. BENNETT,
  HOWARD GLYNDON,
  SUSAN COOLIDGE,
  MRS. MAGGIE B. PEEKE,
  AND OTHERS.


           _TERMS: PER ANNUM, $3. TO CLERGYMEN, $2.50._
    On trial for Three Months to any new address, FIFTY CENTS.

       Address THE CHRISTIAN UNION, 27 Park Place, New York.

        Boston Office: Shumway & Co., 21 Bromfield Street.
              Chicago Office: Room 99 Ashland Block.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

             PUBLISH THE ONLY SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised and enlarged.
Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every want. For Samples
(loaned without charge) and Terms address the Publishers.

                          LYMAN ABBOTT’S
                  Commentary on the New Testament

Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the best
Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight volumes=
octavo.

                 AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


                     Gospel Temperance Hymnal.
                            EDITED BY
          Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev. E. S. LORENZ.

Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his meetings.

This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and Tunes
abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel Temperance
Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church Prayer Meetings.=


      Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.
                  DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.

                 A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,
                       New York and Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          GET THE BEST.
                           The “OXFORD”

                          [Illustration]

                         TEACHERS’ BIBLES
                     IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                   At prices to suit everybody.
          Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

                       THOS. NELSON & SONS,
                            42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          BIBLE POSTERS.

A large variety of systematically selected passages of Scripture,
printed separately, in large, clear type, suitable for posting on
fences, along country highways.

A Pastor writes: “I deem the undertaking a most important one, and
feel satisfied that I could preach the word of God in no better way
than to be always engaged in posting up these most striking and
vital portions of God’s word.”

Our Circular contains a list of the selected passages.

Send a postal for it, and for Specimen posters.

VEDDER & KEELER, WEST MILTON, Saratoga Co., N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    Brown Bros. & Co. BANKERS,

            59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
                 211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                           66 State Street, Boston.


Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money between
this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.

They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee
of repayment,

                 Circular Credits for Travellers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          DUDLEY’S PATENT
                             DIAGONAL
                           ROAD SCRAPER

                      THE BEST. THE CHEAPEST.

Weighs but 50 lbs., has Steel Cutter Plate, can be worked square or
at any desired angle, and is rapidly superseding all other Scrapers
where it is known.

[Illustration]

                        Read the following:

One says: “It will do more work than two of the common kind.”

Another: “It is worth more than all the old kind that can be made.”

“I would not take 25 dollars for mine, if I could not get another.”

“With a yoke of oxen and boy to drive, I can scrape and finish up
in five hours as much road as I can with any scraper known to me in
ten hours, beside doing it better and easier both for myself and
team.”--J. DAVIS, Hartford.

“For working roads it will soon supersede the old scoop. I consider
it one of the best simple inventions of the age.”--G. P. BELDEN,
Dover Plains.

“Leaves a road in better shape, and is easier for man and team,
than any scraper I ever saw.”--J. S. KINNEY, Washington.

                                                 Send for circular.

                          S. H. DUDLEY,
               Bantam Falls, Litchfield County, Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S
                             PURE OLD
                            PALM SOAP.

                          [Illustration]

                     For the Laundry,
                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR
                    General Household Purposes.
                          MANUFACTURED BY
                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,
               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._
                 Send for Circular and Price List.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                               PLANS
                                AND
                          SPECIFICATIONS,
                               WITH
                       Full Detail Drawings
                                FOR

                         CHURCHES,
                            SCHOOLS and
                                DWELLINGS.

                         B. J. SCHWEITZER,

                            Architect,

                2d Floor.      =76 JOHN ST., N. Y.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  The
  ESTEY
  ORGAN
  IS THE BEST!

  THE WORLD OVER.

  Manufactory BRATTLEBORO, VT.]

                          J. ESTEY & CO.

                         BRATTLEBORO’, VT.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.

The manufacture of these widely known instruments was begun in
1846, and American enterprise and skill have steadily developed
this business until now it is the largest Reed Organ manufactory
in the world. The unsolicited testimony of the most careful judges
places the =ESTEY ORGAN= at the head of all others of its class.
Send for the new illustrated catalogue.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
  SUI GENERIS]

                  Mason & Hamlin Cabinet Organs.

_Demonstrated best_ by HIGHEST HONORS AT ALL WORLD’S EXPOSITIONS
FOR TWELVE YEARS; viz: at PARIS, 1867; VIENNA, 1873; SANTIAGO,
1875; PHILADELPHIA, 1876; TWO HIGHEST MEDALS at PARIS 1878; and
GRAND SWEDISH GOLD MEDAL, 1878. Only American Organs ever awarded
highest honors at any. Sold for cash or installments. ILLUSTRATED
CATALOGUES with new styles and prices, free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN
CO., BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

  Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.
  Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.
  ☞ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          CHURCH CUSHIONS

                            MADE OF THE

                       PATENT ELASTIC FELT.

             For particulars, address H. D. OSTERMOOR,

            P. O. Box 4004.      36 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


OUR ANNUAL MEETING.

The Thirty-third Annual Meeting of the American Missionary
Association will be held in Chicago, Illinois, by invitation of
the Congregational churches of that city, commencing on Tuesday,
October 28th, at 3 P. M.

The local Committee of Arrangements, representing each
Congregational Church in the city, has already at a preliminary
meeting decided to hold the meetings in the First Congregational
Church (Rev. E. P. Goodwin, D. D., Pastor), which has been offered
with most cordial unanimity for the use of the Anniversary.

The sermon will be preached by the Rev. Richard S. Storrs, D.D., of
the Church of the Pilgrims, Brooklyn, N. Y.

Further announcements of arrangements and programme will be made
later.

       *       *       *       *       *


YESTERDAY’S WORK.

We point to the record of results of our work among the Freedmen
during the last fifteen years, as indicating a degree of progress
and an amount of fruitage rarely equaled in the same length of
time. We base our claims for generous gifts, now and in the years
to come, upon this showing, confident that this is the best
argument we can make. Is it too much to claim to have been faithful
over a few things, or to ask that we be trusted with what may be
needful for the many which are at hand?


TO-MORROW’S WANT.

Looking ahead, we see that the coming claims upon us must be
greater than those of the past. The signs of the times indicate
that the Lord’s work is to be done upon a larger scale in the near
future; the progress, made and making, in our schools, and the call
for enlargement in our church work, will make increasing demands
upon us, until the time shall come when they shall be more largely
self-supporting than it is possible for them to be now. We have
done much--we are doing more--we must expect to do a still greater
work. Give us the means, and plan large things for us in the days
to come.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

We invite special attention to this department, of which our low
rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable. Our
readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitutes them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are accustomed
to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES”
for these “LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior
printing, with =no extra charge for cuts=, are advantages readily
appreciated, and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
business announcements.

Gratified with the substantial success of this department, we
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                    J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:

Ditto marks replaced with the text they represent to facilitate text
alignment. Obvious punctuation errors and omissions corrected.

On page 231, “Afric’s” was changed to “Africa’s”. (on Africa’s
shores)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 33, NO. 08, AUGUST, 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.