Transcriber’s Note: A number of obvious printer’s errors (u for
n, inconsistent spelling of Senators’ and Representatives’ names,
punctuation, etc) have been amended. Other than that, the original text
remains unchanged.




                               ABRIDGMENT
                                 OF THE
                          DEBATES OF CONGRESS,
                           FROM 1789 TO 1856.

         FROM GALES AND SEATON’S ANNALS OF CONGRESS; FROM THEIR
               REGISTER OF DEBATES; AND FROM THE OFFICIAL
                   REPORTED DEBATES, BY JOHN C. RIVES.

                                   BY
                  THE AUTHOR OF THE THIRTY YEARS’ VIEW.

                                VOL. III.

                                NEW YORK
               D. APPLETON & COMPANY, 443 & 445 BROADWAY.
                                  1861

       Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
      in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court for the Southern
                          District of New York.




EIGHTH CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, OCTOBER 17, 1803.

PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,--THOMAS JEFFERSON.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE SENATE.

_New Hampshire._--Simeon Olcott, William Plumer.

_Vermont._--S. R. Bradley, Israel Smith.

_Massachusetts._--Jonathan Mason, Timothy Pickering.

_Rhode Island._--Christopher Ellery, Samuel I. Potter.

_Connecticut._--James Hillhouse, Uriah Tracy.

_New York._--De Witt Clinton, Theodorus Bailey.

_New Jersey._--Jonathan Dayton, John Condit.

_Pennsylvania._--George Logan, Samuel Maclay.

_Delaware._--William H. Wells, Samuel White.

_Maryland._--Robert Wright, Samuel Smith.

_Virginia._--Wilson C. Nicholas, John Taylor.

_North Carolina._--Jesse Franklin, David Stone.

_South Carolina._--Pierce Butler, Thomas Sumter.

_Georgia._--A. Baldwin, James Jackson.

_Tennessee._--William Cocke, Joseph Anderson.

_Kentucky._--John Breckenridge, John Browne.

_Ohio._--Thomas Worthington, John Smith.


MONDAY, October 17, 1803.

The first session of the eighth Congress, conformably to the Constitution
of the United States, commenced at the city of Washington, agreeably to
the Proclamation of the President of the United States for that purpose;
and the Senate assembled on this day.

PRESENT:

SIMEON OLCOTT and WILLIAM PLUMER, from New Hampshire;

TIMOTHY PICKERING, from Massachusetts;

JAMES HILLHOUSE and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut;

CHRISTOPHER ELLERY and SAMUEL I. POTTER, from Rhode Island;

STEPHEN R. BRADLEY and ISRAEL SMITH, from Vermont;

DE WITT CLINTON and THEODORUS BAILEY, from New York;

JONATHAN DAYTON and JOHN CONDIT, from New Jersey;

GEORGE LOGAN and SAMUEL MACLAY, from Pennsylvania;

WILLIAM HILL WELLS and SAMUEL WHITE, from Delaware;

ROBERT WRIGHT and SAMUEL SMITH, from Maryland;

JOHN TAYLOR and WILSON CAREY NICHOLAS, from Virginia;

JOHN BROWN and JOHN BRECKENRIDGE, from Kentucky;

JESSE FRANKLIN and DAVID STONE, from North Carolina;

JOSEPH ANDERSON and WILLIAM COCKE, from Tennessee;

ABRAHAM BALDWIN, from Georgia; and

THOMAS WORTHINGTON, from Ohio.

The Vice President being absent, the Senate proceeded to the election
of a President, _pro tem._, as the constitution provides, and the
ballots being collected and counted, the whole number was found to be
twenty-nine, of which fifteen make a majority. Mr. BROWN had 24, Mr.
BALDWIN 2, Mr. DAYTON 2, and Mr. PICKERING 1.

Consequently, the Honorable JOHN BROWN was elected President of the
Senate, _pro tempore_.

The credentials of the following Senators were severally read, to wit:

Of JOSEPH ANDERSON, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Tennessee; of THEODORUS BAILEY, appointed a Senator by the Legislature
of the State of New York; of JAMES HILLHOUSE, appointed a Senator by the
Legislature of the State of Connecticut; of SAMUEL MACLAY, appointed a
Senator by the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania; of SAMUEL I.
POTTER, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of Rhode
Island; of ISRAEL SMITH, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the
State of Vermont; of SAMUEL WHITE, appointed a Senator by the Legislature
of the State of Delaware; for the term of six years from and after the
third day of March last, respectively: also, of THOMAS WORTHINGTON,
appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of Ohio; of JOHN
CONDIT, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the State of New Jersey;
of JOHN TAYLOR, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the State of
Virginia, in place of S. T. Mason, deceased; of TIMOTHY PICKERING,
appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of Massachusetts, in
the place of Dwight Foster, resigned; and the oath required by law was,
by the PRESIDENT, administered to them respectively.

The oath was also administered to SAMUEL SMITH, appointed a Senator by
the Legislature of the State of Maryland, for the term of six years from
and after the third day of March last.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States
and acquaint him that a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and that, in
the absence of the VICE PRESIDENT, they have elected the Hon. JOHN BROWN
President of the Senate, _pro tempore_.

The Secretary was directed to give a similar notice to the House of
Representatives.

_Resolved_, That JAMES MATHERS, Sergeant-at-Arms and Doorkeeper to
the Senate, be, and he is hereby, authorized to employ one additional
assistant and two horses, for the purpose of performing such services as
are usually required by the Doorkeeper to the Senate; and that the sum of
twenty-eight dollars be allowed him weekly for that purpose during the
session, and for twenty days after.

_Resolved_, That each Senator be supplied during the present session with
three such newspapers, printed in any of the States, as he may choose,
provided that the same be furnished at the usual rate for the annual
charge of such papers.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of the House had assembled, and had elected the Hon. NATHANIEL
MACON their Speaker, and is ready to proceed to business.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. CLINTON and BRECKENRIDGE be a committee on
the part of the Senate, together with such committee as the House of
Representatives may appoint on their part, to wait on the President of
the United States, and notify him that a quorum of the two Houses is
assembled, and ready to receive any communications that he may be pleased
to make to them.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate, that
the House agree to the resolution of the Senate for the appointment of a
joint committee to wait on the President of the United States, and have
appointed a committee on their part.

On motion, _Resolved_, That two Chaplains, of different denominations,
be appointed to Congress for the present session, one by each House, who
shall interchange weekly.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary desire the concurrence of the House of
Representatives in this resolution.

The Senate proceeded to the choice of a Chaplain on their part, and
the ballots having been collected and counted, the whole number was
twenty-eight; of which fifteen make a majority. Mr. GANTT had 15 votes,
and Mr. M’CORMICK 13.

Consequently, the Rev. Dr. GANTT was elected.

Mr. CLINTON reported, from the joint committee appointed for the purpose,
that they had waited on the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, and that
he had acquainted them that he would make a communication to the two
Houses, by message, immediately.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    In calling you together, fellow-citizens, at an earlier
    day than was contemplated by the act of the last session
    of Congress, I have not been insensible to the personal
    inconveniences necessarily resulting from an unexpected change
    in your arrangements. But matters of great public concernment
    have rendered this call necessary, and the interest you feel in
    these will supersede, in your minds, all private considerations.

    Congress witnessed, at their late session, the extraordinary
    agitation produced in the public mind by the suspension of our
    right of deposit at the port of New Orleans, no assignment of
    another place having been made according to treaty. They were
    sensible that the continuance of that privation would be more
    injurious to our nation than any consequences which could flow
    from any mode of redress; but, reposing just confidence in the
    good faith of the Government whose officer had committed the
    wrong, friendly and reasonable representations were resorted
    to, and the right of deposit was restored.

    Previous, however, to this period, we had not been unaware of
    the danger to which our peace would be perpetually exposed
    whilst so important a key to the commerce of the western
    country remained under a foreign power. Difficulties too
    were presenting themselves as to the navigation of other
    streams, which, arising within our territories, pass through
    those adjacent. Propositions had therefore been authorized
    for obtaining, on fair conditions, the sovereignty of New
    Orleans, and of other possessions in that quarter, interesting
    to our quiet, to such extent as was deemed practicable; and
    the provisional appropriation of two millions of dollars,
    to be applied and accounted for by the President of the
    United States, intended as part of the price, was considered
    as conveying the sanction of Congress to the acquisition
    proposed.[1] The enlightened Government of France saw, with
    just discernment, the importance to both nations of such
    liberal arrangements as might best and permanently promote the
    peace, interests, and friendship of both; and the property and
    sovereignty of all Louisiana, which had been restored to them,
    has, on certain conditions, been transferred to the United
    States, by instruments bearing date the 30th of April last.
    When these shall have received the constitutional sanction
    of the Senate, they will, without delay, be communicated to
    the Representatives for the exercise of their functions, as
    to those conditions which are within the powers vested by the
    constitution in Congress. Whilst the property and sovereignty
    of the Mississippi and its waters secure an independent outlet
    for the produce of the Western States, and an uncontrolled
    navigation through their whole course, free from collision
    with other Powers, and the dangers to our peace from that
    source, the fertility of the country, its climate and extent,
    promise, in due season, important aids to our Treasury, an
    ample provision for our posterity, and a wide spread for the
    blessings of freedom and equal laws.

    With the wisdom of Congress it will rest to take those ulterior
    measures which may be necessary for the immediate occupation
    and temporary government of the country; for its incorporation
    into our Union; for rendering the change of government a
    blessing to our newly adopted brethren; for securing to them
    the rights of conscience and property; for confirming to
    the Indian inhabitants their occupancy and self-government,
    establishing friendly and commercial relations with them,
    and for ascertaining the geography of the country acquired.
    Such materials for your information relative to its affairs
    in general, as the short space of time has permitted me to
    collect, will be laid before you when the subject shall be in a
    state for your consideration.

    The small vessels authorized by Congress, with a view to the
    Mediterranean service, have been sent into that sea, and will
    be able more effectually to confine the Tripoline cruisers
    within their harbors, and supersede the necessity of convoy to
    our commerce in that quarter. They will sensibly lessen the
    expenses of that service the ensuing year.

    A further knowledge of the ground in the north-eastern and
    north-western angles of the United States has evinced that
    the boundaries established by the treaty of Paris, between
    the British territories and ours in those parts, were too
    imperfectly described to be susceptible of execution. It has
    therefore been thought worthy of attention, for preserving
    and cherishing the harmony and useful intercourse subsisting
    between the two nations, to remove, by timely arrangements,
    what unfavorable incidents might otherwise render a ground
    of future misunderstanding. A convention has therefore been
    entered into, which provides for a practicable demarcation of
    those limits, to the satisfaction of both parties.

    An account of the receipts and expenditures of the year ending
    30th September last, with the estimates for the service of
    the ensuing year, will be laid before you by the Secretary
    of the Treasury, so soon as the receipts of the last quarter
    shall be returned from the more distant States. It is already
    ascertained that the amount paid into the Treasury for that
    year has been between eleven and twelve millions of dollars;
    and that the revenue accrued, during the same term, exceeds
    the sum counted on as sufficient for our current expenses, and
    to extinguish the public debt within the period heretofore
    proposed.

    We have seen with sincere concern the flames of war lighted
    up again in Europe, and nations, with which we have the most
    friendly and useful relations, engaged in mutual destruction.
    While we regret the miseries in which we see others involved,
    let us bow with gratitude to that kind Providence, which,
    inspiring with wisdom and moderation our late Legislative
    Councils, while placed under the urgency of the greatest
    wrongs, guarded us from hastily entering into the sanguinary
    contest, and left us only to look on and to pity its ravages.
    These will be the heaviest on those immediately engaged. Yet
    the nations pursuing peace will not be exempt from all evil.
    In the course of this conflict let it be our endeavor, as it
    is our interest and desire, to cultivate the friendship of the
    belligerent nations by every act of justice, and of innocent
    kindness; to receive their armed vessels with hospitality from
    the distresses of the sea, but to administer the means of
    annoyance to none; to establish in our harbors such a police
    as may maintain law and order; to restrain our citizens from
    embarking individually in a war in which their country takes no
    part; to punish severely those persons, citizen or alien, who
    shall usurp the cover of our flag for vessels not entitled to
    it, infecting thereby with suspicion those of real Americans,
    and committing us into controversies for the redress of wrongs
    not our own; to exact from every nation the observance, towards
    our vessels and citizens, of those principles and practices
    which all civilized people acknowledge; to merit the character
    of a just nation, and maintain that of an independent one,
    preferring every consequence to insult and habitual wrong.
    Separated by a wide ocean from the nations of Europe, and from
    the political interests which entangle them together, with
    productions and wants which render our commerce and friendship
    useful to them, and theirs to us, it cannot be the interest of
    any to assail us, nor ours to disturb them. We should be most
    unwise, indeed, were we to cast away the singular blessings of
    the position in which nature has placed us, the opportunity she
    has endowed us with, of pursuing, at a distance from foreign
    contentions, the paths of industry, peace, and happiness; of
    cultivating general friendship, and of bringing collisions of
    interest to the umpire of reason rather than of force. How
    desirable, then, must it be, in a Government like ours, to see
    its citizens adopt, individually, the views, the interests,
    and the conduct, which their country should pursue, divesting
    themselves of those passions and partialities which tend to
    lessen useful friendships, and to embarrass and embroil us, in
    the calamitous scenes of Europe! Confident, fellow-citizens,
    that you will duly estimate the importance of neutral
    dispositions towards the observance of neutral conduct, that
    you will be sensible how much it is our duty to look on the
    bloody arena spread before us, with commiseration, indeed, but
    with no other wish than to see it closed, I am persuaded you
    will cordially cherish these dispositions in all discussions
    among yourselves, and in all communications with your
    constituents; and I anticipate, with satisfaction, the measures
    of wisdom which the great interests now committed to you will
    give _you_ an opportunity of providing, and _myself_, that of
    approving and of carrying into execution with the fidelity I
    owe to my country.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    OCT. 17, 1803.

The Message was read, and five hundred copies thereof ordered to be
printed for the use of the Senate.


TUESDAY, October 18.

PIERCE BUTLER, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
South Carolina, for the unexpired time for which the late John Ewing
Colhoun was elected to serve, produced his credentials, which were read,
and the oath required by law was administered to him by the President.

JAMES JACKSON, from the State of Georgia, attended.

The credentials of SAMUEL SMITH, a Senator from the State of Maryland,
were read.


FRIDAY, October 21.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Massachusetts, for six years, commencing the 4th day of March last,
produced his credentials, which were read; and the oath required by law
was administered to him by the President.

Mr. CLINTON, after a few prefatory observations on the necessity of
designating the persons, severally, whom the people should wish to
hold the offices of President and Vice-President of the United States,
and stating that the State which he represented, as well as others in
the Union, had, through the medium of their Legislatures, strongly
recommended the adoption of the principle, laid on the table the
following motion, which he read; and it was made the order of the day for
the next day, and printed.

    [The amendment proposed by Mr. Clinton grew out of the attempt
    in the House of Representatives to elect Mr. Burr President,
    and to prevent such attempt in future, in the event of an
    equality of votes between the two highest on the list, it
    required the electors to discriminate between the presidential
    and vice-presidential office, and name the persons voted for
    for each.]

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE gave notice, that he should, to-morrow, ask leave to
bring in a bill to enable the President of the United States to take
possession of the territories ceded by France to the United States, by
the treaty concluded at Paris on the 30th of April last, and for other
purposes.


SATURDAY, October 22.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    In my communication to you of the 17th instant, I informed you
    that conventions had been entered into with the Government
    of France for the cession of Louisiana to the United States.
    These, with the advice and consent of the Senate, having now
    been ratified, and my ratification exchanged for that of the
    First Consul of France in due form, they are communicated to
    you for consideration in your Legislative capacity. You will
    observe that some important conditions cannot be carried into
    execution, but with the aid of the Legislature; and that time
    presses a decision on them without delay.

    The ulterior provisions, also, suggested in the same
    communication, for the occupation and government of the
    country, will call for early attention. Such information
    relative to its government as time and distance have permitted
    me to obtain, will be ready to be laid before you in a few
    days. But, as permanent arrangements for this object may
    require time and deliberation, it is for your consideration
    whether you will not forthwith make such temporary provisions
    for the preservation, in the meanwhile, of order and
    tranquillity in the country, as the case may require.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    OCT. 21, 1803.

The Message was read, and, together with the papers therein referred to,
ordered to lie for consideration.

Agreeably to notice given yesterday, Mr. BRECKENRIDGE had leave to bring
in a bill to enable the President of the United States to take possession
of the territories ceded by France to the United States, by the treaty
concluded at Paris on the 30th of April last, and for other purposes;
which bill was read, and ordered to the second reading. The bill is in
the following words:

    _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
    the United States of America, in Congress assembled_, That the
    President of the United States be, and he is hereby, authorized
    to take possession of and occupy the territories ceded by
    France to the United States by the treaty concluded at Paris,
    on the 30th day of April last, between the two nations; and
    that he may for that purpose, and in order to maintain in the
    said territories the authority of the United States, employ
    any part of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the
    force authorized by an act passed the 3d day of March last,
    entitled “An act directing a detachment from the militia of
    the United States, and for erecting certain arsenals,” which
    he may deem necessary: And so much of the sum appropriated by
    the said act as may be necessary is hereby appropriated for the
    purpose of carrying this act into effect; to be applied under
    the direction of the President of the United States.

    SEC 2.. _And be it further enacted_, That until Congress shall
    have made provision for the temporary government of the said
    territories, all the military, civil, and judicial powers
    exercised by the officers of the existing government of the
    same, shall be vested in such person or persons, and shall be
    exercised by and in such manner, as the President of the United
    States shall direct.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

The order of the day being called for on Mr. CLINTON’s motion of
yesterday,

Mr. CLINTON said that, as the resolution was but now printed, and laid
before the Senate, it might be proper to refer it to Monday for further
consideration, but if it was requisite, by the rules of the Senate, that
the resolution must have three separate readings, and on three different
days, he should call for a second reading on Saturday, that it might be
in readiness for a third reading on Monday, and be ultimately acted upon
that day, as the Legislatures of Tennessee and Vermont were in session,
and probably must be at the trouble of an extra session to act upon the
amendment, unless it could be sent to them before they separated.

Mr. BROWN, of Kentucky, the President _pro tem._ of the Senate, said
the written rule of the Senate determined that bills should have three
readings, and on different days, without unanimous consent to the
contrary; but the resolutions were not included; and that he should be
glad of the opinion of the Senate upon the subject.

Mr. TRACY of Connecticut said, that there was no written rule which would
reach the case, but the Vice President, upon the ground that they came
within the reason of the rule, had determined that all resolutions which
required a joint vote of both Houses to give them efficacy, should take
the same course as bills, and have three readings, and on different days,
before a final vote; and as this resolution went to the alteration of
the supreme law of the land, as the constitution was declared to be, he
thought it highly requisite to give the deliberations all the solemnity
which was required in passing bills.

Mr. BRADLEY, of Vermont, then offered two amendments to the resolution;
one went to the form only, and the other makes a majority of votes of the
electors requisite for the choice of Vice President, and in case such
majority is not obtained, places the choice of Vice President in the
Senate.

Mr. BUTLER, of South Carolina, proposed an amendment by adding a new
clause, in substance: “That at the next election of President, no person
should be eligible who had served more than eight years, and, in all
future elections, no person should be eligible more than four years in
any period of eight years.”

Mr. DAYTON, of New Jersey, moved to refer the resolution, with all the
amendments, to a select committee; he said that it was a subject far too
important to be carried in this way. There has been no time to consider
it. Something more was due in this instance, than, as it were, offering
it one moment, and deciding upon it the next.

Mr. HILLHOUSE, of Connecticut, supported the motion for referring the
question to a select committee. He was opposed to entering now upon the
business. Why should this subject be hurried? Why not have taken it up
last session? We might in that case have had time to consider it. He had
not often known a resolution, of the nature of that before the House,
disposed of otherwise, in the first instance, than being referred to a
committee. He never knew it refused. In a great and free empire, like the
United States, this question is of the highest importance--no less than
the choice of the First Magistrate. It is laid upon the table to-day,
and we are to determine upon it to-morrow. He hoped not, and as he never
knew it refused before, he hoped that it would not be adopted now. He
wished it to be referred to a select committee; that it should there be
examined, line by line, letter by letter. In the present mode of doing
business, it is impossible to act with accuracy. He again trusted and
hoped that it would be referred to a select committee.

Mr. JACKSON, of Georgia, wished the business to be immediately proceeded
upon. He was an admirer of Mr. Jefferson; he was happy, and he trusted
all were happy, while he was President. But, continued Mr. J., we know
not who may follow him; we may have a Buonaparte, or one who will
be equally obnoxious to the people. He hoped the motions would be
incorporated and immediately come before the House.

Mr. WRIGHT, of Maryland, spoke for some time against the resolution going
to a committee. He was against the amendment proposed by Mr. BUTLER.
A committee might report when they pleased. He therefore thought it
necessary to proceed with the question immediately.

Mr. SMITH, of Maryland, wished to have some principles fixed. If the
motion and amendments were to go to a committee, he would not tack them
together, for by this mode they might both be lost. It has been said that
the subject might have been entered into last session. There was then a
multiplicity of business of importance before the House, yet this subject
might have been entered into. As it stands, this is the proper place to
make objections. The mover of the resolution does not say that it shall
be determined on Monday; he means that it shall then be before the whole
House.

After some desultory observations, in which one member observed that
he thought it disorderly, the question on Mr. BUTLER’s amendment was
put--ayes 16, nays 15.

A committee was then chosen for the purpose, namely:

Mr. BUTLER, Mr. BRADLEY, Mr. CLINTON, Mr. NICHOLAS, and Mr. SMITH.


MONDAY, October 24.

_Louisiana Cession._

The bill to enable the President of the United States to take possession
of the territories ceded by France to the United States, by the treaty
concluded at Paris on the 30th of April last, and for other purposes, was
read the second time and referred to Messrs. BRECKENRIDGE, DAYTON, and
BALDWIN, to consider and report thereon.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

Mr. BUTLER, from the committee, to whom was referred, on the 22d inst.,
the motion for an amendment to the Constitution of the United States,
made report, which was read.

Mr. DAYTON moved to strike out all which respected the appointment of a
Vice President.

He said the great inducements of the framers of the constitution to admit
the office of Vice President was, that, by the mode of choice, the best
and most respectable man should be designated; and that the electors of
each State should vote for one person at least, living in a different
State from themselves; and if the substance of the amendment was adopted,
he thought the office had better be abolished. Jealousies were natural
between President and Vice President; no heir apparent ever loved the
person on the throne. With this resolution for an amendment to the
constitution we were left with all the inconveniencies, without a single
advantage from the office of Vice President.

Mr. CLINTON.--The obvious intention of the amendment proposed by
the gentleman from New Jersey, is to put off or get rid of the main
question. It would more comport with the candor of the gentleman to
meet the question fairly. Can the gentleman suppose that the electors
will not vote for a man of respectability for Vice President? True, the
qualifications are distinct, and ought not to be confounded; this will
stave off the question till the Legislatures of the States of Tennessee
and Vermont are out of session, and the object must be very obvious.

Mr. DAYTON.--The custom of the gentleman from New York has been of late
to arraign motives instead of meeting arguments; on Saturday he accused
me of wishing to procrastinate, and now the same is repeated.

The reasons of erecting the office are frustrated by the amendment to the
constitution now proposed; it will be preferable, therefore, to abolish
the office.

Mr. CLINTON.--The charge of the gentleman from New Jersey is totally
unfounded that I arraign motives, and do not meet arguments. On Saturday
the gentleman accused me of precipitation; I am not in the habit of
arraigning motives, as this Senate can witness, and the charge is totally
untrue.

Mr. NICHOLAS.--To secure the United States from the dangers which
existed during the last choice of President, the present resolution was
introduced. It was impossible to act upon, or pass the amendment offered
by the member from New Jersey, with a full view of all its bearings at
this time. It ought not to stand in the way of the resolution reported by
the committee, for two-thirds or three-quarters of the State Legislatures
would be in session in two or three months; the Senate had, therefore,
better not admit the amendment, even if convinced that it was correct,
because it might jeopardize the main amendment of discriminating.

Mr. BUTLER moved a postponement until Wednesday, because the amendment
was important, and he had not had sufficient time to make up his mind.

Mr. WORTHINGTON said the same.

This motion was seconded.

The question for postponement was taken, and lost--ayes 15, noes 16.

The amendment of Mr. DAYTON was now before the Senate.

A motion for adjournment was now made and carried--ayes 16, noes 15.


TUESDAY, October 25.

JOHN SMITH, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of Ohio,
attended and produced his credentials, which were read, and the oath
required by law was administered to him by the President.

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE, from the committee to whom was referred, on the 24th
instant, the bill to enable the President of the United States to take
possession of the territories ceded by France to the United States, by
the treaty concluded at Paris on the 30th of April last, and for other
purposes, reported it without amendment.

_Ordered_, That this bill pass to a third reading.


WEDNESDAY, October 26.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The bill to enable the President of the United States to take possession
of the territories ceded by France to the United States, by the treaty
concluded at Paris on the 30th of April last, and for other purposes, was
read the third time. And, on the question, Shall this bill pass? it was
determined in the affirmative--yeas 26, nays 6, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Brown, Butler, Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Ellery,
    Franklin, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Potter, I. Smith,
    J. Smith, S. Smith, Stone, Taylor, Wells, White, Worthington,
    and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Hillhouse, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, and
    Tracy.[2]


SATURDAY, October 29.

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE, from the committee of conference on the amendments of
the House of Representatives to the bill, entitled “An act to enable
the President of the United States to take possession of the territories
ceded by France to the United States, by the treaty concluded at Paris
on the 30th of April last, and for the temporary government thereof,”
reported, that the Senate recede from their disagreement to the
amendments, and agree thereto, with amendments; and a division of the
report was called for.

And, on the question to adopt the report, so far as that the Senate
recede from their disagreement to the amendments of the House of
Representatives, it passed in the affirmative.

And, on the question to adopt the remaining division of the report, it
passed in the negative.

So it was _Resolved_, That the Senate recede from their disagreement to
the amendments of the House of Representatives to the said bill, and
agree thereto.[3]


MONDAY, October 31.

On motion, it was,

_Resolved, unanimously_, That the members of the Senate, from a sincere
desire of showing every mark of respect due to the memory of the Hon.
STEVENS THOMPSON MASON, deceased, late a member thereof, will go into
mourning for him one month, by the usual mode of wearing a crape around
the left arm.[4]


WEDNESDAY, November 2.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill, entitled “An act
authorizing the creation of a stock to the amount of eleven millions two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, for the purpose of carrying into
effect the convention of the 30th of April, 1803, between the United
States of America and the French Republic, and making provision for the
payment of the same;” and having amended the bill--

On the question, Shall the bill pass?

Mr. WHITE rose and made the following remarks:

Mr. President, by the provisions of the bill before us, and which are
thus far in conformity with the words of the treaty, we have until
three months after the exchange of ratifications and the delivery of
possession to pay this money in. Where, then, is the necessity for such
haste on this subject? It seems to me to be anticipating our business
unnecessarily, and perhaps unwisely; it is showing on our part a degree
of anxiety that may be taken advantage of and operate to our injury,
and that may serve to retard the accomplishment of the very object
that gentlemen seem to have so much at heart. It is not at present
altogether certain that we shall ever have occasion to use this stock,
and it will be time enough to provide it when the occasion arises, when
we see ourselves in the undisturbed possession of this mighty boon, or
wherefore are we allowed these three months’ credit after the delivery
of possession? The ratifications have been already exchanged; the French
officer who is to make the cession is said to be at New Orleans, and
previous to the adjournment of Congress we shall know with certainty
whether the First Consul will or can carry this treaty faithfully into
operation. We have already passed a bill authorizing the President to
take possession, for which I voted, and it will be time enough to create
this stock and to make the other necessary arrangements when we find
ourselves in possession of the territory, or when we ascertain with
certainty that it will be given to us.

But, Mr. President, it is now a well-known fact, that Spain considers
herself injured by this treaty, and if it should be in her power to
prevent it, will not agree to the cession of New Orleans and Louisiana
to the United States. She considers herself absolved from her contract
with France, in consequence of the latter having neglected to comply with
certain stipulations in the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, to be performed on
her part, and of having violated her engagement never to transfer this
country into other hands. Gentlemen may say this money is to be paid
upon the responsibility of the President of the United States, and not
until after the delivery of possession to us of the territory; but why
cast from ourselves all the responsibility upon this subject, and impose
the whole weight upon the President, which may hereafter prove dangerous
and embarrassing to him? Why make the President the sole and absolute
judge of what shall be a faithful delivery of possession under the
treaty? What he may think a delivery of possession sufficient to justify
the payment of this money, we might not; and I have no hesitation in
saying that if, in acquiring this territory under the treaty, we have to
fire a single musket, to charge a bayonet, or to lose a drop of blood,
it will not be such a cession on the part of France as should justify to
the people of this country the payment of any, and much less so enormous
a sum of money. What would the case be, sir? It would be buying of France
authority to make war upon Spain; it would be giving the First Consul
fifteen millions of dollars to stand aloof until we can settle our
differences with His Catholic Majesty. Would honorable gentlemen submit
to the degradation of purchasing even his neutrality at so inconvenient
a price? We are told that there is in the hands of the French Prefect
at New Orleans a royal order of His Catholic Majesty, founded upon the
Treaty of St. Ildefonso, for the delivery of possession of this territory
to France; but which has never been done--the precedent conditions not
having been performed on the part of France. This royal order, it is
probable, will be handed over to our Commissioner, or to whoever may be
sent down to receive possession. We may then be told that we have the
right of France, as she acquired it from Spain, which is all she is bound
by her treaty to transfer to us; we may be shown the Spaniards, who yet
claim to be the rightful owners of the country, and be told that we have
the permission of the First Consul to subdue or drive them out, and,
according to the words of the treaty, to take possession. Of our capacity
to do so I have no doubt; but this we could have done, sir, six months
ago, and with one-sixth of fifteen millions of dollars, when they had
wantonly violated the sacred obligations of a treaty, had insulted our
Government, and prostrated all the commerce of our Western country. Then
we had, indeed, a just cause for chastising them; the laws of nations
and of honor authorized it, and all the world would have applauded our
conduct. And it is well known that if France had been so disposed she
could not have brought a single man or ship to their relief; before the
news could have reached Europe, she was blockaded in her own ports by
the British fleet. But that time was permitted to go by unimproved, and
instead of regretting the past, let us provide for the future.

Admitting then, Mr. President, that His Catholic Majesty is hostile to
the cession of this territory to the United States, and no honorable
gentleman will deny it, what reasons have we to suppose that the
French Prefect, provided the Spaniards should interfere, can give to
us peaceable possession of the country? He is acknowledged there in no
public character, is clothed with no authority, nor has he a single
soldier to enforce his orders. I speak now, sir, from mere probabilities.
I wish not to be understood as predicting that the French will not cede
to us the actual and quiet possession of the territory. I hope to God
they may, for possession of it we must have--I mean of New Orleans, and
of such other positions on the Mississippi as may be necessary to secure
to us for ever the complete and uninterrupted navigation of that river.
This I have ever been in favor of; I think it essential to the peace of
the United States, and to the prosperity of our Western country. But
as to Louisiana, this new, immense, unbounded world, if it should ever
be incorporated into this Union, which I have no idea can be done but
by altering the constitution, I believe it will be the greatest curse
that could at present befall us; it may be productive of innumerable
evils, and especially of one that I fear even to look upon. Gentlemen on
all sides, with very few exceptions, agree that the settlement of this
country will be highly injurious and dangerous to the United States; but
as to what has been suggested of removing the Creeks and other nations of
Indians from the eastern to the western banks of the Mississippi, and of
making the fertile regions of Louisiana a howling wilderness, never to be
trodden by the foot of civilized man, it is impracticable. The gentleman
from Tennessee (Mr. COCKE) has shown his usual candor on this subject,
and I believe with him, to use his strong language, that you had as
well pretend to inhibit the fish from swimming in the sea as to prevent
the population of that country after its sovereignty shall become ours.
To every man acquainted with the adventurous, roving, and enterprising
temper of our people, and with the manner in which our Western country
has been settled, such an idea must be chimerical. The inducements will
be so strong that it will be impossible to restrain our citizens from
crossing the river. Louisiana must and will become settled, if we hold
it, and with the very population that would otherwise occupy part of
our present territory. Thus our citizens will be removed to the immense
distance of two or three thousand miles from the capital of the Union,
where they will scarcely ever feel the rays of the General Government;
their affections will become alienated; they will gradually begin to view
us as strangers; they will form other commercial connections, and our
interests will become distinct.

These, with other causes that human wisdom may not now foresee, will in
time effect a separation, and I fear our bounds will be fixed nearer to
our houses than the waters of the Mississippi. We have already territory
enough, and when I contemplate the evils that may arise to these States,
from this intended incorporation of Louisiana into the Union, I would
rather see it given to France, to Spain, or to any other nation of the
earth, upon the mere condition that no citizen of the United States
should ever settle within its limits, than to see the territory sold
for a hundred millions of dollars, and we retain the sovereignty. But
however dangerous the possession of Louisiana might prove to us, I do
not presume to say that the retention of it would not have been very
convenient to France, and we know that at the time of the mission of
Mr. Monroe, our Administration had never thought of the purchase of
Louisiana, and that nothing short of the fullest conviction on the part
of the First Consul that he was on the very eve of a war with England;
that this being the most defenceless point of his possessions, if such
they could be called, was the one at which the British would first
strike, and that it must inevitably fall into their hands, could ever
have induced his pride and ambition to make the sale. He judged wisely,
that he had better sell it for as much as he could get than lose it
entirely. And I do say that under existing circumstances, even supposing
that this extent of territory was a desirable acquisition, fifteen
millions of dollars was a most enormous sum to give. Our Commissioners
were negotiating in Paris--they must have known the relative situation
of France and England--they must have known at the moment that a war
was unavoidable between the two countries, and they knew the pecuniary
necessities of France and the naval power of Great Britain. These
imperious circumstances should have been turned to our advantage, and if
we were to purchase, should have lessened the consideration. Viewing, Mr.
President, this subject in any point of light--either as it regards the
territory purchased, the high consideration to be given, the contract
itself, or any of the circumstances attending it, I see no necessity
for precipitating the passage of this bill; and if this motion for
postponement should fail, and the question on the final passage of the
bill be taken now, I shall certainly vote against it.

The further consideration of the bill was postponed until to-morrow.


THURSDAY, November 3.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The bill, entitled “An act authorizing the creation of a stock to the
amount of eleven millions two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, for
the purpose of carrying into effect the Convention of the 30th of April,
1803, between the United States of America and the French Republic,
and making provision for the payment of the same,” was read the third
time; and, having been amended, on the question, Shall this bill pass as
amended?

Mr. WELLS said: Mr. President, having always held to the opinion that,
when a treaty was duly made under the constituted authorities of the
United States, Congress was bound to pass the laws necessary to carry it
into effect; and as the vote which I am about to give may not at first
seem to conform itself to this opinion, I feel an obligation imposed upon
me to state, in as concise a manner as I can, the reasons why I withhold
my assent from the passage of this bill.

There are two acts necessary to be performed to carry the present
treaty into effect--one by the French Government, the other by our own.
They are to deliver us a fair and effectual possession of the ceded
territory; and then, and not till then, are we to pay the purchase
money. We have already authorized the President to receive possession.
This co-operation on our part was requisite to enable the French to
comply with the stipulation they had made; they could not deliver unless
somebody was appointed to receive. In this view of the subject, the
question which presents itself to my mind is, who shall judge whether the
French Government does, or does not, faithfully comply with the previous
condition? The bill on your table gives to the President this power. I am
for our retaining and exercising it ourselves. I may be asked, why not
delegate this power to the President? Sir, I answer by inquiring why we
should delegate it? To us it properly belongs; and, unless some advantage
will be derived to the United States, it shall not be transferred with
my consent. Congress will be in session at the time that the delivery
of the ceded territory takes place; and if we should then be satisfied
that the French have executed with fidelity that part of the treaty
which is incumbent upon them first to perform, I pledge myself to vote
for the payment of the purchase money. This appears to me, arguing upon
general principles, to be the course which ought to be pursued, even
supposing there were attending this case no particular difficulties.
But in this special case are there not among the archives of the Senate
sufficient documents, and which have been withheld from the House of
Representatives, to justify an apprehension that the French Government
was not invested with the capacity to convey this property to us, and
that we shall not receive that kind of possession which is stipulated for
by the treaty? I am not permitted, by the order of this body, to make
any other than this general reference to those documents. Suffice it to
say that they have strongly impressed me with an opinion that, even if
possession is rendered to us, the territory will come into our hands
without any title to justify our holding it.

Mr. JACKSON.--Mr. President: The honorable gentleman (Mr. WELLS) has
said that the French have no title, and, having no title herself, we can
derive none from her. Is not, I ask, the King of Spain’s proclamation,
declaring the cession of Louisiana to France, and his orders to his
Governor and officers to deliver it to France, a title? Do nations
give any other? I believe the honorable gentleman can find no solitary
instance of feofment or conveyance between States. The treaty of St.
Ildefonso was the groundwork of the cession, and whatever might have been
the terms to be performed by France, the King of Spain’s proclamation
and orders have declared to all the world that they were complied with.
The honorable gentleman, however, insists that there is no consideration
expressed in the treaty, and therefore it must be void; if the honorable
gentleman will but look attentively at the ninth article, I am persuaded
he will perceive one: the conventions are made part of the treaty; they
are declared to have execution in the same manner, as if they had been
inserted in the treaty; they are to be ratified in the same form, and
at the same time, so that the one shall not be distinct from the other.
What inference can possibly be drawn, but that the payments to be made by
them were full consideration for Louisiana? But the honorable gentleman
lays stress on that part of the treaty which declares that “the First
Consul of the French Republic, desiring to give to the United States a
strong proof of his friendship, doth hereby cede to the United States
the territory,” &c.; inferring from thence that our title rests on the
friendship of Buonaparte alone. Sir, let my opinion of the present
Government of France be what it may, and I confess it is not very
favorable, Buonaparte, by the consent of the nation, is placed at its
head; he is the organ through which the will of the nation is expressed,
and is and must be respected as such by all other Powers. No nation has
a right to interfere with the rule or police of another. It is enough
that the nation wills it, and Buonaparte’s act is the act of the whole
nation, which cannot recall it, even if Buonaparte should cease to govern
and another form of government be adopted. Last session we were impressed
with the necessity of taking immediate possession of the island of New
Orleans in the face of two nations, and now we entertain doubts if we can
combat the weakest of those Powers; and we are further told we are going
to sacrifice the immense sum of fifteen millions of dollars, and have to
go to war with Spain for the country afterwards; when, last session, war
was to take place at all events, and no costs were equal to the object.
Gentlemen seem to be displeased, because we have procured it peaceably,
and at probably ten times less expense than it would have cost us had we
taken forcible possession of New Orleans alone, which, I am persuaded,
would have involved us in a war which would have saddled us with a debt
of from one to two hundred millions, and perhaps have lost New Orleans,
and the right of deposit, after all. I again repeat, sir, that I do not
believe that Spain will venture war with the United States. I believe
she dare not; if she does, she will pay the costs. The Floridas will be
immediately ours; they will almost take themselves. The inhabitants pant
for the blessings of your equal and wise Government; they ardently long
to become a part of the United States. An officer, duly authorized, and
armed with the bare proclamation of the President, would go near to take
them; the inhabitants by hundreds would flock to his standard, the very
Spanish force itself would assist in their reduction; it is composed
principally of the Irish brigade and Creoles--the former disaffected, and
the latter the dregs of mankind. With two or three squadrons of dragoons,
and the same number of companies of infantry, not a doubt ought to exist
of the total conquest of East Florida by an officer of tolerable talents.
Exclusive, however, of the loss of the Floridas, to use the language of
a late member of Congress, the road to Mexico is now open to us, which,
if Spain acts in an amicable way, I wish may, and hope will, be shut, as
respects the United States, for ever. For these reasons, I think, sir,
Spain will avoid a war, in which she has nothing to gain and every thing
to lose.

Mr. President, the honorable gentleman appears to be extremely
apprehensive of vesting the powers delegated by the bill, now on its
passage, in the President, and wishes to retain it in the Legislature.
Is this a Legislative or an Executive business? Assuredly, in my mind,
of the latter nature. The President gave instructions for, and, with
our consent, ratified the treaty. We have given him the power to take
possession, which his officers are at this moment doing; and surely,
as the ostensible party, the representative of the sovereignty to whom
France will alone look, he ought to possess the power of fulfilling
our part of the contract. Gentlemen, indeed, had doubted, on a former
occasion, the propriety of giving the President the power of taking
possession and organizing a temporary government, which every inferior
officer, in case of conquest or cession, from the general to the
subaltern, if commanding, has a right to do; but I little expected these
doubts after we had gone so far. For my part, sir, I have none of those
fears. I believe the President will be as cautious as ourselves, and the
bill is as carefully worded as possible; for the money is not to be paid
until after Louisiana shall be placed in our possession.

Mr. WRIGHT.--Mr. President, I presumed from the observations of the
honorable gentleman from Delaware, (Mr. WELLS,) that he had not minutely
attended to the provisions of this bill, on which the transfer of this
stock is made expressly to depend. The treaty has in the most guarded
manner secured us in the possession of the ceded territory, as a
condition precedent to the payment of the purchase money, and this bill
has expressly provided that no part of the stock shall be transferred
till the possession stipulated by the treaty shall have been obtained.
Not such a possession as the gentleman has said the President may be
satisfied with--“the delivery of a twig and turf, or the knocker of
a door.” The treaty has defined the possession intended: it is the
possession of Louisiana, the island and city of New Orleans, with the
forts and arsenals, the troops having been withdrawn from thence. But,
sir, from his remarks, it would seem that his objections to this bill
had been predicated on his want of confidence in the Executive, as he
has expressed his fears that the stock would be transferred, before
the prerequisite conditions had been performed. He says, we ought to
be satisfied that the possession stipulated by the treaty shall have
been delivered up before we pass this bill. Has he forgot that, by
the constitution, the President is to superintend the execution of
the law? Or has he forgot that treaties are the supreme law of the
land? Or why, while he professes to respect this constitution, does he
oppose the commission of the execution of this law to that organ of the
Government to which it has been assigned by the constitution? Why, I
ask, does he distrust the President? Has he not been, throughout the
whole of this business, very much alive to the peaceful acquisition of
this immense territory, and the invaluable waters of the Mississippi? a
property which, but the other day, we were told was all-important, and
so necessary to our political existence that if it was not obtained the
Western people would sever themselves from the Union. This property,
for which countless millions were then proposed to be expended, and the
best blood of our citizens to be shed, and which then was to be had
at all hazards, _per fas aut per nefas_, seems now to have lost its
worth, and it would seem as if some gentlemen could not be satisfied
with the purchase, because our title was not recorded in the blood of
its inhabitants. But that this is not the wish of the American people,
has been unequivocally declared by their immediate representatives
in Congress, as well as by this House, who had each expressed their
approbation of the peaceful title we had acquired, by majorities I
thought not to be misunderstood. And the gentleman, although he voted for
the ratification of the treaty, now again calls on us to investigate the
title. It is certainly too late.

Mr. PICKERING said, if he entertained the opinion just now expressed by
the gentleman from Delaware, (Mr. WELLS,) of the binding force of all
treaties made by the President and Senate, he should think it to be his
duty to vote for the bill now under consideration. “The constitution,
and the laws of the United States made in pursuance thereof, and all
treaties made, or which shall be made under the authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme law of the land.”--But a treaty to be
thus obligatory, must not contravene the constitution, nor contain any
stipulations which transcend the powers therein given to the President
and Senate. The treaty between the United States and the French Republic,
professing to cede Louisiana to the United States, appeared to him
to contain such an exceptionable stipulation--a stipulation which
cannot be executed by any authority now existing. It is declared in
the third article, that “the inhabitants of the ceded territory shall
be incorporated in the Union of the United States.” But neither the
President and Senate, nor the President and Congress, are competent
to such an act of incorporation. He believed that our Administration
admitted that this incorporation could not be effected without an
amendment of the constitution; and he conceived that this necessary
amendment could not be made in the ordinary mode by the concurrence
of two-thirds of both Houses of Congress, and the ratification by the
Legislatures of three-fourths of the several States. He believed the
assent of each individual State to be necessary for the admission of a
foreign country as an associate in the Union; in like manner as in a
commercial house, the consent of each member would be necessary to admit
a new partner into the company; and whether the assent of every State
to such an indispensable amendment were attainable, was uncertain. But
the articles of a treaty were necessarily related to each other; the
stipulation in one article being the consideration for another. If,
therefore, in respect to the Louisiana Treaty, the United States fail
to execute, and within a reasonable time, the engagement in the third
article, (to incorporate that territory into the Union,) the French
Government will have a right to declare the whole treaty void. We must
then abandon the country, or go to war to maintain our possession. But
it was to prevent war that the pacific measures of the last winter were
adopted--they were to “lay the foundation for future peace.”

Mr. P. had never doubted the right of the United States to acquire new
territory, either by purchase or by conquest, and to govern the territory
so acquired as a dependent province; and in this way might Louisiana have
become a territory of the United States, and have received a form of
government infinitely preferable to that to which its inhabitants are now
subject.

Mr. DAYTON.--As the honorable gentleman from Massachusetts has quoted
what was suggested by me in a former debate, to deduce from it an
inference which the information I gave can by no means warrant, I must
be allowed the liberty of correcting him. When I said that there existed
an essential difference between the French and Spanish officers at New
Orleans as to the real boundaries of the province of Louisiana, I did not
mean to insinuate that this disagreement extended so far as an opposition
to the French taking possession. It was a question of limits only,
varying, however, so much in extent as would have produced a serious
altercation between those two countries, although closely allied.

The Spanish Governor had taken it upon himself to proclaim that the
province lately ceded and about to be given over to France would be
confined on the east of the Mississippi to the river Iberville, and the
lakes Maurepas and Pontchartrain, or in other words to the island of New
Orleans; but the French Prefect on the contrary declared that he neither
had nor would give his assent to the establishment of those limits, which
would be regarded no longer than until the arrival of their troops.

The same gentleman (Mr. PICKERING) has said that the advocates of this
measure seem to rely much more upon their power than upon their right,
and in this assertion I am compelled to say that he has done us very
great injustice. The title of the French is founded upon the often quoted
treaty of St Ildefonso, confirmed by the royal order signed by the King
of Spain himself, so lately as the 15th October, 1802, directing the
delivery of the “colony of Louisiana and its dependencies as well as of
the city and island of New Orleans, without any exception, to General
Victor, or other officer duly authorized by that Republic to take charge
of the said delivery.”

When at New Orleans in July last, I obtained from the best source a
translated copy of that royal order, and can aver that it absolutely
directs possession to be given without reservation or condition. It is
not, and cannot be, denied that the lately ratified treaty of Paris
transfers to us completely all the title acquired by France in virtue of
the first treaty and order alluded to. We have, then, most incontestably,
the right of possession, and our object now is, by passing the bill
before us to obtain the possession itself, which we can certainly never
effect, consistently with good faith, if the reasonings and objections
of my honorable friends from Delaware and Massachusetts should prevail.
We are asked by the same gentlemen what will be the consequence if it
shall appear that the royal order has been revoked? I answer, first, that
it is not in the least degree probable, for neither of them pretend to
have heard of such revocation, nor is it intimated in the confidential
communications before the Senate. But admitting for argument’s sake that
it were revoked, of what avail could it be against a third party, who
had in the mean time become a _bona fide_ purchaser? Shall one nation
give to another a written, formal evidence of transfer of territory, and
revoke it at pleasure, especially after a third shall have been tempted
and induced by that very evidence of title to contract for the purchase
of it? Would an act so fraudulent be countenanced between individuals in
a court of equity? Could it be justified between nations in a high court
of honor? The honorable gentleman from Delaware has taken a more delicate
ground of objection. He has insinuated that there exists in the knowledge
of the Senate, the evidence of a serious opposition to our possessing
that country, which, if known to the other branch of the Legislature,
would probably have defeated this bill in its progress there. Allusions
artfully made in this manner to documents communicated under the
injunction of secrecy, place us in an embarrassing situation. Forbidden
by our rules to expose the papers referred to, even in argument, we
can only declare what impressions they have made upon ourselves. Every
Senator must understand him, every one must have heard and read, and
weighed deliberately the contents of those documents, and, for myself, I
am free to avow my belief, that, if known to every member of the other
House, they would have had no effect against this bill, but would rather
have quickened and ensured its progress, for such is the influence they
have upon me.

Mr. TAYLOR.--There have been, Mr. President, two objections made against
the treaty; one that the United States cannot constitutionally acquire
territory; the other, that the treaty stipulates for the admission of a
new State into the Union; a stipulation which the treaty-making power
is unable to comply with. To these objections I shall endeavor to give
answers not heretofore urged.

Before a confederation, each State in the Union possessed a right, as
attached to sovereignty, of acquiring territory, by war, purchase, or
treaty. This right must be either still possessed, or forbidden both to
each State and to the General Government, or transferred to the General
Government. It is not possessed by the States separately, because war
and compacts with foreign powers and with each other are prohibited to
a separate State; and no other means of acquiring territory exist. By
depriving every State of the means of exercising the right of acquiring
territory, the constitution has deprived each separate State of the
right itself. Neither the means nor the right of acquiring territory are
forbidden to the United States; on the contrary, in the fourth article
of the constitution, Congress is empowered “to dispose of and regulate
the territory belonging to the United States.” This recognizes the right
of the United States to hold territory. The means of acquiring territory
consist of war and compact; both are expressly surrendered to Congress
and forbidden to the several States; and no right in a separate State
to hold territory without its limits is recognized by the constitution,
nor any mode of effecting it possible, consistent with it. The means
of acquiring and the right of holding territory, being both given to
the United States, and prohibited to each State, it follows that these
attributes of sovereignty once held by each State are thus transferred
to the United States; and that, if the means of acquiring and the right
of holding, are equivalent to the right of acquiring territory, then
this right merged from the separate States to the United States, as
indispensably annexed to the treaty-making power, and the power of making
war; or, indeed, is literally given to the General Government by the
constitution.

Having proved, sir, that the United States may constitutionally acquire,
hold, dispose of, and regulate territory, the other objection to be
considered is, whether the third article of the treaty does stipulate
that Louisiana shall be erected into a State? It is conceded that the
treaty-making power cannot, by treaty, erect a new State, however they
may stipulate for it. I premise, that in the construction of this
article, it is proper to recollect that the negotiators must be supposed
to have understood our constitution. It became very particularly their
duty to do so, because, in this article itself, they have recited “the
principles of the constitution” as their guide. Hence, it is obvious,
they did not intend to infringe, but to adhere to those principles;
and therefore, if the article will admit of a construction consistent
with this presumable knowledge and intention of the negotiators, the
probability of its accuracy will be greater than one formed in a
supposition that the negotiators were either ignorant of that which
they ought to have known, or that they fraudulently professed a purpose
which they really intended to defeat. The following construction is
reconcilable with what the negotiators ought to have known, and with what
they professed to intend.

Recollect, sir, that it has been proved that the United States may
acquire territory. Territory, so acquired, becomes from the acquisition
itself a portion of the territories of the United States, or may be
united with their territories without being erected into a State. A union
of territory is one thing; of States, another. Both are exemplified by
an actual existence. The United States possess territory, comprised in
the union of territory, and not in the union of States. Congress is
empowered to regulate or dispose of territorial sections of the Union,
and have exercised the power; but it is not empowered to regulate or
dispose of State sections of the Union. The citizens of these territorial
sections are citizens of the United States, and they have all the rights
of citizens of the United States; but such rights do not include those
political rights arising from State compacts or governments, which
are dissimilar in different States. Supposing the General Government
or treaty-making power have no right to add or unite States and State
citizens to the Union, yet they have a power of adding or uniting to it
territory and territorial citizens of the United States.

The territory is ceded by the first article of the treaty. It will no
longer be denied that the United States may constitutionally acquire
territory. The third article declares that “the inhabitants of the ceded
territory shall be incorporated in the Union of the United States.”
And these words are said to require the territory to be erected into a
State. This they do not express, and the words are literally satisfied
by incorporating them into the Union as a Territory, and not as a State.
The constitution recognizes and the practice warrants an incorporation
of a Territory and its inhabitants into the Union, without admitting
either as a State. And this construction of the first member of the
article is necessary to shield its two other members from a charge of
surplusage, and even absurdity. For if the words “the inhabitants of the
ceded territory shall be incorporated in the Union of the United States”
intended that Louisiana and its inhabitants should become a State in the
Union of States, there existed no reason for proceeding to stipulate that
these same inhabitants should be made “citizens as soon as possible,
according to the principles of the Federal Constitution.” Their admission
into the Union of States would have made them citizens of the United
States. Is it not then absurd to suppose that the first member of this
third article intended to admit Louisiana into the Union as a State,
which would instantly entitle the inhabitants to the benefit of the
article of the constitution declaring, that “the citizens of each State
shall be entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens in the
several States,” and yet to have gone on to stipulate for citizenship,
under the limitation “as soon as possible, according to the principles of
the Federal Constitution,” after it had been bestowed without limitation?
Again, the concluding member of the article is to bestow “protection
in the mean time;” incorporating this stipulation, and the stipulation
for citizenship, with the construction which accuses the treaty of
unconstitutionality, the article altogether must be understood thus:
“The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be taken into the Union of
States, which will instantly give them all the rights of citizenship,
after which they shall be made citizens as soon as possible; and after
they are taken into the Union of States, they shall be protected in the
interim between becoming a State in the Union, and being made citizens,
in their liberty, property, and religion.”

By supposing the first member of the article to require that the
inhabitants and their territory shall be incorporated in the Union,
in the known and recognized political character of a Territory,
these inconsistencies are avoided, and the article reconciled to the
constitution, as understood by the opposers of the bill; the stipulation
also for citizenship “as soon as possible” according to the principles
of the constitution, and the delay meditated by these words, and the
subsequent words “in the mean time,” so utterly inconsistent with the
instantaneous citizenship, which would follow an admission into the Union
as a State, are both fully explained. Being incorporated in the Union as
a Territory, and not as a State, a stipulation for citizenship became
necessary; whereas it would have been unnecessary had the inhabitants
been incorporated as a State, and not as a Territory. And as they were
not to be invested with citizenship by becoming a State, the delay which
would occur between the incorporation of the Territory into the Union and
the arrival of the inhabitants to citizenship according to the principles
of the constitution, under some uniform rule of naturalization, exhibited
an interim which demanded the concluding stipulation, for “protection in
the mean time for liberty, property, and religion.” As a State of the
Union, they would not have needed a stipulation for the safety of their
“liberty, property and religion;” as a Territory, this stipulation would
govern and restrain the undefined power of Congress to make “rules and
regulations for Territories.”

Mr. TRACY.--Mr. President: I shall vote against this bill, and will give
some of the reasons which govern my vote in this case.

It is well known that this bill is introduced to carry into effect
the treaty between the United States and France, which has been lately
ratified. If that treaty be an unconstitutional compact, such a one
as the President and Senate had no rightful authority to make, the
conclusion is easy, that it creates no obligation on any branch or
member of the Government to vote for this bill, or any other, which is
calculated to carry into effect such unconstitutional compact.

The third and seventh articles of the treaty are, in my opinion,
unconstitutional.

The third article is in the following words:

    “The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be incorporated
    into the Union of the United States, and admitted, as soon
    as possible, according to the principles of the Federal
    Constitution, to the enjoyment of all the rights, advantages,
    and immunities of citizens of the United States, and, in the
    mean time, they shall be maintained in the free enjoyment of
    their liberty, property, and the religion they profess.”

The obvious meaning of this article is, that the inhabitants of Louisiana
are incorporated, by it, into the Union, upon the same footing that the
Territorial Governments are, and, like them, the Territory, when the
population is sufficiently numerous, must be admitted as a State, with
every right of any other State.

Have the President and Senate a constitutional right to do all this?

When we advert to the constitution, we shall find that the President, by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, may make treaties. Now,
say gentlemen, this power is undefined, and one gentleman says, it is
unlimited.

True, there is no definition in words of the extent and nature of the
treaty-making power. Two modes of ascertaining its extent have been
mentioned: one is, by ascertaining the extent of the same power among the
monarchs of Europe, and making that the standard of the treaty-making
power here; and the other is, to limit the power of the President and
Senate, in respect to treaties, by the constitution and the nature and
principles of our Government.

Upon the first criterion, it is obvious that we cannot obtain any
satisfactory definition of the treaty-making power, as applicable to our
Government.

The paragraph in the constitution, which says that “new States may
be admitted by Congress into this Union,” has been quoted to justify
this treaty. To this, two answers may be given, either of which are
conclusive in my favor. First, if Congress have the power collectively
of admitting Louisiana, it cannot be vested in the President and Senate
alone. Secondly, Congress have no power to admit new foreign States
into the Union, without the consent of the old partners. The article
of the constitution, if any person will take the trouble to examine
it, refers to domestic States only, and not at all to foreign States;
and it is unreasonable to suppose that Congress should, by a majority
only, admit new foreign States, and swallow up, by it, the old partners,
when two-thirds of all the members are made requisite for the least
alteration in the constitution. The words of the constitution are
completely satisfied by a construction which shall include only the
admission of domestic States, who were all parties to the Revolutionary
war, and to the compact; and the spirit of the association seems to
embrace no other. But I repeat it, if the Congress collectively has this
power, the President and Senate cannot, of course, have it exclusively.

I think, sir, that, from a fair construction of the constitution, and
an impartial view of the nature and principles of our association,
the President and Senate have not the power of thus obtruding upon us
Louisiana.

The seventh article admits for twelve years the ships of France and
Spain into the ceded territory, free of foreign duty. This is giving a
commercial preference to those ports over the other ports of the United
States; because it is well known that a duty of forty-four cents on
tonnage, and ten per cent. on duties, are paid by all foreign ships
or vessels in all the ports of the United States. If it be said we
must repeal those laws, and then the preference will cease, the answer
is, that this seventh article gives the exclusive right of entering
the ports of Louisiana to the ships of France and Spain, and if our
discriminating duties were repealed this day, the preference would be
given to the ports of the United States against those of Louisiana, so
that the preference, by any regulation of commerce or revenue, which the
constitution expressly prohibits from being given to the ports of one
State over those of another, would be given by this treaty, in violation
of the constitution. I acknowledge, if Louisiana is not admitted into
the Union, and that if there is no promise to admit her, then this part
of our argument will not apply; but, in declaring these to be facts, my
opponents are driven to acknowledge that the third article of this treaty
is void, which answers every purpose which I wish to establish, that
this treaty is unconstitutional and void, and that I have, consequently,
a right to withhold my vote from any bill which shall be introduced
to carry it into effect. I acknowledge, sir, that my opinion ever has
been, and still is, that when a treaty is ratified by the constituted
authorities, and is a constitutional treaty, every member of the
community is bound by it, as a law of the land; but not so by a treaty
which is unconstitutional. The terms of this treaty may be extravagant
and unwise, yet, in my legislative capacity, that can form no excuse
for an opposition; we may have no title, we may have given an enormous
sum, we may have made a silly attempt to destroy the discriminating
duties, yet, if the treaty be not unconstitutional, every member of the
Government is bound to carry it into effect.

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE observed, that he little expected a proceeding so much
out of order would have been attempted, as a re-discussion of the merits
of the treaty on the passage of this bill; but as the gentlemen in the
opposition had urged it, he would, exhausted as the subject was, claim
the indulgence of the Senate in replying to some of their remarks.

No gentleman, continued he, has yet ventured to deny, that it is
incumbent on the United States to secure to the citizens of the western
waters, the uninterrupted use of the Mississippi. Under this impression
of duty, what has been the conduct of the General Government, and
particularly of the gentlemen now in the opposition, for the last eight
months? When the right of deposit was violated by a Spanish officer
without authority from his Government, these gentlemen considered our
national honor so deeply implicated, and the rights of the western people
so wantonly violated, that no atonement or redress was admissible, except
through the medium of the bayonet. Negotiation was scouted at. It was
deemed pusillanimous, and was said to exhibit a want of fellow-feeling
for the western people, and a disregard to their essential rights.
Fortunately for their country, the counsel of these gentlemen was
rejected, and their war measures negatived. The so much scouted process
of negotiation was, however, persisted in, and instead of restoring the
right of deposit, and securing more effectually for the future our right
to navigate the Mississippi, the Mississippi itself was acquired, and
every thing which appertained to it. I did suppose that those gentlemen,
who at the last session so strongly urged war measures for the attainment
of this object, upon an avowal that it was too important to trust to
the tardy and less effectual process of negotiation, would have stood
foremost in carrying the treaty into effect, and that the peaceful mode
by which it was acquired would not lessen with them the importance of
the acquisition. But it seems to me, sir, that the opinions of a certain
portion of the United States with respect to this ill-fated Mississippi,
have varied as often as the fashions. [Here Mr. B. made some remarks on
the attempts which were made in the old Congress, and which had nearly
proved successful, to cede this river to Spain for twenty-five years.]
But, I trust, continued he, these opinions, schemes, and projects will
for ever be silenced and crushed by the vote which we are this evening
about to pass.

Permit me to examine some of the principal reasons which are deemed so
powerful by gentlemen as to induce them to vote for the destruction of
this treaty. Unfortunately for the gentlemen, no two of them can agree
on the same set of objections; and what is still more unfortunate, I
believe there are no two of them concur in any one objection. In one
thing only they seem to agree, and that is to vote against the bill. An
honorable gentleman from Delaware (Mr. WHITE) considered the price to be
enormous. An honorable gentleman from Connecticut, who has just sat down,
(Mr. TRACY,) says he has no objection whatever to the price; it is, he
supposes, not too much. An honorable gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr.
PICKERING) says that France acquired no title from Spain, and therefore
our title is bad. The same gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. TRACY) says
he has no objection to the title from France; he thinks it a good one.
The gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. PICKERING) contends that the United
States cannot under the constitution acquire foreign territory. The
gentleman from Connecticut is of a different opinion, and has no doubt
but that the United States can acquire and hold foreign territory; but
that Congress alone have the power of incorporating that territory into
the Union. What weight, therefore, ought all their lesser objections to
be entitled to, when they are at war among themselves on the greater one?

The same gentleman has told us, that this acquisition will, from its
extent, soon prove destructive to the confederacy.

This, continued Mr. B., is an old and hackneyed doctrine; that a republic
ought not to be too extensive. But the gentleman has assumed two facts,
and then reasoned from them. First, that the extent is too great; and
secondly, that the country will be soon populated. I would ask, sir,
what is his standard extent for a republic? How does he come at that
standard? Our boundary is already extensive. Would his standard extent be
violated by including the island of Orleans and the Floridas? I presume
not, as all parties seem to think their acquisition, in part or in whole,
essential. Why not then acquire territory on the west, as well as on the
east side of the Mississippi? Is the Goddess of Liberty restrained by
water courses? Is she governed by geographical limits? Is her dominion
on this continent confined to the east side of the Mississippi? So far
from believing in the doctrine that a republic ought to be confined
within narrow limits, I believe, on the contrary, that the more extensive
its dominion the more safe and more durable it will be. In proportion
to the number of hands you intrust the precious blessings of a free
government to, in the same proportion do you multiply the chances for
their preservation. I entertain, therefore, no fears for the confederacy
on account of its extent.

I had hoped, sir, that the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. TRACY,) from
the trouble he was so good as to give himself yesterday in assisting to
amend this bill, would have voted for it; but it seems he is constrained
to vote to-day against it. He asks, if the United States have power to
acquire and add new States to the Union, can they not also cede States?
Can they not, for example, cede Connecticut to France? I answer they
cannot; but for none of the reasons assigned by him. The Government of
the United States cannot cede Connecticut, because, first, it would be
annihilating part of that sovereignty of the nation which is whole and
entire, and upon which the Government of the United States is dependent
for its existence; and secondly, because the fourth section of the
fourth article of the constitution forbids it. But how does it follow
as a consequence, that because the United States cannot cede an existing
State, they cannot acquire a new State? He admits explicitly that
Congress may acquire territory and hold it as a territory, but cannot
incorporate it into the Union. By this construction he admits the power
to acquire territory, a modification infinitely more dangerous than
the unconditional admission of a new State; for by his construction,
territories and citizens are considered and held as the property of
the Government of the United States, and may consequently be used as
dangerous engines in the hands of the Government against the States and
people.

Could we not, says the same gentleman, incorporate in the Union some
foreign nation containing ten millions of inhabitants--Africa, for
instance--and thereby destroy our Government? Certainly the thing would
be possible if Congress would do it, and the people consent to it; but it
is supposing so extreme a case and is so barely possible, that it does
not merit serious refutation. It is also possible and equally probable
that republicanism itself may one day or other become unfashionable,
(for I believe it is not without its enemies,) and that the people of
America may call for a king. From such hypotheses it is impossible to
deduce any thing for or against the construction contended for. The true
construction must depend on the manifest import of the instrument and the
good sense of the community.

The same gentleman, in reply to the observations which fell from the
gentleman from South Carolina, as to the admission of new States,
observes, that although Congress may admit new States, the President and
Senate, who are but a component part, cannot. Apply this doctrine to
the case before us. How could Congress by any mode of legislation admit
this country into the Union until it was acquired? And how can this
acquisition be made except through the treaty-making power? Could the
gentleman rise in his place and move for leave to bring in a bill for the
purchase of Louisiana and its admission into the Union? I take it that
no transaction of this or any other kind with a foreign power can take
place except through the Executive Department, and that in the form of a
treaty, agreement, or convention. When the acquisition is made, Congress
can then make such disposition of it as may be expedient.

Mr. ADAMS.--It is not my intention to trespass long upon the patience
of the Senate, on a subject which has already been debated almost to
satiety; but, as objections on constitutional grounds have been raised
against the bill under discussion, I wish to say a very few words in
justification of the vote which I think it my duty to give.

The objections against the passage of the bill, as far as my recollection
serves me, are two: the first, started by the honorable gentleman from
Delaware who opened this debate; the second, urged by several of the
other members who have spoken upon the question.

The gentleman from Delaware admits the necessity of making the provision
for carrying into execution, on our part, the treaty which has been duly
ratified by the Senate, _provided_ we can obtain complete and undoubted
possession of the territory ceded us by France, in that treaty. But
he observes, that the term possession is indefinite; that it may mean
nothing more than the delivery of a twig, or of the knob of a door. That,
from sources of the authenticity of which we have no reason to doubt,
we are informed that Spain is very far from acquiescing in the cession
of this territory to us; that probably the Spanish officers will not
deliver peaceable possession; and that we ought not to put out of our
own hands the power of withholding the payment of this money, until it
shall be ascertained, beyond all question, that the territory, for which
it is the consideration, is in our hands. But, sir, admitting that the
word possession were of itself not sufficiently precise, I think, with
the gentleman last up, that the fourth and fifth articles of the treaty,
read by him, render it so in this instance. The fourth, stipulating
that the French commissary shall do _every act necessary_ to receive
the country from the Spanish officers, and transmit it to the agent
of the United States--and the fifth, providing, not only that all the
_military posts_ shall be delivered to us, and that the troops, whether
of France or Spain, shall cease to occupy them, but that those troops
shall all be embarked within three months after the ratification of the
treaty. Now, when the country has been formally surrendered to us, when
all the military posts are in our hands, and when all the troops, French
or Spanish, have been embarked, what possible adverse possession can
there be to contend against ours? Until all these conditions shall have
been fulfilled on the part of France, neither the convention nor the
bill before us requires the payment of money on ours; and we may safely
trust the execution of the law to the discretion of the President of the
United States. For, even if I could see any reason for distrusting him
in the exercise of such a power, under different circumstances, which I
certainly do not, still, in the present case, his own interest, and the
weight of responsibility resting upon him, are ample security to us,
against any undue precipitation on his part, in the payment of the money.
On the other hand, I am extremely solicitous that every tittle of the
engagements on our part in these conventions should be performed with the
most scrupulous good faith, and I see no purpose of utility that can be
answered by postponing the determination on the passage of this bill.

But it has been argued that the bill ought not to pass, because the
treaty itself is unconstitutional, or, to use the words of the gentleman
from Connecticut, an extra-constitutional act; because it contains
engagements which the powers of the Senate were not competent to ratify,
the powers of Congress not competent to confirm, and, as two of the
gentlemen have contended, not even the Legislatures of the number of
States requisite to effect an amendment of the constitution are adequate
to sanction. It is therefore, say they, a nullity; we cannot fulfil
our part of its conditions, and on our failure in the performance of
any one stipulation, France may consider herself as absolved from the
obligations of the whole treaty on her. I do not conceive it necessary
to enter into the merits of the treaty at this time. The proper occasion
for that discussion is past. But, allowing even that this is a case for
which the constitution has not provided, it does not in my mind follow,
that the treaty is a nullity, or that its obligations, either on us or
on France, must necessarily be cancelled. For my own part, I am free to
confess, that the third article, and more especially the seventh, contain
engagements placing us in a dilemma, from which I see no possible mode
of extricating ourselves but by an amendment, or rather an addition to
the constitution. The gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. TRACY,) both
on a former occasion, and in this day’s debate, appears to me to have
shown this to demonstration. But what is this more than saying, that the
President and Senate have bound the nation to engagements which require
the co-operation of more extensive powers than theirs, to carry them into
execution? Nothing is more common, in the negotiations between nation
and nation, than for a minister to agree to and sign articles beyond
the extent of his powers. This is what your ministers, in the very case
before you, have confessedly done. It is well known that their powers
did not authorize them to conclude this treaty; but they acted for the
benefit of their country, and this House by a large majority has advised
to the ratification of their proceedings. Suppose then, not only that
the ministers who signed, but the President and Senate who ratified this
compact, have exceeded their powers. Suppose that the other House of
Congress, who have given their assent by passing this and other bills
for the fulfilment of the obligations it imposes on us, have exceeded
their powers. Nay, suppose even that the majority of States competent
to amend the constitution in other cases, could not amend it in this,
without exceeding their powers--and this is the extremest point to which
any gentleman on this floor has extended his scruples--suppose all this,
and there still remains in the country a power competent to adopt and
sanction every part of our engagements, and to carry them entirely into
execution. For, notwithstanding the objections and apprehensions of many
individuals, of many wise, able and excellent men, in various parts of
the Union, yet such is the public favor attending the transaction which
commenced by the negotiation of this treaty, and which I hope will
terminate in our full, undisturbed and undisputed possession of the ceded
territory, that I firmly believe if an amendment to the constitution,
amply sufficient for the accomplishment of every thing for which we have
contracted, shall be proposed, as I think it ought, it will be adopted
by the Legislature of every State in the Union. We can therefore fulfil
our part of the conventions, and this is all that France has a right to
require of us.

Mr. NICHOLAS.--Mr. President: The gentlemen on the other side differ
among themselves. The two gentlemen from Delaware say, that if peaceable
possession is given of Louisiana this bill ought to pass; the other
gentlemen who have spoken in opposition to it have declared, that if they
believed the constitution was not violated by the treaty, they should
think themselves bound to vote for the bill. To this Senate it cannot
be necessary to answer arguments denying the power of the Government to
make such a treaty; it has already been affirmed, so far as we could
affirm it, by two-thirds of this body; it is then only now necessary to
show that we ought to pass the bill at this time. In addition to the
reasons which have been so ably and forcibly urged by my friends, I will
remark, that the treaty-making power of this Government is so limited,
that engagements to pay money cannot be carried into effect without the
consent and co-operation of Congress. This was solemnly decided, after a
long discussion of several weeks, by the House of Representatives, which
made the appropriations for carrying the British treaty into effect,
and such I believe is the understanding of nine-tenths of the American
people, as to the construction of their constitution. This decision
must be also known to foreigners, and if not, they are bound to know
the extent of the powers of the Government with which they treat. If
this bill should be rejected, I ask gentlemen whether they believe, that
France would or ought to execute the treaty on her part? It is known to
the French Government that the President and Senate cannot create stock,
nor provide for the payment of either principal or interest of stock; and
if that Government should be informed that a bill, authorizing the issue
of stock to pay for the purchase, “after possession shall be delivered,”
had been rejected by the only department of our Government competent to
the execution of that part of the treaty, they would have strong ground
to suspect that we did not mean to execute the treaty on our part;
particularly when they are informed, that the arguments most pressed in
opposition to the bill were grounded upon a belief that the Government of
the United States had not a constitutional power to execute the treaty.
Of one thing I am confident, that if they have the distrust of us which
some gentlemen have this day expressed of them, the country will not be
delivered to the agents of our Government should this bill be rejected.

The gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. TRACY) muse consider the grant of
power to the Legislature as a limitation of the treaty-making power,
for he says, “that the power to admit new States and to make citizens
is given to Congress, and not to the treaty-making power;” therefore an
engagement in a treaty to do either of these things is unconstitutional.
I cannot help expressing my surprise at that gentleman’s giving that
opinion, and I think myself justifiable in saying, that if it is now
his opinion, it was not always so. The contrary opinion is the only
justification of that gentleman’s approbation of the British treaty,
and of his vote for carrying it into effect. By that treaty a great
number of persons had a right to become American citizens immediately;
not only without a law, but contrary to an existing law. And by that
treaty many of the powers specially given to Congress were exercised by
the treaty-making power. It is for gentlemen who supported that treaty,
to reconcile the construction given by them to the constitution in its
application to that instrument, with their exposition of it at this time.

If the third article of the treaty is an engagement to incorporate the
Territory of Louisiana into the Union of the United States, and to make
it a State, it cannot be considered as an unconstitutional exercise of
the treaty-making power; for it will not be asserted by any rational man
that the territory is incorporated as a State by the treaty itself, when
it is expressly declared that “the inhabitants shall be incorporated
in the Union of the United States, and admitted as soon as possible,
according to the principles of the Federal Constitution.” Evidently
referring the question of incorporation, in whatever character it was to
take place, to the competent authority; and leaving to that authority to
do it, at such time, and in such manner, as they may think proper. If,
as some gentlemen suppose, Congress possess this power, they are free
to exercise it in the manner that they may think most conducive to the
public good. If it can only be done by an amendment to the constitution,
it is a matter of discretion with the States whether they will do it
or not; for it cannot be done “according to the principles of the
Federal Constitution,” if the Congress or the States are deprived of
that discretion, which is given to the first, and secured to the last,
by the constitution. In the third section of the fourth article of the
constitution it is said, “New States may be admitted by the Congress
into this Union.” If Congress have the power, it is derived from this
source; for there are no other words in the constitution that can, by
any construction that can be given to them, be considered as conveying
this power. If Congress have not this power, the constitutional mode
would be by an amendment to the constitution. If it should be conceded
then that the admission of this territory into the Union, as a State, was
in the contemplation of the contracting parties, it must be understood
with a reservation of the right of this Congress or of the States to do
it, or not; the words “admitted as soon as possible,” must refer to the
voluntary admission in one of the two modes that I have mentioned; for in
no other way can a State be admitted into this Union.

The question was then taken on the passage of the bill, and carried in
the affirmative--yeas 26, nays 5, as follows:

YEAS--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge,
Brown, Butler, Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Logan,
Maclay, Nicholas, Olcott, Plumer, Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith,
Stone, Taylor, Worthington, and Wright.

NAYS--Messrs. Hillhouse, Pickering, Tracy, Wells, and White.


FRIDAY, November 4.

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    By the copy now communicated of a letter from Captain
    Bainbridge, of the Philadelphia frigate, to our Consul at
    Gibraltar, you will learn that an act of hostility has been
    committed on a merchant vessel of the United States, by an
    armed ship of the Emperor of Morocco. This conduct on the part
    of that power is without cause and without explanation. It is
    fortunate that Captain Bainbridge fell in with and took the
    capturing vessel and her prize; and I have the satisfaction
    to inform you that about the date of this transaction, such a
    force would be arriving in the neighborhood of Gibraltar, both
    from the east and from the west, as leaves less to be feared
    for our commerce, from the suddenness of the aggression.

    On the 4th of September, the Constitution frigate, Captain
    Preble, with Mr. Lear on board, was within two days’ sail of
    Gibraltar, where the Philadelphia would then be arrived with
    her prize; and such explanations would probably be instituted
    as the state of things required, and as might perhaps arrest
    the progress of hostilities.

    In the mean while, it is for Congress to consider the
    provisional authorities which may be necessary to restrain the
    depredations of this power, should they be continued.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    NOV. 4, 1803.

The Message and papers therein referred to were read and ordered to lie
for consideration.


THURSDAY, November 10.

The credentials of JOHN CONDIT, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of
the State of New Jersey, for the time limited in the Constitution of the
United States, were presented and read.

_Ordered_, That they lie on file.


FRIDAY, November 11.

The PRESIDENT communicated a letter from De Witt Clinton, late a Senator
from the State of New York, stating that he had resigned his seat in the
Senate.


MONDAY, November 14.

The PRESIDENT administered the oath required by law to Mr. CONDIT, a
Senator from the State of New Jersey.


TUESDAY, November 15.

Mr. WORTHINGTON presented the petition of a number of the inhabitants of
the Indiana Territory, praying to be set off into a separate district,
for reasons therein stated.

_Ordered_, That it be referred to Mr. BRADLEY and others, the committee
to whom were referred on the 7th instant, petitions on the same subject,
to consider and report thereon to the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, November 23.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

The Senate resumed the consideration of the report of the committee to
whom was referred the motion for an amendment to the constitution in
the mode of electing the President and the Vice President of the United
States; whereupon, the President _pro tem._ (Mr. BROWN) submitted to the
consideration of the Senate the following question of order:

    “When an amendment to be proposed to the constitution is
    under consideration, shall the concurrence of two-thirds of
    the members present be requisite to decide any question for
    amendments, or extending to the merits, being short of the
    final question?”

[A debate took place on this proposition, tedious, intricate, and
desultory, which it was very difficult to follow, and often to
comprehend.]

The proposition offered by the President was then called up for decision,
whether two-thirds were necessary--ayes 13, noes 18.

Mr. BUTLER desired to know from the President if the question now decided
did not require a majority of two-thirds?

The PRESIDENT said, according to the rule of the House, the question
required only a principal majority to decide.

Mr. DAYTON’s motion for striking out what related to the Vice President
was called for, and the question taken on striking out--ayes 12, noes 19.

The report of the committee at large being then under consideration,

Mr. NICHOLAS moved to strike out all following the seventh line of the
report, to the end, for the purpose of inserting the following:

    “In all future elections of President and Vice President,
    the Electors shall name in their ballots the person voted
    for as President, and, in distinct ballots, the person voted
    for as Vice President, of whom one at least shall not be an
    inhabitant of the same State with themselves. The person voted
    for as President, having a majority of the votes of all the
    Electors appointed, shall be the President; and if no person
    have such majority, then from the three highest on the list
    of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives
    shall choose the President in the manner directed by the
    constitution. The person having the greatest number of votes
    as Vice President, shall be the Vice President; and in case
    of an equal number of votes for two or more persons for Vice
    President, they being the highest on the list, the Senate shall
    choose the Vice President from those having such equal number,
    in the manner directed by the constitution; but no person
    constitutionally ineligible to the office of President, shall
    be eligible to that of Vice President of the United States.”

Mr. ADAMS objected to the number “three” instead of five, and wished five
to be restored, as the House of Representatives had already agreed to it.
He asked for a division of the question; which was not agreed to.

Upon the question for striking out being put, it was carried without
a dissenting voice, and the amendment of Mr. NICHOLAS adopted in the
report, leaving the number blank.

Mr. DAYTON moved to fill up the blank with the number five; upon the
question being put, it was lost--only eleven rose in the affirmative.

Mr. ANDERSON moved to strike out the word “two” in the nineteenth
line--ayes 6. Lost.

Mr. S. SMITH then moved to fill the blank with the word “three;” which
was carried--ayes 18, noes 13.

Mr. ADAMS suggested an objection to the amendment as it stood, which
appeared to arise out of the treaty of cession of Louisiana. His
original idea was adverse to the limitation to natural-born citizens,
as superfluous; but, as it stood, the terms upon which Louisiana was
acquired had rendered a change necessary, for it appeared to him that
there was no alternative, but to admit those born in Louisiana as well
as those born in the United States to the right of being chosen for
President and Vice President.

Mr. BUTLER said that, if there was a numerous portion of those who were
already citizens of the United States who can never aspire to, nor be
eligible for, those situations under the constitution, he did not see
how this supposed alternative could be upheld. The people of Louisiana,
under the treaty and under the constitution, will clearly come under the
description of naturalized citizens. While he was up, he would take the
opportunity of speaking to the question at large, and to examine the
motives which produced this amendment; the principal cause of solicitude,
on this subject, he understood to be the base intrigues which were said
to have been carried on at the Presidential election.

Mr. WRIGHT called to order; and a short altercation on the point of order
took place.

Mr. BUTLER proceeded. He had on a former day asked if he might, in this
stage of the discussion, take a view of the whole subject; the House
had decided in the affirmative. When the proposition was first laid
before the House, he had felt a disposition in favor of it; his mind had
been shocked by those base intrigues, which had taken place at the late
Presidential election, and he was hurried by indignation into a temper
which a little cool reflection and some observation on a particular
mode of action in that House, had checked and corrected, and finally
convinced him that much caution was required in a proceeding of that
nature, and that, in all human probability, such a scene of intrigue may
never occur again; that it became questionable whether any steps whatever
were necessary. Upon a careful review of the subject, it appeared to him
that an alteration might make matters worse; for though at present there
has been afforded, by a course of accidents and oversights, room for
intrigue, it would be preferable to leave it to the care and discretion
of the States at large to prevent the recurrence of the danger, than
put into the hands of four of the large States the perpetual choice
of President, to the exclusion of the other thirteen States. It was a
reasonable principle that every State should, in turn, have the choice
of the Chief Magistrate made from among its citizens. The jealousy
of the small States was natural; and he would not tire the House by
bringing to their ears arguments from the history of Greece, because the
subject must be familiar to every member of that House, and, indeed, to
every school-boy. He would not weary them with the painful history of
the conflicts of Athens and Sparta, for the supremacy of Greece, and
the fatal effects of their quarrels and ambition on the smaller States
of that inveterate confederacy of Republics. Their history is that of
all nations in similar circumstances; for man is man in every clime,
and passion mingles in all his actions. If the smaller States were to
agree to this amendment, it would fix for ever the combination of the
larger States, and they would not only choose the President but the Vice
President also in spite of the smaller States. It would ill become him
who had been a member of that convention which had the honor of forming
the present constitution to let a measure such as the present pass
without the most deliberate investigation of its effects. Before the
present constitution was adopted all the States held an equal vote on all
national questions; by the constitution their sovereignty was guarantied,
and the instrument of guarantee and right, he had subscribed his name
to as a Representative from South Carolina, and had used all the zeal
and influence of which he was possessed to promote its adoption. To give
his assent to any violation of it, or any unnecessary innovation on its
principles, would be a deviation from morality.

The question was immediately taken on the report and carried--yeas 20,
nays 11.

Mr. ADAMS said, that though he had voted for the amendment, he
disapproved of the alteration from five to three. He felt, however,
though a representative of a large State, a deep interest in this
question. Was there no champion of the small States to stand up in that
House and vindicate their rights?

Mr. DAYTON was not here as champion of the small States; but, as the
representative of one of them, he was ready to enter his protest against
being delivered over bound hand and foot to four or five of the large
States. The gentleman from South Carolina had offered arguments on the
subject irrefutable. The little portion of influence left us he has
demonstrated to be now about to be taken away, and the gentleman from
Massachusetts, (Mr. ADAMS,) after aiding the effort with his vote, has
taken mercy upon us, and after he has helped to knock us down, asks us
why we do not stand up for ourselves.

Mr. S. SMITH was not surprised to find those who were members of the old
Congress, in which the subject of large and small States was frequently
agitated, familiar with the subject of those days. Under the present
constitution he had been ten years in Congress and had never heard the
subject agitated, nor the least ground given for any apprehension on this
subject; he had seen the small States possess all the advantages secured
to them without even a moment’s jealousy. The State he represented was
once considered a large State; the increase of others in population,
however, had rendered it properly belonging to neither class; it was
an intermediate State; but from the natural progression of the Union
it must be ranked among the small States. In this view then he could
speak dispassionately, and the small States could not with reason be
apprehensive that a State, which must speedily take rank among them,
could be indifferent to their rights if there were the least cause for
apprehension.

He had moved for the insertion of three instead of five, with this
precise and special intention, that the people themselves should have the
power of electing the President and Vice President; and that intrigues
should be thereby for ever frustrated. The intention of the convention
was that the election of the chief officers of the Government should
come as immediately from the people as was practicable, and that the
Legislature should possess the power only in such an exigency as accident
might give birth to, but which they had considered as likely to occur.
Had it not been for these considerations, the large States never would
have given up the advantages which they held in point of numbers. If the
number five were to be continued, and the House of Representatives made
the last resort, he would undertake to say, that four times out of five
the choice would devolve upon them.

Mr. HILLHOUSE.--In avoiding rocks he feared we were steering for
quicksands. The evils that are past we know; those that may arrive
we know not. The object proposed is to provide against a storm, a
phenomenon not rare or unfrequent in republics. You are called upon
to act upon a calculation that all the States in the Union will vote
for the same persons, or that each of two parties opposed in politics
will have an individual candidate. Suppose the two candidates who had
the highest votes on the late election had been the champions of two
opposite parties, and that neither would recede, what then would be the
consequence; according to the gentleman from Maryland, a civil war!
When men are bent on a favorite pursuit, they are too apt to shut out
all consequences which do not bear out their object. Thus gentlemen
can very well discover the danger they have escaped, but they do not
perceive that the opposition of two powerful candidates gives, besides
the hazard of civil war, the hazard of placing one of them on a permanent
throne. The First Magistracy of this nation is an object capable of
exciting ambition; and no doubt it would one day or other be sought
after by dangerous and enterprising men. It was to place a check upon
this ambition that the constitution provided a competitor for the Chief
Magistrate, and declared that both should not be chosen from the same
State. Here also was a guard against State pride, and this guard you wish
to take away; and what will be the consequence? Instead of two or three
or five, you will have as many candidates as there are States in the
Union. By voting for two persons without designation, the States stood a
double chance of a majority, besides the chance of a majority of all the
States in the House of Representatives. For once or twice there may be
such an organization of party as will secure for a conspicuous character
the majority of votes. But that character cannot live always. The evil
of the last election will recur, and be greater, because the whole field
will be to range in.

He hoped this amendment would not be hastily adopted. The subsisting mode
was the result of much deliberation and solemn compromise, after having
long agitated the convention. It is now attacked by party, whatever
gentlemen may say to the contrary; the gentleman from South Carolina has
confessed it. If gentlemen will suffer themselves to look forward without
passion, great good may come from the present mode; men of each of the
parties may hold the two principal offices of the Government; they will
be checks upon each other; our Government is composed of checks; and let
us preserve it from party spirit, which has been tyrannical in all ages.
These checks take off the fiery edge of persecution. Would not one of a
different party placed in that chair tend to check and preserve in temper
the overheated zeal of party? he would conduct himself with firmness
because of the minor party; he would take care that the majority should
have justice, but he would also guard the minority from oppression. If
we cannot destroy party we ought to place every check upon it. If the
present amendment pass, nine out of ten times the election will go to
the other House, and then the only difference will be that you had a
comedy the last time, and you’ll have a tragedy the next. Though it
was impossible to prevent party altogether, much more when population
and luxury increase, and corruption and vice with them, it was prudent
to preserve as many checks against it as was practicable. He had been
long in Congress and saw the conflicting interests of large and small
States operate; the time may not be remote when party will adopt new
designations; federal and republican parties have had their day, their
designations will not last long, and the ground of difference between
parties will not be the same that it has been; new names and new views
will be taken; it has been the course in all nations. There has not yet
been a rotation of offices in which the small States could look for their
share, but the time may, it will come when the small will wrestle with
the large States for their rights. Each State has felt that though its
limits were not so extensive as others, its rights were not disregarded.
Suffer this confidence to be done away, and you may bid adieu to it;
three or four large States will take upon them in rotation to nominate
the Executive, and the second officer also. This will be felt. A fanciful
difference in politics is the bugbear of party now, because no other, no
real cause of difference has subsisted. But remedy will create a real
disease. States like individuals may say we will be of no party, and
whenever this shall happen blood will follow.

Mr. BRADLEY moved an adjournment. The motion was agreed to.


THURSDAY, November 24.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

The consideration of the report on the amendment to the constitution
being taken up, the amendment as directed to be printed on the preceding
day, was taken up, and read, as follows:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds
    of both Houses concurring_, That the following amendment be
    proposed to the Legislatures of the several States as an
    amendment to the constitution of the United States, which,
    when ratified by three-fourths of the said Legislatures, shall
    be valid to all intents and purposes, as a part of the said
    constitution, viz:

    In all future elections of President and Vice President, the
    Electors shall name in their ballots the person voted for
    as President, and, in distinct ballots, the person voted
    for as Vice President, of whom one at least shall not be an
    inhabitant of the same State with themselves. The person voted
    for as President having a majority of the votes of all the
    Electors appointed, shall be the President, and if no person
    have such majority, then from the three highest on the list
    of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives
    shall choose the President in the manner directed by the
    constitution. The person having the greatest number of votes
    as Vice President, shall be Vice President; and in case of an
    equal number of votes for two or more persons for the Vice
    President, they being the highest on the list, the Senate shall
    choose the Vice President from those having such equal number,
    in the manner directed by the constitution; but no person
    constitutionally ineligible to the office of President, shall
    be eligible to that of the President of the United States.

Mr. BRADLEY did not approve of the amendment as it now stood; he could
not see why the Vice President should not be chosen by a majority,
as well as the President. He considered the possibility of the Vice
President becoming President by any casualty, as a good reason for both
being chosen by the same ratio of numbers. If it should be carried as the
amendment now stands, the office of Vice President would be hawked about
at market, and given as change for votes for the Presidency. And what
would be the effect?--that it might so happen that a citizen chosen only
for the office of Vice President, might by the death of the President,
though chosen only by a plurality, become President, and hold the office
for three years eleven months and thirty days. He did not approve of
many arguments which he had heard on the preceding day, and however
disposed to concur in the principle of designation for the two offices,
he could not give it his vote in the present shape. He would, in order to
render the report more congenial with his wishes, move to strike out the
following words beginning with the words _shall_, in the thirteenth line,
to _constitution_, in the eighteenth. The motion was seconded.

Mr. TRACY opposed the striking out, as not in order, it being an
amendment to an amendment already received by the House. He thought,
however, it would be in order to reconcile the whole, and then any part
might be amended.

The PRESIDENT said that the motion for amending the amendment was not
in order; but if the member from Vermont, or any other gentleman of the
majority on the question yesterday chose to move for a recommittal, or
even to refer the report to a select committee, it would be in order.

Mr. BRADLEY then renewed his motion as before, for striking out and
inserting after the 13th line; this amendment he thought of great
importance, as under the constitution as it now stands the Vice
President must be a person of the highest respectability, well known,
and of established reputation throughout the United States; but if the
discriminating principle prevails without some precautions such as the
amendment proposed, that assurance would be lost; and he should not be
surprised to hear of as many candidates for Vice President as there are
States, as the votes for President would be offered in truck for votes
for Vice President, and an enterprising character might employ his
emissaries through all the States to purchase them, and your amendment
lays the foundation for intrigues. He was desirous that he who is to
be set up as candidate for the Vice President should as at present be
equally respectable, or that there should be none--that at least he
should be the second man in the nation; adopt the designating principle,
without the most guarded precautions, and you lose that assurance.

Mr. HILLHOUSE accorded with the gentleman’s amendment, as it naturally
grows out of the principles of the report. There was not a word in the
constitution about voting for the Vice President, no vote in fact is
given for such an office; the alteration to designation alters the whole
thing; and as the gentleman has expressed, will send the Vice President’s
office into market to be handed about as change for the candidate
supported by larger States; he would prefer leaving the choice of
President and Vice President at once to the larger States than take it
in this way. In calm times any government may work well, but he wished in
calm times to provide against storm. If we designate any, then designate
both and on equal terms.

Mr. JACKSON said, that though coming from a small State he had not been
instructed, and was therefore at perfect liberty to act according to the
best of his judgment; though his State was now, in regard to population,
small, and though it were to remain so, he could have but one opinion on
this subject. He saw abundance of reason for preferring three to five.
The constitution under the present form has directed the choice to be
made from five. But the reason of this was consistent with the result to
be produced; the electors were to vote for two persons indiscriminately,
but with the restriction of voting for one only belonging to the State
where the vote was given. The voting for two would necessarily bring
forward four candidates, and a fifth possibly, for we saw in the two
elections before the last that there was one more than the four, though
in each case the fifth had but one vote; he alluded to the vote for Mr.
Jay. In the amendment proposed you are called upon to designate for each
office, and there can be little apprehension of having more than two
or three principal candidates; and for twenty years to come he had no
apprehension of a greater number of candidates if this amendment prevails.

Mr. WRIGHT.--We need not be told in this house, that the constitution was
the result of a compromise, or that care was taken to guard the rights of
each State; these things we must be very ignorant, indeed, not to know.
But does it therefore follow that it is not susceptible of amendment
or correction under experience? Does it follow, because, for mutual
interest and security, this compromise was made, that we are precluded
from effecting any greater good? No man would accuse him of a wish to
see the interest of any State impaired. But we can preserve the spirit
and intention of the constitution in full vigor, without impairing any
interests. And this is to be done, by the discriminating principle; it
fulfills the intention, and it forefends the recurrence of that danger
from which you have once escaped. By this principle, each elector may
name his man for each office, and this can be done whether the number be
three or five. For the latter number he was disposed; because already
adopted by the other House, and he did not wish to delay its progress.
If we were to form a constitution, he would provide that there should be
only two candidates presented to the House. But he did not rely on any
number so much as on the discriminating principle.

Mr. NICHOLAS.--Several gentlemen profess much reluctance to make any
change in the constitution; he would make no such profession; and though
he should be as jealous of improper alterations, or the introduction
of principles incompatible with Republican Government, he would not
hesitate to make any alteration calculated to promote, or secure the
public liberty upon a firmer basis; nay, if it could be made better he
would expunge the whole book. Gentlemen who are for adhering so closely
to the constitution, appear not to consider that a choice of President
from the number three, is more in the spirit of the constitution than
from five; and preserves the relation that the election of two persons,
under the present form, holds to the number five. A reason equally
forcible with him was, that, by taking the number three instead of five,
you place the choice with more certainty in the people at large, and
render the choice more consonant to their wishes. With him, also, it was
a most powerful reason for preferring three, that it would render the
Chief Magistrate dependent only on the people at large, and independent
of any party or any State interest. The people held the sovereign power,
and it was intended by the constitution that they should have the
election of the Chief Magistrate. It was never contemplated as a case
likely to occur, but in an extreme case, that the election should go to
the House of Representatives. What, he asked, would have been the effect,
had Mr. Jay been elected when he had only one vote? What, he would ask,
would be the impression made upon our own people, and upon foreign
nations, had Mr. Aaron Burr been chosen at the last election, when the
universal sentiment was to place the present Chief Magistrate in that
station? He did not mean any thing disrespectful or invidious towards
the Vice President, he barely stated the fact, so well known, and asked,
what would be the effect? Where would be the bond of attachment to that
constitution which could admit of an investiture in a case so important,
in known opposition to the wishes of the people? The effect would be
fatal to the constitution itself; it would weaken public attachment to
it, and the affectation, if alone for the small States, would not have
been heard of in the deep murmur of discontent.

An adjournment was now called for and carried.


TUESDAY, November 29.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

The order of the day being called up on the amendments to the
constitution, a considerable time elapsed, when

Mr. DAYTON rose and said, that since no other gentleman thought proper to
address the Chair, although laboring himself under a very severe cold,
which rendered speaking painful, he could not suffer the question to pass
without an effort to arrest it in its progress; and should consider his
last breath well expended in endeavoring to prevent the degradation which
the State he represented would suffer if the amendment were to prevail.

As to the question immediately before the Senate for filling the blank
with five, he felt himself indebted to the member from Tennessee for
renewing the subject. He was grateful, also, to the member from Maryland
(Mr. WRIGHT) for declaring he would support it, as well as for giving the
assurance that he was disposed to consider and spare the interests of the
small States as far as possible, consistently with the great object of
discrimination.

Every member who had spoken on this subject seemed to have admitted, by
the very course and pointing of their arguments, even though they may
have denied it in words, that this was really a question between great
and small States, and disguise it as they would, the question would be
so considered out of doors. The privilege given by the constitution
extended to five, out of which the choice of President should be made;
and why should the smaller, for whose benefit and security that number
was given, now wantonly throw it away without an equivalent? As to the
Vice President, his election had no influence upon the number, because
the choice of President in the House of Representatives was as free and
unqualified as if that subordinate office did not exist. Nay, he said,
he would venture to assert that, even if the number five were continued,
and the Vice Presidency entirely abolished, there would not be as great a
latitude of choice as under the present mode, because those five out of
whom the choice must eventually be made, were much more likely hereafter
to be nominated by the great States, inasmuch as their electors would no
longer be compelled to vote for a man of a different State. The honorable
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. SMITH) has said, he was not surprised that
those who had seats in the old Congress, should perplex themselves with
the distinctions; but he could tell that gentleman, that it was not in
the old Congress he had learnt them, for there he had seen all the votes
of the States equal, and had known the comparatively little State of
Maryland controlling the will of the _Ancient Dominion_. It was in the
Federal Convention that distinction was made and acknowledged; and he
defied that member to do, what had been before requested of the honorable
gentleman of Virginia, viz: to open the constitution, and point out a
single article, if he could, that had not evidently been framed upon a
presumption of diversity (he had almost said, adversity) of interest
between the great and small States.

Mr. ADAMS in a former debate had stated that he had not a wish to avoid
or seek for the yeas and nays on any question; on the present occasion,
however, he would, when the question was taken, call for the yeas and
nays. But his own vote on the final question would be governed by the
decision of the number five, and he wished to have some record of his
vote, that he might be hereafter able to defend himself against any
charge of inconsistency. On the principle of the amendment he had formed
his opinion, and he was free to confess, that notwithstanding the many
able productions which he had seen against it, he thought it calculated
to produce more good than evil. He was not, however, influenced in this
opinion by the instructions which had been read in a preceding debate
from a former Legislature of Massachusetts to their Senators; he presumed
these were not read by way of intimidation. To the instructions of those
to whom he owed his seat in that House he would pay every respect that
was due, but he did not think that the resolutions of a Legislature
passed in March 1799 or 1800 ought to have the same weight. Since that
time four total and complete changes had taken place, and probably not
one third of those who gave those instructions now remained. He held a
seat in the Legislature himself three years since, but did not perceive
any particular anxiety on the subject, and he did not think that the
present Legislature would be extremely offended if he were to give a
direct vote against what was recommended four years ago.

The constitution was a combination of federative and popular principles.
When you argue upon, or wish to change any of its federative principles,
you must use analogies as arguments; popular arguments will not apply
to federative principles. The House of Representatives was founded on
popular principles; in this House the representation is federative,
and not popular; it is in its nature aristocratic. The foundation of
all popular representation is equality of votes; but even the ratio
of representation is different in different States; the numbers in
Massachusetts and Virginia, in Vermont and Delaware, are different in
their proportions; but still an equality of representation is preserved,
and the only difference is in the details. But if you argue upon the
principles of the Senate, this equality of popular representation, or by
an equal or relatively equal number, will not apply; you must discuss it
upon another species of equality, of sovereignties, and the independence
of several States federatively connected. Applying principles then to the
election of President, if you reduce the number from which the House of
Representatives is authorized to choose, do you not attack the principles
of the federal compact, rather than the rights of the small States?
The Executive, it had been said, is the man of the people; true, and
he is also, as was said, though upon different grounds, the man of the
Legislature--it was here a combined principle, federative and popular.
Virginia had in that House twenty-two popular representatives, in this
she has two federative; Delaware has one popular and two federative
representatives. And even in the operation of election in the popular
branch of Congress, the federative principle is pursued, and the State
which has only one popular representative has an equal voice in that
instance with the State that has twenty-two popular representatives. It
was therefore evident that the attempt to alter the number from five to
three, is an attack upon the federative principle, and not upon the small
States.

Mr. S. SMITH, when he made the motion for filling up the blank with
three, did it after the most deliberate consideration of the theory and
the principles of the constitution; which, if he understood it right,
intended that the election of the Executive should be in the people, or
as nearly as was possible, consistent with public order and security to
the right of suffrage. The provision admitting the choice by the House
of Representatives, was itself intended only for an extreme case, where
great inconvenience might result from sending a defective election back
to the people, as is customary in Massachusetts, where, if the majority
is deficient, a new election is required. Our object in the amendment
is or should be to make the election more certain by the people. This
was to be done most effectually by leaving it to them to designate the
persons whom they preferred for each office. As under the present form
there was an extreme case, so there might be when the change of number
should take place; for, although even with the number three, there was
a possibility of the choice devolving on the House of Representatives,
yet the adoption of the designating principle and the number three,
would render the case less probable. It never was the intention of the
framers of the constitution that the election should go to the House of
Representatives but in the extreme case; nor was it ever contemplated
that about one-fifth of the people should choose a President for the
rest, which certainly would be the case if what some gentlemen contended
for were to take place. When gentlemen contend for such a power as
would transfer the choice from the people, and place it in the hands
of a minority so small, how happens it that gentlemen will not bear to
hear of the efforts which such arguments or such measures would produce
on the larger States? It was not the interest of the small States to
combine against the large. Suppose it were possible that the four large
States should combine--and a combination of the small States alone could
produce such an effect--nine States in the Union have but thirty-two
votes out of one hundred and forty-two, yet nine States, with one vote
each, make a majority of seventeen, though in relation to population they
contain only about one-fifth of the whole; and by such a proceeding the
one-fifth might choose a President and Vice President in defiance of the
other four-fifths. What would be the consequence of such an election?
At a subsequent election the large States would combine, and by the use
of their votes they would frustrate every object which the small States
might use their efforts to accomplish.

Notwithstanding what had been said concerning the jealousy of States, he
could see nothing in it but the leaven of the old Congress, thrown in to
work up feelings that had been long still. It was the forlorn hope, the
last stratagem of party; and he was the more disposed to think so, when
he saw gentlemen from the large States coming forward as the champions of
the small--this might, to be sure, be magnanimity; but if his discernment
did not deceive him, it was a stratagem to divide the friends of the
amendment. Why was not the same jealousy entertained of the power of
thirteen out of seventeen combining and giving absolute law to the other
four? Why have gentlemen paid no regard to the experience which they
have had from the last election, when less than one third of the members
harassed the public mind, kept the Union in agitation, and Congress
engrossed to the exclusion of nearly all other business for two weeks?
Suppose that the House had been as accessible to corruption as the diets
of other nations have been, and that three men, having in their power
the votes of three States, had been seized upon, and the election made
contrary to the wishes of the people. What would be the effect--on the
minds of the people--on the administration of the Government--and on the
attachment which the people feel for the constitution itself? He need not
attempt to describe the effects. But it is our duty to prevent the return
of such dangers, by keeping the election out of that House. And the most
effectual mode is to fix the selection from the number three.

Mr. PICKERING had not intended to have spoken on this question so far
as it concerned the numbers; but as he should probably vote differently
from his colleague, he conceived it proper to give his motives for his
vote. His wishes for the entire preservation of the constitution were so
strong, that he regretted any change was contemplated to be made in it,
and he wished if an alteration was made to keep as near as possible to
the spirit of the constitution as it now is, and it appeared to him that
the number _three_ conformed more to that spirit than the number _five_.
He believed it to be the intention of the constitution, that the people
should _elect_. As to what gentlemen said concerning the will of the
people, he paid but little regard to it. The will of the people! he did
not know how the will of the people could be known--how gentlemen came by
it; it would not be asserted that it was to be found in the newspapers,
or in private society; in truth he believed it never had been fairly
expressed on the subject. We have seen an amendment brought forward from
New York, but was that an expression of the public opinion? if it was,
it was a very remarkable one, for it contained an absurdity--visible to
every one. He wished to avoid innovations on the constitution, and to
preserve the combined operation of federative and popular principles upon
which it rested unimpaired.

Mr. WORTHINGTON hoped the number three would be adopted in preference to
five. Nevertheless he approved so much of the principle of designation in
the election of the President and Vice President, that rather than lose
it he would vote for it with either number.

The yeas and nays being called for on filling up the blank with the
largest number according to order; the votes were--yeas 12, nays 19, as
follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Bailey, Butler, Condit, Dayton,
    Hillhouse, Olcott, Plumer, Tracy, Wells, White, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke,
    Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Pickering,
    Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith, Samuel Smith, Stone, Taylor,
    and Worthington.

The question on the number three being inserted was then put, and the
yeas and nays being demanded by one fifth of the members present; they
were, yeas 21, nays 10, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Cocke, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas,
    Pickering, Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith, Samuel Smith,
    Stone, Taylor, Worthington, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Butler, Condit, Dayton, Hillhouse,
    Olcott, Plumer, Tracy, Wells, and White.

The House then adjourned.


FRIDAY, December 2.

Mr. WHITE, of Delaware, rose and addressed the chair as follows:

Mr. President: It may be expected that we, who oppose the present
measure, and especially those of us who belong to the smaller States,
and who think the interests of those States will be most injuriously
affected by its adoption, shall assign some reasons for our opinion, and
for the resistance we give it: I will for myself endeavor to do so. I
know well the prejudices of many in favor of this proposed amendment to
the constitution; I know too, and acknowledge with pleasure, the weight
of abilities on the other side of the House by which those prejudices, if
I may so be permitted to call them, will be sustained; this might perhaps
be sufficient to create embarrassment or even silence on my part, but
for the consciousness I feel in the rectitude of my views, and my full
reliance on the talents of those with whom I have the honor generally to
think and act. Upon a subject of the nature and importance of the one
before us a great diversity of sentiment must be expected, and is perhaps
necessary to the due and proper investigation of it. Without detaining
the Senate with further preliminary remarks, presuming upon that
patience and polite indulgence that are at all times extended by this
honorable body to gentlemen who claim their attention, I will proceed
immediately to the subject of the resolution; barely premising that
notwithstanding the opinions of the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. TAYLOR)
and the gentleman from Georgia, (Mr. JACKSON,) whose opinions I highly
respect, I must yet think with my honorable friend from New Jersey (Mr.
DAYTON) that the Constitution of the United States bears upon the face
of it the strongest marks of its having been made under the influence of
State classifications. It was a work of compromise, though not formed,
as stated by the gentleman from Virginia, by the large States yielding
most, but by the smaller States yielding much more to the general good.

It will be recollected that, previous to the adoption of the
constitution, on all legislative subjects, in fact, on every measure of
the constitution, each State had an equal voice; but very different is
the case now, when, in the popular branch of your Government, you see
one State represented by twenty-two members, and another by but one,
voting according to numbers. So that, notwithstanding the ideas of those
gentlemen, and the declaration of an honorable member from Maryland, on
my right, (Mr. SMITH,) that, during his ten years’ service in Congress,
he had never seen anything like State jealousies, State divisions,
or State classification, I must be permitted to predicate part of my
argument upon this business. Should any gentleman be able to show that
the foundation is unsound, the superstructure of course will be easily
demolished. Admitting, then, sir, for the sake of argument, that there
were no very great objections to this proposed alteration in the mode of
electing a President and Vice President, and that it were now part of the
constitution, it might be unwise to strike it out, unless much stronger
arguments had been urged against than I have heard in favor of it; yet I
would not now vote for its adoption.

The United States are now divided, and will probably continue so,
into two great political parties; whenever, under this amendment, a
Presidential election shall come round, and the four rival candidates
be proposed, two of them only will be voted for as President--one of
these two must be the man; the chances in favor of each will be equal.
Will not this increased probability of success afford more than double
the inducement to those candidates, and their friends, to tamper with
the Electors, to exercise intrigue, bribery, and corruption, as in an
election upon the present plan, where the whole four would be voted for
alike, where the chances against each are as three to one, and it is
totally uncertain which of the gentlemen may succeed to the high office?
And there must, indeed, be a great scarcity of character in the United
States, when, in so extensive and populous a country, four citizens
cannot be found, either of them worthy even of the Chief Magistracy
of the nation. But, Mr. President, I have never yet seen the great
inconvenience that has been so much clamored about, and that will be
provided against in future by substituting this amendment. There was,
indeed, a time when it became necessary for the House of Representatives
to elect, by ballot, a President of the United States from the two
highest in vote, and they were engaged here some days, as I have been
told, in a very good-humored way, in the exercise of that constitutional
right. They at length decided; and what was the consequence? The people
were satisfied, and here the thing ended. What does this prove? that the
constitution is defective? No, sir, but rather the wisdom and efficiency
of the very provision intended to be stricken out, and that the people
are acquainted with the nature of their Government; and give me leave
to say, if fortune had smiled upon another man, and that election had
eventuated in another way, the consequence would have been precisely
the same; the great mass of the people would have been content and
quiet; and those factious, restless disorganizers, that are the eternal
disturbers of all well administered Governments, and who then talked of
resistance, would have had too much prudence to hazard their necks in
so dangerous an enterprise. I will not undertake to say that there was
no danger apprehended on that occasion. I know many of the friends of
the constitution had their fears; the experiment however proved them
groundless; but what was the danger apprehended pending the election
in the House of Representatives? Was it that they might choose Colonel
Burr or Mr. Jefferson President? Not at all; they had, notwithstanding
what had been said on this subject by the gentleman from Maryland, (Mr.
WRIGHT,) a clear constitutional right to choose either of them, as much
so as the Electors in the several States had to vote for them in the
first instance; the particular man was a consideration of but secondary
importance to the country; the only ground of alarm was, lest the House
should separate without making any choice, and the Government be without
a head, the consequences of which no man could well calculate.

It has of late, Mr. President, become fashionable to attach very little
importance to the office of Vice President, to consider it a matter but
of small consequence who the man may be; to view his post merely as an
idle post of honor, and the incumbent as a cipher in the Government; or
according to the idea expressed by an honorable member from Georgia, (Mr.
JACKSON,) quoting, I believe, the language of some Eastern politician,
as a fifth wheel to a coach; but in my humble opinion this doctrine is
both incorrect and dangerous. The Vice President is not only the second
officer of Government in point of rank, but of importance, and should be
a man possessing and worthy of the confidence of the nation. I grant,
sir, should this designating mode of election succeed, it will go very
far to destroy, not the certain or contingent duties of the office,
for the latter by this resolution are considerably extended, but what
may be much more dangerous, the personal consequence and worth of the
officer; by rendering the Electors more indifferent about the reputation
and qualification of the candidate, seeing they vote for him but as a
secondary character; and which may occasion this high and important
trust to be deposited in very unsafe hands. By a provision in the first
section of the second article of the constitution, “in case of the
removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation or
inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the
same shall devolve on the Vice President”--and he is constitutionally
the President, not until another can be made only, but of the residue
of the term, which may be nearly four years; and this is not to be
supposed a remote or improbable case. In the State to which I have the
honor to belong, within a few years past, two instances have happened
of the place of Governor becoming vacant, and the duties of the office,
according to the constitution of that State, devolving upon the Speaker
of the Senate. We know well too, generally speaking, that before any man
can acquire a sufficient share of the public confidence to be elected
President, the people must have long been acquainted with his character
and his merit; he must have proved himself a good and faithful servant,
and will of course be far advanced in years, when the chances of life
will be much against him. It may indeed, owing to popular infatuation,
or some other extraordinary causes, be the ill fate of our country, that
an unworthy designing man, grown old and gray in the ways of vice and
hypocrisy, shall for a time dishonor the Presidential chair, or it may
be the fortune of some young man to be elected, but those will rarely
happen. The convention in constructing this part of the constitution, in
settling the first and second offices of the Government, and pointing
out the mode of filling, aware of the probability of the Vice President
succeeding to the office of President, endeavored to attach as much
importance and respectability to his office as possible, by making it
uncertain at the time of voting, which of the persons voted for should
be President, and which Vice President; so as to secure the election of
the best men in the country, or at least those in whom the people reposed
the highest confidence, to the two offices--thus filling the office of
Vice President with one of our most distinguished citizens, who would
give respectability to the Government, and in case of the Presidency
becoming vacant, having at his post a man constitutionally entitled to
succeed, who had been honored with the second largest number of the
suffrages of the people for the same office, and who of consequence would
be probably worthy of the place, and competent to its duties. Let us now,
Mr. President, examine for a moment the certain effect of the change
about to be made, or what must be the operation of this designating
principle, if you introduce it into the constitution. Now the Elector
cannot designate, but must vote for two persons as President, leaving it
to circumstances not within his power to control which shall be the man:
of course he will select two characters, each suitable for that office,
and the second highest in vote must be the Vice President; but upon this
designating plan the public attention will be entirely engrossed in the
election of the President, in making one great man. The eyes of each
contending party will be fixed exclusively upon their candidate for this
first and highest office; no surrounding object can be viewed at the
same time, they will be lost in his disc. The office of President is, in
point of honor, profit, trust, and influential patronage, so infinitely
superior to any other place attainable in this Government, that, in the
pursuit and disposal of it, all minor considerations will be forgotten,
every thing will be made to bend, in order to subserve the ambitious
views of the candidates and their friends. In this angry conflict of
parties, amidst the heat and anxiety of this political warfare, the Vice
Presidency will either be left to chance, or what will be much worse,
prostituted to the basest purposes; character, talents, virtue, and
merit, will not be sought after in the candidate. The question will not
be asked, is he capable? is he honest? But can he by his name, by his
connections, by his wealth, by his local situation, by his influence
or his intrigues, best promote the election of a President? He will be
made a mere stepping-stone of ambition. Thus, by the death or other
constitutional inability of the President to do the duties of the office,
you may find at the head of your Government, as First Magistrate of the
nation, a man who has either smuggled or bought himself into office; who,
not having the confidence of the people, or feeling the constitutional
responsibility of his place, but attributing his elevation merely to
accident, and conscious of the superior claims of others, will be without
restraint upon his conduct, without that strong inducement to consult the
wishes of the people, and to pursue the true interests of the nation,
that the hope of popular applause, and the prospect of re-election, would
offer. Such a state of things might be productive of incalculable evils;
for it is, as I fear time will show, in the power of a President of the
United States to bring this Government into contempt, and this country to
disgrace, if not to ruin.

Mr. PLUMER said that he had generally contented himself with expressing
his opinion by a silent vote, but on a question which affected the rights
of the smaller States, (one of which he had the honor to represent,) he
requested the indulgence of the Senate to a few observations.

He said the constitution had provided only two methods for obtaining
amendments, and both are granted with great caution. If two-thirds of
the several State Legislatures apply, Congress shall call a convention
who are to propose amendments, which, when ratified by the conventions
of three-fourths of the States, will be valid. If this mode is adopted,
Congress have nothing to do but to ascertain the fact, whether the
necessary number of States require a convention. If they do, a convention
must be called. The State Legislatures are only to apply for a
convention. They can neither propose nor decide the amendments.

The other mode is, if two-thirds of both Houses of Congress deem
it necessary to propose amendments, and three-fourths of the State
Legislatures ratify them, they are valid. This is the present mode. The
State Legislatures have nothing to do till after Congress has proposed
the amendments, and then it is their exclusive province either to
ratify or reject them. But they have no authority to direct or even
request Congress to propose particular amendments for themselves to
ratify. Instructions on this subject are therefore improper. It is an
assumption of power, not the exercise of a right. It is an attempt to
create an undue influence over Congress. It is prejudging the question
before it is proposed by the only authority that has the constitutional
right to move it. If these instructions are obligatory, our votes must be
governed, not by the convictions of our own judgments, or the propriety
and fitness of the measure, but by the mandates of other Legislatures.
This would destroy one of the checks that the constitution has provided
against innovation. State Legislatures may, on some subjects, instruct
their Senators; but on this, their instructions ought not to influence,
much less bind us, to propose amendments, unless we ourselves deem them
necessary.

The Senate consists of two members from each State; and in this case, the
concurrence of two-thirds of all the Senate are necessary. A majority
of the Senate constitutes a quorum to do business, but that quorum is a
majority of all the Senators that all the States are entitled to elect.
This applies with equal force to the term “two-thirds of the Senate.”
But in cases where from necessity a speedy decision is requisite, and
where the concurrence of two-thirds is required, the constitution is
explicit in confining that two-thirds to the members present, as in cases
of treaties and impeachments; and also a fifth of the members present
requesting the yeas and nays. If amendments can be constitutionally
proposed by two-thirds of the Senate present, it will follow that twelve
Senators, when only a quorum is present, may propose them against the
will of twenty-two Senators.

This amendment affects the relative interest and importance of the
smaller States. The constitution requires the Electors of each State to
vote for two men, one of whom to be President of the United States. This
affords a degree of security to the small States against the views and
ambition of the large States. It gives them weight and influence in the
choice. By destroying this complex mode of choice, and introducing the
simple principle of designation, the large States can with more ease
elect their candidate. This amendment will enable the Electors from
four States and a half to choose a President, against the will of the
remaining twelve States and a half. Can such a change tend to conciliate
and strengthen the Union?

This amendment has a tendency to render the Vice President less
respectable. He will be voted for not as President of the United States,
but as President of the Senate, elected to preside over forms in this
House. In electing a subordinate officer the Electors will not require
those qualifications requisite for supreme command. The office of Vice
President will be a sinecure. It will be brought to market and exposed
to sale to procure votes for the President. Will the ambitious, aspiring
candidate for the Presidency, will his friends and favorites promote the
election of a man of talents, probity, and popularity for Vice President,
and who may prove his rival? No! They will seek a man of moderate
talents, whose ambition is bounded by that office, and whose influence
will aid them in electing the President. This mode of election is
calculated to increase corruption, promote intrigue, and aid inordinate
ambition. The Vice President will be selected from some of the large
States; he will have a casting vote in this House; and feeble indeed must
his talents be, if his influence will not be equal to that of a member.
This will, in fact, be giving to that State a third Senator.

In the Southern States the blacks are considered as property, and the
States in which they live are thereby entitled to eighteen additional
Electors and Representatives--a number equal to all the Electors and
Representatives that four States and a half are entitled to elect. Will
you, by this amendment, lessen the weight and influence of the Eastern
States in the election of your first officers, and still retain this
unequal article in your constitution? Shall property in one part of the
Union give an increase of Electors, and be wholly excluded in other
States? Can this be right? Will it strengthen the Union?

Mr. TRACY.--I shall attempt to prove, sir, that the resolution before
us contains principles which have a manifest tendency to deprive the
small States of an important right, secured to them by a solemn and
constitutional compact, and to vest an overwhelming power in the great
States. And, further, I shall attempt to show that, in many other points,
the resolution is objectionable, and, for a variety of causes, ought not
to be adopted.

As I shall be obliged, in delineating the main features of this
resolution, to mention the great States in the Union as objects of
jealousy, I wish it to be understood that no special stigma is intended.
“Man is man,” was the maxim expressed in an early part of this debate, by
the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. BUTLER,) and in application to
the subject of government, the maxim is worthy to be written in letters
of gold. Yes, sir, “man is man,” and the melancholy truth that he is
always imperfect and frequently wicked, induces us to fear his power,
and guard against his rapacity, by the establishment and preservation
of laws, and well-regulated constitutions of government. Man, when
connected with very many of his fellow-men, in a great State, derives
power from the circumstance of this numerous combination; and from every
circumstance which clothes him with additional power, he will generally
derive some additional force to his passions.

Having premised this, I shall not deem it requisite to make any apology,
when I attempt to excite the attention, the vigilance, and even the
jealousy of the small, in reference to the conduct of the great States.
The caution is meant to apply against the imperfections and passions
of man, generally, and not against any State, or description of men,
particularly.

It may be proper, in this place, to explain my meaning, when I make use
of the words “small” and “great,” as applicable to States.

Massachusetts has been usually called a great State; but, in respect
to all the operations of this resolution, she must, I think, be ranked
among the small States. The district of Maine is increasing rapidly,
and must, in the nature of things, soon become a State. To which
event, its location, being divided from what was the ancient Colony of
Massachusetts, by the intervention of New Hampshire, will very much
contribute. I believe there is a legislative provision of some years’
standing, authorizing a division at the option of Maine. When this event
shall occur, Massachusetts, although, in comparison with Connecticut and
Rhode Island, she will not be a small State, yet, in comparison with
many others, must be so considered. I think myself justifiable, then,
for my present purposes, in calling Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, and
South Carolina, small States. They are limited in point of territory,
and cannot reasonably expect any great increase of population for many
years, not, indeed, until the other States shall become so populous as
to discourage emigration, with agricultural views; which may retain the
population of the small States as seamen or manufacturers. This event,
if it ever arrives, must be distant. A possible exception only may exist
in favor of Maine; but, when we consider its climate, and a variety of
other circumstances, it is believed to form no solid exception to this
statement.

By the same rule of deciding, the residue of the States must be called
great; for although Georgia and several others are not sufficiently
populous, at this time, to be considered relatively great States, yet
their prospect of increase, with other circumstances, fairly bring them
within the description, in respect to the operation of the measure now
under consideration.

It will be recollected that, in the various turns which the debate has
taken, gentlemen have repeatedly said that the constitution was formed
for the people; that the good of the whole was its object; that nothing
was discernible in it like a contest of States, nothing like jealousy
of small States against the great; and although such distinctions and
jealousies might have existed under the first confederation, yet they
could have no existence under the last. And one gentleman (Mr. SMITH,
of Maryland) has said that he has been a member of this Government ten
years, and has heard nothing of great and small States, as in the least
affecting the operations of Government, or the feelings of those who
administer it.

Propriety, therefore, requires that we attentively examine the
constitution itself, not only to obtain correct ideas upon these
observations, so repeatedly urged, but to place in the proper light the
operations and effects of the resolution in debate. If we attend to the
constitution, we shall immediately find evident marks of concession
and compromise, and that the parties to these concessions were the
great and small States. And the members of the convention who formed
the instrument have, in private information and public communications,
united in the declaration, that the constitution was the result of
concession and compromise between the great and small States. In this
examination of the constitution it will be impossible to keep out of
view our political relations under the first confederation. We primarily
united upon the footing of complete State equality--each State had one,
and no State had more than one vote in the Federal Council or Congress.
With such a confederation we successfully waged war, and became an
independent nation. When we were relieved from the pressure of war, that
confederation, both in structure and power, was found inadequate to
the purposes for which it was established. Under these circumstances,
the States, by their convention, entered into a new agreement, upon
principles better adapted to promote their mutual security and happiness.
But this last agreement, or constitution, under which we are now united,
was manifestly carved out of the first confederation. The small States
adhered tenaciously to the principles of State equality; and gave up
only a part of that federative principle, complete State equality, and
that with evident caution and reluctance. To this federative principle
they were attached by habit; and their attachment was sanctioned and
corroborated by the example of most if not all the ancient and the modern
confederacies. And when the great States claimed a weight in the councils
of the nation proportionate to their numbers and wealth, the novelty of
the claim, as well as its obvious tendency to reduce the sovereignty of
the small States, must have produced serious obstacles to its admission.
Hence it is, that we find in the constitution but one entire departure
from the federal principle. The House of Representatives is established
upon the popular principle, and given to numbers and wealth, or to the
great States, which, in this view of the subject, are synonymous. It was
thought, by the convention, that a consolidation of the States into one
simple Republic would be improper. And the local feelings and jealousies
of all, but more especially of the small States, rendered a consolidation
impracticable.

The Senate, who have the power of a legislative check upon the House
of Representatives, and many other extensive and important powers, is
preserved as an entire federative feature of Government as it was enjoyed
by the small States, under the first confederacy.

In the article which obliges the Electors of President to vote for one
person not an inhabitant of the same State with themselves, is discovered
State jealousy. In the majorities required for many purposes by the
constitution, although there were other motives for the regulations, yet
the jealousy of the small States is clearly discernible. Indeed, sir,
if we peruse the constitution with attention, we shall find the small
States are perpetually guarding the federative principle, that is, State
equality. And this, in every part of it, except in the choice of the
House of Representatives, and in their ordinary legislative proceedings.
They go so far as to prohibit any amendment which may affect the equality
of States in the Senate.

This is guarding against almost an impossibility, because the Senators
of small States must be criminally remiss in their attendance, and
the Legislatures extremely off their guard, if they permit such
alterations, which aim at their own existence. But lest some accident,
some unaccountable blindness or perfidy should put in jeopardy the
federative principle in the Senate, they totally and for ever prohibit
all attempts at such a measure. In the choice of President, the mutual
caution and concession of the great and small States is, if possible,
more conspicuous than in any other part of the constitution.

He is to be chosen by Electors appointed as the State Legislatures shall
direct, not according to numbers entirely, but adding two Electors in
each State as representatives of State sovereignty. Thus Delaware obtains
three votes for President, whereas she could have but one in right of
numbers. Yet, mixed as this mode of choice is, with both popular and
federative principles, we see the small States watching its motions and
circumscribing it to one attempt only, and, on failure of an Electoral
choice, they instantly seize upon the right of a federal election, and
select from the candidates a President by States and not by numbers. In
confirmation of my assertion, that this part of the constitution was
peculiarly the effect of compromise between the great and small States,
permit me to quote an authority which will certainly have great weight,
not only in the Senate, but through the Union, I mean that of the present
Secretary of State, (Mr. Madison,) who was a leading member of the
Federal Convention who formed, and of the Virginia Convention who adopted
the constitution.

In the Debates of the Virginia Convention, volume 3, page 77, Mr. Madison
says, speaking of the mode of electing the President:

    “As to the eventual voting by States, it has my approbation.
    The lesser States and some larger States will be generally
    pleased by that mode. The Deputies from the small States
    argued, and there is some force in their reasoning, that, when
    the people voted, the large States evidently had the advantage
    over the rest, and, without varying the mode, the interests of
    the little States might be neglected or sacrificed. Here is a
    compromise. For in the eventual election, the small States will
    have the advantage.”

After this view of the constitution, let us inquire, what is the direct
object of the proposed alteration in the choice of President?

To render more practicable and certain the choice by Electors--and for
this reason: that the people at large, or in other words, that the great
States, ought to have more weight and influence in the choice. That it
should be brought nearer to the popular and carried further from the
federative principle. This claim we find was made at the formation of
the constitution. The great States naturally wished for a popular choice
of First Magistrate. This mode was sanctioned by the example of many
of the States in the choice of Governor. The small States claimed a
choice on the federative principle, by the Legislatures, and to vote by
States; analogies and examples were not wanting to sanction this mode of
election. A consideration of the weight and influence of a President of
this Union, must have multiplied the difficulties of agreeing upon the
mode of choice. But as I have before said, by mutual concession, they
agreed upon the present mode, combining both principles and dividing
between the two parties, thus mutually jealous, as they could, this
important privilege of electing a Chief Magistrate.

This mode then became established, and the right of the small States
to elect upon the federative principle, or by States, in case of the
contingency of electoral failure of choice, cannot with reason and
fairness be taken from them, without their consent, and on a full
understanding of its operation; since it was meant to be secured to them
by the constitution, and was one of the terms upon which they became
members of the present confederacy; and for which privilege they gave an
equivalent to the great States in sacrificing so much of the federative
principle, or State equality.

The constitution is nicely balanced, with the federative and popular
principles; the Senate are the guardians of the former, and the House of
Representatives of the latter; and any attempts to destroy this balance,
under whatever specious names or pretences they may be presented,
should be watched with a jealous eye. Perhaps a fair definition of the
constitutional powers of amending is, that you may upon experiment so
modify the constitution in its practice and operation, as to give it,
upon its own principles, a more complete effect. But this is an attack
upon a fundamental principle established after a long deliberation,
and by mutual concession, a principle of essential importance to the
instrument itself, and an attempt to wrest from the small States a vested
right, and by it, to increase the power and influence of the large
States. I shall not pretend, sir, that the parties to this constitutional
compact cannot alter its original essential principles, and that such
alterations may not be effected under the name of amendment; but, let
a proposal of that kind come forward in its own proper and undisguised
shape; let it be fairly stated to Congress, to the State Legislatures,
to the people at large, that the intention is to change an important
federative feature in the constitution, which change in itself and all
its consequences, will tend to a consolidation of this Union into a
simple republic; let it be fairly stated, that the small States have too
much agency in the important article of electing a Chief Magistrate,
and that the great States claim the choice; and we shall then have a
fair decision. If the Senators of the small States, and if their State
Legislatures, will then quietly part with the right they have, no person
can reasonably complain.

Nothing can be more obvious, than the intention of the plan adopted by
our constitution for choosing a President. The Electors are to nominate
two persons, of whom they cannot know which will be President; this
circumstance not only induces them to select both from the best men; but
gives a direct advantage into the hands of the small States even in the
electoral choice. For they can always select from the two candidates set
up by the Electors of large States, by throwing their votes upon their
favorite, and of course giving him a majority; or, if the Electors of
the large States should, to prevent this effect, scatter their votes
for one candidate, then the Electors of the small States would have it
in their power to elect a Vice President. So that, in any event, the
small States will have a considerable agency in the election. But if
the discriminating or designating principle is carried, as contained in
this resolution, the whole, or nearly the whole right and agency of the
small States, in the electoral choice of Chief Magistrate, is destroyed,
and their chance of obtaining a federative choice by States, if not
destroyed, is very much diminished.

The whole power of election is now vested in the two parties; numbers and
States, or, great and small States; and it is demonstration itself, if
you increase the power of the one, in just such proportion you diminish
that of the other. Do the gentlemen suppose that the public will, when
constitutionally expressed by a majority of States, in pursuance of the
federative principle of our Government, is of less validity, or less
binding upon the community at large, than the public will expressed by
a popular majority? The framers of your constitution, the people who
adopted it, meant, that the public will, in the choice of a President,
should be expressed by Electors, if they could agree, and if not, the
public will should be expressed by a majority of the States, acting in
their federative capacity, and that in both cases the expression of the
public will should be equally binding.

It is pretended that the public will can never properly or
constitutionally be expressed by a majority of numbers of the people, or
of the House of Representatives. This may be a pleasing doctrine enough
to great States; but it is certainly incorrect. Our constitution has
given the expression of the public will, in a variety of instances, other
than that of the choice of President, into very different hands from
either House of Representatives or the people at large. The President and
Senate, and in many cases the President alone, can express the public
will, in appointments of high trust and responsibility, and it cannot
be forgotten that the President sometimes expresses the public will by
removals. Treaties, highly important expressions of the public will, are
made by the President and Senate; and they are the supreme law of the
land. In the several States, many great offices are filled, and even
the Chief Magistracy, by various modes of election. The public will is
sometimes expressed by pluralities instead of majorities, sometimes by
both branches of the Legislatures, and sometimes by one, and in certain
contingencies, elections are settled by lot. The people have adopted
constitutions containing such regulations, and experience has proved that
they are well calculated to preserve their liberties and promote their
happiness. From what good or even pardonable motive, then, can it be
urged that the present mode of electing our President has a tendency to
counteract the public will? Do gentlemen intend to destroy every federal
feature in this constitution? And is this resolution a precursor to a
complete consolidation of the Union, and to the establishment of a simple
republic?--Or will it suffice to break down every federative feature
which secures to one portion of the Union, to the small States, their
rights?

Mr. TAYLOR.--The opposition to this discriminating amendment to the
constitution is condensed into a single stratagem, namely: an effort to
excite the passion of jealousy in various forms. Endeavors have been made
to excite geographical jealousies--a jealousy of the smaller against the
larger States--a jealousy in the people against the idea of amending
the constitution; and even a jealousy against individual members of
this House. Sir, is this passion a good medium through which to discern
truth, or is it a mirror calculated to reflect error? Will it enlighten
or deceive? Is it planted in good or in evil--in moral or in vicious
principles? Wherefore, then, do gentlemen endeavor to blow it up? Is it
because they distrust the strength of their arguments, that they resort
to this furious and erring passion? Is it because they know that

    ----“Trifles light as air,
    Are, to the jealous, confirmations strong
    As proofs of holy writ!”

So far as these efforts have been directed towards a geographical
demarcation of the interests of the Union into North and South, in order
to excite a jealousy of one division against another; and, so far as they
have been used to create suspicions of individuals, they have been either
so feeble, inapplicable, or frivolous, as to bear but lightly upon the
question, and to merit but little attention. But the attempts to array
States against States because they differ in size, and to prejudice the
people against the idea of amending their constitution, bear a more
formidable aspect, and ought to be repelled, because they are founded on
principles the most mischievous and inimical to the constitution, and,
could they be successful, are replete with great mischiefs.

Towards exciting this jealousy of smaller States against larger States,
the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. TRACY) had labored to prove that the
federal principle of the constitution of the United States was founded in
the idea of minority invested with operative power. That, in pursuance
of this principle, it was contemplated and intended that the election of
a President should frequently come into the House of Representatives,
and to divert it from thence by this amendment would trench upon the
federal principle of our constitution, and diminish the rights of the
smaller States, bestowed by this principle upon them. This was the scope
of his argument to excite their jealousy, and is the amount also of
several other arguments delivered by gentlemen on the same side of the
question. He did not question the words, but the ideas of gentlemen.
Words, selected from their comrades, are easily asserted to misrepresent
opinions, as he had himself experienced during the discussion on the
subject.

This idea of federalism ought to be well discussed by the smaller
States, before they will suffer it to produce the intended effect--that
of exciting their jealousy against the larger. To him it appeared to
be evidently incorrect. Two principles sustain our constitution: one a
majority of the people, the other a majority of the States; the first
was necessary to preserve the liberty or sovereignty of the people; the
last, to preserve the liberty or sovereignty of the States. But both are
founded in the principle of majority; and the effort of the constitution
is to preserve this principle in relation both to the people and the
States, so that neither species of sovereignty or independence should
be able to destroy the other. Many illustrations might be adduced. That
of amending the constitution will suffice. Three-fourths of the States
must concur in this object, because a less number or a majority of States
might not contain a majority of people; therefore, the constitution
is not amendable by a majority of States, lest a species of State
sovereignty might, under color of amending the constitution, infringe
the right of the people. On the other hand, a majority of the people
residing in the large States cannot amend the constitution, lest they
should diminish or destroy the sovereignty of the small States, the
federal Union, or federalism itself. Hence a concurrence of the States
to amend the constitution became necessary, not because federalism was
founded in the idea of minority, but for a reason the very reverse
of that idea--that is, to cover the will both of a majority of the
people and a majority of States, so as to preserve the great element
of self-government, as it regarded State sovereignty, and also as it
regarded the sovereignty of the people.

For this great purpose certain political functions are assigned to be
performed, under the auspices of the State or federal principle, and
certain others under the popular principle. It was the intention of the
constitution that these functions should be performed in conformity to
its principle. If that principle is in fact a government of a minority,
then these functions ought to be performed by a minority. When the
federal principle is performing a function, according to this idea,
a majority of the States ought to decide. And, by the same mode of
reasoning, when the popular principle is performing a function, then a
minority of the people ought to decide. This brings us precisely to the
question of the amendment. It is the intention of the constitution that
the popular principle shall operate in the election of a President and
Vice President. It is also the intention of the constitution that the
popular principle, in discharging the functions committed to it by the
constitution, should operate by a majority and not by a minority. That
the majority of the people should be driven, by an unforeseen state of
parties, to the necessity of relinquishing their will in the election of
one or the other of these officers, or that the principle of majority, in
a function confided to the popular will, should be deprived of half its
rights, and be laid under a necessity of violating its duty to preserve
the other half, is not the intention of the constitution.

But the gentleman from Connecticut has leaped over all this ground,
and gotten into the House of Representatives, without considering
the principles of the constitution, as applicable to the election of
President and Vice President by Electors, and distinguishing them
from an election by the House of Representatives. And by mingling and
interweaving the two modes of electing together, a considerable degree
of complexity has been produced. If, however, it is admitted that in an
election of a President and Vice President by Electors, the will of the
electing majority ought fairly to operate, and that an election by the
will of a minority would be an abuse or corruption of the principles of
the constitution, then it follows that an amendment, to avoid this abuse,
accords with, and is necessary to save these principles. In like manner,
had an abuse crept into the same election, whenever it was to be made
under the federal principle by the House of Representatives, enabling
a minority of States to carry the election, it would not have violated
the intention of the constitution to have corrected this abuse, also,
by an amendment. For, sir, I must suppose it to have been the intention
of the constitution that both the federal principle and the popular
principle should operate in those functions respectively assigned to
them, perfectly and not imperfectly--that is, the former by a majority of
States, and the latter by a majority of the people.

Under this view of the subject, the amendment ought to be considered.
Then the question will be, whether it is calculated or not to cause the
popular principle, applied by the constitution in the first instance, to
operate perfectly, and to prevent the abuse of an election by a minority?
If it is, it corresponds with the intention, diminishes nothing of the
rights of the smaller States, and, of course, affords them no cause of
jealousy.

Sir, it could never have been the intention of the constitution to
produce a state of things by which a majority of the popular principle
should be under the necessity of voting against its judgment to secure a
President, and by which a minor faction should acquire a power capable
of defeating the majority in the election of President, or of electing
a Vice President contrary to the will of the electing principle. To
permit this abuse would be a fraudulent mode of defeating the operation
of the popular principle in this election, in order to transfer it to
the federal principle--to disinherit the people for the sake of endowing
the House of Representatives; whereas it was an accidental and not an
artificial disappointment in the election of a President, against which
the constitution intended to provide. A fair and not an unfair attempt
to elect was previously to be made by the popular principle, before
the election was to go into the House of Representatives. And if the
people of all the States, both large and small, should, by an abuse of
the real design of the constitution, be bubbled out of the election of
executive power, by leaving to them the nominal right of an abortive
effort, and transferring to the House of Representatives the substantial
right of a real election, nothing will remain but to corrupt the election
in that House by some of those abuses of which elections by diets are
susceptible, to bestow upon executive power an aspect both formidable and
inconsistent with the principles by which the constitution intended to
mould it.

The great check imposed upon executive power was a popular mode of
election; and the true object of jealousy, which ought to attract the
attention of the people of every State, is any circumstance tending
to diminish or destroy that check. It was also a primary intention of
the constitution to keep executive power independent of legislative;
and although a provision was made for its election by the House of
Representatives in a possible case, that possible case never was
intended to be converted into the active rule, so as to destroy in a
degree the line of separation and independency between the executive and
legislative power. The controversy is not therefore between larger and
smaller States, but between the people of every State and the House of
Representatives. Is it better that the people--a fair majority of the
popular principle--should elect executive power; or, that a minor faction
should be enabled to embarrass and defeat the judgment and will of this
majority, and throw the election into the House of Representatives? This
is the question. If this amendment should enable the popular principle
to elect executive power, and thus keep it separate and distinct from
legislation, the intention of the constitution, the interest of the
people, and the principles of our policy, will be preserved; and if so,
it is as I have often endeavored to prove in this debate, the interest of
the smaller States themselves, that the amendment should prevail. For,
sir, is an exposure of their Representatives to bribery and corruption
(a thing which may possibly happen at some future day, when men lose
that public virtue which now governs them) an acquisition more desirable
than all those great objects best (if not exclusively) attainable by
the election of executive power by the popular principle of the Federal
Government, as the constitution itself meditates and prefers?

So far, then, the amendment strictly coincides with the constitution and
with the interests of the people of every State in the Union. But suppose
by some rare accident the election should still be sent into the House of
Representatives, does not the amendment then afford cause of jealousy to
the smaller States? Sir, each State has but one vote, whether it is large
or small; and the President and Vice President are still to be chosen out
of five persons. Such is the constitution in both respects now. To have
enlarged the number of nominees, would have increased the occurrence of
an election by the House of Representatives; and if, as I have endeavored
to prove, it is for the interest of every State, that the election should
be made by the popular principle of Government and not by that House,
then it follows, that whatever would have a tendency to draw the election
into that House, is against the interest of every State in the Union; and
that every State in the Union is interested to avoid an enlargement of
the nominees, if it would have such a tendency.

To illustrate this argument, I will repeat a position which I lately
advanced, namely, that the substance of a constitution may be effectually
destroyed, and yet its form may remain unaltered. England illustrates
it. The Government of that country took its present form in the
thirteenth century; but its aspect in substance has been extremely
different at different periods, under the same form. Without taking
time to mark the changes in substance which have taken place under
the form of Kings, Lords, and Commons, it will suffice to cast our
eyes upon the present state of that Government. What are now its chief
and substantial energies? Armies, debt, executive patronage, penal
laws, and corporations. These are the modern energies or substance
of the English monarchy; to the ancient English monarchy they were
unknown. Of the ancient, they were substantial abuses; for, whether
these modern energies are good or bad, they overturned the ancient
monarchy substantially, without altering its form. Under every change
of Administration these abuses proceeded. The _outs_ were clamorous for
preserving the constitution, as they called it; for, though divorced
from its administration, the hope of getting in again caused them to
maintain abuses, by which their avarice or ambition might be gratified
upon the next turn of the wheel; just as in Prussia, where divorces are
common, nothing is more usual than for late husbands to affect a violent
passion for a former wife, if she carried off from him a good estate! And
the _ins_, fearing the national jealousy, and the prepossession against
amending the form of Government, and meeting new abuses by new remedies,
brought no relief to the nation. So that under every change of men abuses
proceeded.

The solution of this effect exists in the species of political craft
similar to priestcraft. Mankind were anciently deprived of their
religious liberty by a dissemination of a fanatical zeal for some idol;
in times of ignorance, this idol was of physical structure; and when
that fraud was detected, a metaphysical idol in the shape of a tenet or
dogma was substituted for it, infinitely more pernicious in its effects,
because infinitely more difficult of detection. The same system has
been pursued by political craft. It has ever labored to excite the same
species of idolatry and superstition for the same reason, namely, to
conceal its own frauds and vices. Sometimes it sets up a physical, at
others a metaphysical idol, as the object of vulgar superstition. Of one,
the former “Grand Monarch of France;” of the other, the present “Church
and State” tenet of England is an evidence. And if our constitution is
to be made like the “Church and State” tenet of England, a metaphysical
political idol, which it will be sacrilege to amend, even for the sake of
saving both that and the national liberty; and if, like that tenet, it is
to be exposed to all the means which centuries may suggest to vicious men
for its substantial destruction, it is not hard to imagine that it also
may become a monument of the inefficacy of unalterable forms of political
law to correct avarice and ambition in the new and multifarious shapes
they are for ever assuming.

It has been urged, sir, by the gentlemen in opposition, in a mode, as
if they supposed we wished to conceal or deny it, that one object of
this amendment is to bestow upon the majority a power to elect a Vice
President. Sir, I avow it to be so. This is one object of the amendment;
and the other, as to which I have heretofore expressed my sentiments,
is to enable the Electors, by perfecting the election of a President,
to keep it out of the House of Representatives. Are not both objects
correct, if, as I have endeavored to prove, the constitution, in all
cases where it refers elections to the popular principle, intended that
principle to act by majorities? Did the constitution intend that any
minor faction should elect a Vice President? If not, then an amendment
to prevent it accords with, and is representative of, the constitution.
Permit me here again to illustrate by an historical case. England, in the
time of Charles the Second, was divided into two parties--Protestants
and Papists--and the heir to the throne was a Papist. The Protestants,
constituting the majority of the nation, passed an exclusion bill, but
it was defeated, and the minor Papist faction, in the person of the
Duke of York, got possession of executive power. The consequences were,
domestic oppressions and rebellions, foreign wars occasionally for almost
a century, and the foundation of a national debt, under which the nation
has been ever since groaning, and under which the Government will finally
expire.

Had the majority carried and executed the proposed exclusion of James
II. from executive power, the English would have escaped all these
calamities. Such precisely may be our case. I beg again that it may be
understood that, in this application, I speak prospectively and not
retrospectively.

But it is far from being improbable, that in place of these religious
parties, political parties may arise of equal zeal and animosity. We may
at some future day see our country divided into a republican party and
a monarchical party. Is it wise, or according to the intention of the
constitution, that a minor monarchical faction should, by any means,
acquire the power of electing a Vice President, the possible successor
to executive power? Ought a republican majority to stake the national
liberty upon the frail life of one man? Will not a monarchical Executive
overturn the system of a republican Executive? And ought the United
States to shut their eyes upon this possible danger until the case shall
happen, when it may be too late to open them?

Sir, let us contemplate the dreadful evils which the English nation have
suffered from the cause of investing executive power in a man hostile
to the national opinion, and avoid them. They suffered, because their
exclusion bill was abortive. Election is our exclusion bill. Its efficacy
depends upon its being exercised by a majority. It is only a minority
which can render election insufficient to exclude monarchical principles
from executive power. It is against minority that election is intended to
operate, because minority is the author of monarchy and aristocracy.

Shall we, sir, be so injudicious as to make election destroy the
principle of election by adhering to a mode of exercising it, now seen to
be capable of bestowing upon a minority the choice of a Vice President?
Shall we make election, invented to exclude monarchy, a handmaid for
its introduction? Or shall we, if we do not see monarchy at this day
assailing our republican system, conclude that it never will; although
we know that this system has but two foes, of whom monarchy is one? No,
sir, let us rather draw instruction from the prophetic observations of
a member of the English House of Commons, whilst the bill for excluding
James II. was depending, who said:

    “I hear a lion in the lobby roar,
    Say, Mr. Speaker, shall we shut the door,
    And keep him there! Or shall we let him in,
    To try if we can get him out again!”

Instead of shutting the door, the English left it open; tyranny got in;
and the evils produced by its expulsion, to that nation, may possibly
have been equal to those which submission would have produced.

The question was called for loudly at half-past nine, and put--the yeas
and nays being taken, were:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson,
    Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith,
    Samuel Smith, Stone, Taylor, Worthington, and Wright--22.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Butler, Dayton, Hillhouse, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Tracy, Wells, and White--10.

Upon the PRESIDENT declaring the question carried by two-thirds--

Mr. TRACY said he denied that the question was fairly decided. He took it
to be the intention of the constitution, that there should be two-thirds
of the whole number of Senators elected, which would make the number
necessary to its passage 23.

It was moved to adjourn to Monday.

Mr. TAYLOR said that since it was proposed to adjourn to Monday, when he
should be disqualified to sit in that House, he hoped the Senate would
not rise without deciding the question definitively on the gentleman’s
objections.

Mr. TRACY said he certainly would avail himself of the principle to
oppose its passage through the State Legislatures.

The PRESIDENT declared the question had passed the Senate by the majority
required, and conformable to the constitution and former usage.

The amendment, as adopted, is as follows:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds of
    both Houses concurring_, That, in lieu of the third paragraph
    of the first section of the second article of the Constitution
    of the United States, the following be proposed as an amendment
    to the Constitution of the United States, which, when ratified
    by three-fourths of the Legislatures of the several States,
    shall be valid, to all intents and purposes, as part of the
    said Constitution, to wit:

    The Electors shall meet in their respective States and vote
    by ballot for President and Vice President, one of whom, at
    least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with
    themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted
    for as President, and, in distinct ballots, the person voted
    for as Vice President; and they shall make distinct lists of
    all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted
    for as Vice President, and of the number of votes for each,
    which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to
    the seat of Government of the United States, directed to the
    President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall,
    in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives,
    open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be
    counted. The person having the greatest number of votes for
    the President, shall be the President, if such number be a
    majority of the whole number of electors appointed: and if
    no person have such majority, then, from the persons having
    the highest numbers, not exceeding three, on the list of
    those voted for as President, the House of Representatives
    shall choose, immediately, by ballot, the President. But, in
    choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States,
    the representation from each State having one vote; a quorum
    for this purpose shall consist of a member or members,
    from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the
    States shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of
    Representatives shall not choose a President, whenever the
    right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day
    of March next following, then the Vice President shall act as
    President, as in the case of death or any other constitutional
    disability of the President.

    The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice
    President, shall be the Vice President, if such number be a
    majority of the whole number of electors appointed; and if no
    person have a majority, then, from the two highest numbers
    on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice President; a
    quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the
    whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number
    shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally
    ineligible to the office of President, shall be eligible to
    that of Vice President of the United States.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary request the concurrence of the House of
Representatives in this resolution.


MONDAY, December 5.

_Impressment of Seamen._

The following messages were received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate of the United States_:

    In compliance with the desire of the Senate, expressed in
    their resolution of the 22d of November, on the impressment of
    seamen in the service of the United States, by the agents of
    foreign nations; I now lay before the Senate a letter from the
    Secretary of State, with a specification of the cases of which
    information has been received.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    DEC. 5, 1803.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Tripolitan Aggression._

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I have the satisfaction to inform you, that the act of
    hostility mentioned, in my message of the 4th of November, to
    have been committed by a cruiser of the Emperor of Morocco,
    on a vessel of the United States, has been disavowed by the
    Emperor. All differences in consequence thereof have been
    amicably adjusted, and the Treaty of 1796, between this country
    and that, has been recognized and confirmed by the Emperor,
    each party restoring to the other what had been detained or
    taken. I enclose the Emperor’s orders given on this occasion.

    The conduct of our officers generally, who have had a part in
    these transactions, has merited entire approbation.

    The temperate and correct course pursued by our Consul, Mr.
    Simpson, the promptitude and energy of Commodore Preble,
    the efficacious co-operation of Captains Rodgers and
    Campbell, of the returning squadron, the proper decision of
    Captain Bainbridge, that a vessel which had committed an
    open hostility, was of right to be detained for inquiry and
    consideration, and the general zeal of the other officers and
    men, are honorable facts, which I make known with pleasure. And
    to these I add, what was indeed transacted in another quarter,
    the gallant enterprise of Captain Rodgers, in destroying, on
    the coast of Tripoli, a corvette of that power, of 22 guns.

    I recommend to the consideration of Congress, a just
    indemnification for the interest acquired by the captors of
    the Mishouda and Mirboha, yielded by them for the public
    accommodation.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    DEC. 5, 1803.

The Messages and papers therein respectively referred to, were read.

_Ordered_, That they severally lie for consideration.


WEDNESDAY, December 7.

AARON BURR, Vice President of the United States and President of the
Senate, attended.

JOHN ARMSTRONG, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the State of New
York, in the room of De Witt Clinton, resigned, attended.


THURSDAY, December 8.

The credentials of Mr. ARMSTRONG were read, and the oath was administered
to him by the Vice President as the law provides.


MONDAY, December 12.

_Amendment of the Constitution._

The Senate resumed the consideration of the last resolution reported
by the committee appointed on the 22d of October last, to consider the
motion for an amendment to the constitution in the mode of electing the
President and Vice President of the United States; which is as follows:

    “_Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds
    of both Houses concurring_, That the following amendment be
    proposed to the Legislatures of the several States as an
    amendment to the constitution of the United States, which,
    when ratified by three-fourths of the said Legislature, shall
    be valid, to all intents and purposes, as part of the said
    Constitution, to wit;

    “That no person who has been twice successively elected
    President of the United States shall be eligible as President
    until four years shall have elapsed: but any citizen who
    has been President of the United States may, after such
    intervention, be eligible to the office of President for four
    years and no longer.”

On the question to agree to this resolution, it passed in the
negative--yeas 4, nays 25, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Butler, Dayton, and Jackson.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin,
    Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter,
    Israel Smith, John Smith, Samuel Smith, Tracy, White,
    Worthington, and Wright.


TUESDAY, December 13.

ABRAHAM B. VENABLE, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Virginia on the 7th instant, produced his credentials, was qualified,
and took his seat in the Senate.

_Repeal of Bankrupt Act._

The bill, entitled, “An act to repeal an act, entitled ‘An act to
establish a uniform system of bankruptcy throughout the United States,’”
was read the third time; and, on motion, that the further consideration
of this bill be postponed to the second Monday in December next, it
passed in the negative--yeas 13, nays, 17, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley, Brown, Condit,
Jackson, Israel Smith, Samuel Smith, Tracy, White, and Wright.

NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Butler, Cocke, Dayton, Ellery,
Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter,
John Smith, Venable, and Worthington.

On the question, “Shall this bill pass?” it was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 17, nays 12, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Butler, Cocke, Dayton, Ellery,
Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter,
John Smith, Venable, and Worthington.

NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley, Brown, Condit,
Israel Smith, Samuel Smith, Tracy, White, and Wright.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill do pass.[5]


THURSDAY, December 15.

_Classification of Senators._

On motion, the Senate proceeded to ascertain the classes in which the
Senators of the State of Ohio should be inserted, as the constitution and
rule heretofore adopted prescribe; and it was ordered, that two lots,
No. 2 and a blank, be by the Secretary rolled up and put in the ballot
box; and it was understood that the Senator who should draw the lot No.
2 should be inserted in the class of Senators whose terms of service
respectively expire in four years from and after the third day of March,
1803, in order to equalize the classes.

Accordingly, Mr. WORTHINGTON drew lot No. 2, and Mr. JOHN SMITH drew the
blank.

It was then agreed that two lots, Nos. 1 and 3, should be by the
Secretary rolled up and put into the ballot-box, and one of these
be drawn by Mr. JOHN SMITH, the Senator from the State of Ohio, not
classed; and it was understood that, if he should draw lot No. 1, he
should be inserted in the class of Senators whose terms of service will
respectively expire in two years from and after the third day of March,
1803; but, if he should draw lot No. 3, it was understood that he should
be inserted in the class of Senators whose terms respectively expire in
six years from and after the third day of March, 1803. Mr. JOHN SMITH
drew lot No. 3, and is classed accordingly.


FRIDAY, December 16.

_Importation of Slaves._

The Senate took into consideration the motion made yesterday, that
a committee be appointed to inquire whether any, and, if any, what
amendments ought to be made in the act, entitled “An act to prevent the
importation of certain persons into certain States, by the laws whereof
their admission is prohibited,” and that the committee have leave to
report by bill or otherwise; and the motion was adopted; and

_Ordered_, That Messrs. FRANKLIN, VENABLE, and I. SMITH, be this
committee.


MONDAY, December 19.

_Admissions on the Floor._

The Senate took into consideration the motion made on the 16th instant,
that no person be admitted on the floor of the Senate Chamber except
members of the House of Representatives, foreign ministers, and the Heads
of Departments, unless introduced by a member of the Senate.

On motion, it was agreed to strike out the words “unless introduced by a
member of the Senate;” and on motion, it was agreed to subjoin, after the
word “Departments,” “and Judges of the Supreme and District Courts of the
United States.”

On motion to insert after the word “States,” “and the ladies,” it passed
in the negative--yeas 12, nays 16, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Brown, Dayton, Jackson,
    Maclay, Potter, I. Smith, S. Smith, Tracy, White, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Bailey, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Hillhouse, Olcott, Pickering,
    Plumer, J. Smith, Venable, and Worthington.

On motion to insert after the word “States,” “the Governors and
Councillors of the respective States, and the Representatives of the
State Legislatures,” it passed in the negative--yeas 13, nays 15, as
follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Bailey, Breckenridge,
    Dayton, Maclay, Potter, I. Smith, S. Smith, Tracy, Venable,
    Worthington, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley, Brown, Cocke,
    Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Hillhouse, Jackson, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, J. Smith, and White.

On motion to agree to the resolution amended as follows:

    _Resolved_, That no person be admitted on the floor of the
    Senate Chamber, except members of the House of Representatives,
    foreign ministers, and Heads of Departments, and Judges of the
    Supreme and District Courts of the United States:

It was determined in the negative--yeas 7, nays 21, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Bailey, Condit, Dayton, Franklin,
    Jackson, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Ellery, Hillhouse, Maclay, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Potter, I. Smith, S. Smith, Tracy, Venable,
    White, and Worthington.


FRIDAY, December 30.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE, from the committee appointed, on the 5th instant, for
that purpose, reported a bill erecting Louisiana into two Territories,
and providing for the temporary government thereof; and the bill was
read, and ordered to the second reading.


TUESDAY, January 3, 1804.

_Erection of Contingent Fund._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I now lay before the Congress the annual account of the fund
    established for defraying the contingent charges of Government.
    No occasion having arisen for making use of any part of it in
    the present year, the balance of eighteen thousand five hundred
    and sixty dollars, unexpended at the end of the last year,
    remains now in the Treasury.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    DEC. 31, 1803.

The Message and account therein referred to were read, and ordered to lie
on file.


MONDAY, January 16.

The VICE PRESIDENT communicated a letter of this date from the Hon.
THEODORUS BAILEY, resigning his seat in the Senate; which was read, and

_Ordered_, That the VICE PRESIDENT be requested to notify the Executive
of the State of New York accordingly.

_Transfer of Louisiana._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    In execution of the act of the present session of Congress,
    for taking possession of Louisiana, as ceded to us by France,
    and for the temporary government thereof, Governor Claiborne,
    of the Mississippi Territory, and General Wilkinson, were
    appointed Commissioners to receive possession. They proceeded
    with such regular troops as had been assembled at Fort
    Adams, from the nearest posts, and with some militia of the
    Mississippi Territory, to New Orleans. To be prepared for any
    thing unexpected which might arise out of the transaction, a
    respectable body of militia was ordered to be in readiness in
    the States of Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee, and a part of
    those of Tennessee was moved on to the Natchez. No occasion,
    however, arose for their services. Our Commissioners, on their
    arrival at New Orleans, found the province already delivered
    by the Commissioners of Spain to that of France, who delivered
    it over to them on the 20th day of December, as appears by
    their declaratory act accompanying this. Governor Claiborne
    being duly invested with the powers heretofore exercised
    by the Governor and Intendant of Louisiana, assumed the
    government on the same day, and, for the maintenance of law
    and order, immediately issued the proclamation and address now
    communicated.

    On this important acquisition, so favorable to the immediate
    interests of our western citizens, so auspicious to the
    peace and security of the nation in general, which adds to
    our country territories so extensive and fertile, and to our
    citizens new brethren to partake of the blessings of freedom
    and self-government, I offer to Congress and our country my
    sincere congratulations.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    JANUARY 16, 1804.

The Message and papers therein referred to were read.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof.

On motion to amend the fourth section of the bill, by inserting the
following words at the end thereof:

    “The Legislative Council, a majority of the whole number
    concurring therein, shall have power to elect, by ballot, a
    delegate to Congress, who shall have a seat in the House of
    Representatives, and shall have the right of debating, but not
    of voting:”

It passed in the negative--yeas 12, nays 18, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Cocke, Ellery, Logan,
    Nicholas, Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith, Samuel Smith,
    Venable, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley, Brown,
    Condit, Dayton, Franklin, Hillhouse, Jackson, Maclay, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Stone, Tracy, Wells, and White.

On motion to strike out the fourth section of the bill, as follows:

    “SEC. 4. The legislative powers shall be vested in the
    Governor, and in twenty-four of the most fit and discreet
    persons of the Territory, to be called the Legislative Council,
    who shall be selected annually by the Governor from among those
    holding real estate therein, and who shall have resided one
    year at least in the said Territory, and hold no office of
    profit under the Territory, or the United States. The Governor,
    by and with the advice and consent of the said Legislative
    Council, or of a majority of them, shall have power to alter,
    modify, or repeal, the laws which may be in force at the
    commencement of this act. Their legislative powers shall also
    extend to all the rightful subjects of legislation; but no law
    shall be valid which is inconsistent with the Constitution of
    the United States, with the laws of Congress, or which shall
    lay any person under restraint, burden, or disability, on
    account of his religious opinions, declarations, or worship;
    in all which he shall be free to maintain his own, and not
    be burdened for those of another. The Governor shall publish
    throughout the said Territory all the laws which shall be
    made, and shall, from time to time, report the same to the
    President of the United States, to be laid before Congress;
    which, if disapproved of by Congress, shall thenceforth be of
    no force. The Governor or Legislative Council shall have no
    power over the primary disposal of the soil, nor to tax the
    lands of the United States, nor to interfere with the claims
    to land within the said Territory. The Governor shall convene,
    prorogue, and dissolve the Legislative Council whenever he
    may deem it expedient. It shall be his duty to obtain all the
    information in his power in relation to the customs, habits,
    and dispositions, of the inhabitants of the said Territory, and
    communicate the same, from time to time, to the President of
    the United States.”

It passed in the negative--yeas 12, nays 18, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Cocke, Hillhouse, Olcott,
    Plumer, Stone, Tracy, Venable, Wells, White, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge,
    Brown, Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Logan,
    Maclay, Nicholas, Pickering, Potter, Israel Smith, John Smith,
    and Samuel Smith.


TUESDAY, January 17.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof; and
on the question to amend the following clause of the fifth section:

“In all criminal prosecutions which are capital, the trial shall be by a
jury of twelve good and lawful men of the vicinage,” by striking out the
words “which are capital.”

It passed in the negative--yeas 11, nays 16, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Cocke, Logan, Maclay, Plumer,
    Stone, Tracy, Wells, White, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge, Condit, Dayton,
    Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Nicholas, Olcott, Pickering, Potter,
    Israel Smith, John Smith, Samuel Smith, and Venable.

And after progress, on motion,

_Ordered_, That the consideration of this bill be further postponed.

After the adjournment of the High Court of Impeachments, the Senate
adjourned.


MONDAY, January 23.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent on account of the ill state of his
health, the Senate proceeded to the election of a President _pro
tempore_, as the constitution provides; and the ballots having been
collected and counted, a majority thereof was for the Honorable JOHN
BROWN, who was accordingly elected President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

Mr. LOGAN presented the memorial of the American Convention for promoting
the abolition of slavery, and improving the condition of the African
race, signed Matthew Franklin, president, praying that such laws may be
enacted as shall prohibit the introduction of slaves into the Territory
of Louisiana, lately ceded to the United States; and the petition was
read.


TUESDAY, January 24.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof; and
on motion to strike out of the fourth section, from the word “annually,”
line fourth, to the words “United States,” line seventh, the words, “by
the Governor, from among those holding real estate therein, and who
shall have resided one year, at least, in the said Territory, and hold
no office of profit under the Territory or the United States,” for the
purpose of inserting the words following:

    “The Governor shall lay off and divide the territory aforesaid
    into twenty-four convenient districts, from each of which
    districts there shall be chosen, annually, by the housekeepers
    resident therein, two of the most fit and discreet persons, who
    shall also be residents therein and landholders, and holding
    no office of profit under the territorial government, or that
    of the United States, and make a return of their names to
    the Governor, out of which number the Governor shall select
    twenty-four, to wit, one from each district. But if any of the
    districts should refuse or neglect to make such appointment for
    one month after the time appointed by the Governor for making
    the said elections, he shall then have the power of selecting
    from each district, so refusing or neglecting, one fit person
    for the purposes aforesaid.”

On this, a division on the question was called for, and that it be taken
on striking out.

Whereupon, the yeas and nays being required by one-fifth of the Senators
present, on striking out, it passed in the negative--yeas 15, nays 14, as
follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Breckenridge, Cocke, Condit,
    Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Plumer, John Smith, Stone, Tracy,
    Venable, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley, Brown, Dayton,
    Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Nicholas, Olcott, Pickering, Potter,
    Israel Smith, and Samuel Smith.


THURSDAY, January 26.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof;
and a motion was made to amend the bill, by inserting the following as
section eighth:

    “That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons to
    import or bring into the said Territory, from any port or place
    without the limits of the United States, or to cause or procure
    to be so imported or brought, or knowingly to aid or assist
    in so importing or bringing any slave or slaves; and every
    person so offending, and being thereof convicted, before any
    court within the said Territory, having competent jurisdiction,
    shall forfeit and pay, for each and every slave so imported or
    brought, the sum of ---- dollars, one moiety for the use of the
    United States, and the other moiety for the use of the person
    who shall sue for the same; and every slave so imported or
    brought shall thereupon become entitled to, and receive his or
    her freedom.”

Whereupon, a motion was made to amend the amendment by striking out,
after the words “port or place,” the words “without the limits of the
United States,” and insert in lieu thereof, “for sale.”

A division of the question was called for, and that it be taken on
striking out; and, on the question, Shall the words be struck out? it
passed in the negative,--yeas 6, nays 22, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Bradley, Ellery, Jackson, Israel Smith,
    and Samuel Smith.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Cocke, Condit, Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas,
    Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter, John Smith, Stone, Venable,
    Wells, White, and Worthington.

On motion to agree to the original amendment, it passed in the
affirmative--yeas 21, nays 6, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke,
    Condit, Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Potter, John Smith, Stone, Venable, Wells,
    White, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Bradley, Ellery, Jackson, and
    Israel Smith.


MONDAY, January 30.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof; and
a motion was made to amend the bill, by adding the following to the new
section, adopted as section eighth:

    “_And be it further enacted_, That no male person brought into
    said Territory of Louisiana, from any parts of the United
    States or Territories thereof, or from any province or colony
    of America belonging to any foreign Prince or State, after the
    ---- day of ---- next, ought or can be holden by law to serve
    for more than the term of one year, any person as a servant,
    slave, or apprentice, after he attains the age of twenty-one
    years; nor female in like manner, after she attains the age of
    eighteen years, unless they are bound by their own voluntary
    act, after they arrive to such age, or bound by law for the
    payment of debts, damages, fines, or costs: _Provided_, That
    no person held to service or labor in either of the States or
    Territories aforesaid, under the laws thereof, escaping into
    said Territory of Louisiana, shall, by any thing contained
    herein, he discharged from such service or labor, but shall be
    delivered up in the manner prescribed by law.”

It passed in the negative--yeas 11, nays 17, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Bradley, Brown, Ellery, Hillhouse, Logan,
    Olcott, Plumer, Potter, Israel Smith, Wells, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin,
    Breckenridge, Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Franklin, Jackson, Maclay,
    Nicholas, Pickering, John Smith, Samuel Smith, Venable, and
    White.

A motion was made to amend the bill, by adding to the end of section
eighth, last adopted, the following:

    “That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons to
    import or bring into the said Territory, from any port or place
    within the limits of the United States, or cause to, or procure
    to be so imported or brought, or knowingly to aid or assist in
    so importing or bringing any slave or slaves, which shall have
    been imported since the ---- day of ---- into any port or place
    within the limits of the United States, from any port or place
    without the limits of the United States; and every person so
    offending and being thereof convicted, before any court within
    the said Territory having competent jurisdiction, shall forfeit
    and pay, for each and every such slave so imported or brought,
    the sum of ---- dollars; one moiety for the use of the person
    or persons who shall sue for the same. And no slave or slaves
    shall directly or indirectly be introduced into said Territory,
    except by a person or persons removing into said territory for
    actual settlement, and being at the time of such removal _bona
    fide_ owner of such slave or slaves; and every slave imported
    or brought into the said Territory, contrary to the provisions
    of this act, shall thereupon be entitled to and receive his or
    her freedom.”

And a division was called for, and that the question be taken on the
first proposition, ending with the words, “sue for the same:” and, on the
question to agree to this first division of the amendment, it passed in
the affirmative--yeas 21, nays 7, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Bradley, Breckenridge,
    Brown, Cocke, Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas,
    Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter, I. Smith, John Smith,
    Venable, Wells, White, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Jackson,
    and Samuel Smith.

A motion was made to strike out all that follows the word “and,” in the
second division of the amendment, for the purpose of a further amendment;
and after debate, the consideration of the subject was postponed.


TUESDAY, January 31.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof;
and a motion was made to strike out the last division of the amendment
proposed yesterday, to wit:

    “And no slave or slaves shall, directly or indirectly, be
    introduced into said Territory except by a person or persons
    removing into said Territory for actual settlement, and being,
    at the time of such removal, _bona fide_ owner of such slave
    or slaves; and every slave imported or brought into the said
    Territory, contrary to the provisions of this act, shall,
    thereupon, be entitled to, and receive, his or her freedom;”
    and to insert the following:

    “No slave shall be admitted into the said Territory from the
    United States or their Territories, who shall not be the
    property of some person _bona fide_ removing from the United
    States into the said Territory, and making an actual settlement
    therein, or who shall not have passed by descent or devise to
    the person or persons claiming the same, and residing within
    the said Territory, from some person or persons deceased in
    some one of the United States or their Territories; and every
    slave who shall be brought into said Territory, otherwise than
    is hereby permitted, shall be forfeited, and may be recovered
    by any person who shall sue for the same; and the person or
    persons offending herein shall moreover forfeit and pay ----
    dollars for every slave so brought in, to be recovered by
    action of debt in any court having jurisdiction thereof; one
    moiety to the use of the United States, and the other moiety to
    the use of the person who shall sue for the same. And in any
    action instituted for the recovery of the penalty aforesaid,
    the person or persons sued may be held to special bail:”

And a division on the question was called for, and that it be taken on
striking out; and, on the question, Shall the words be stricken out? it
passed in the negative--yeas 13, nays 15, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Breckenridge,
    Cocke, Condit, Jackson, Nicholas, John Smith, Samuel Smith,
    Stone, Venable, and Wells.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Bradley, Brown, Ellery, Franklin,
    Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Potter,
    Israel Smith, Worthington, and Wright.


WEDNESDAY, February 1.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana into
two Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof; and
on motion, to agree to the last division of the amendment proposed on the
30th ultimo, amended as follows:

    “And no slave or slaves shall, directly or indirectly, be
    introduced into the said Territory except by a citizen of
    the United States, removing into said Territory for actual
    settlement, and being, at the time of such removal, _bona fide_
    owner of such slave or slaves; and every slave imported or
    brought into the said Territory, contrary to the provisions of
    this act, shall thereupon be entitled to, and receive, his or
    her freedom:”

It passed in the affirmative--yeas 18, nays 11, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Armstrong, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit,
Franklin, Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Plumer, Potter, S. Smith,
Wells, White, Worthington, and Wright.

NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Dayton, Ellery, Jackson,
Nicholas, Pickering, J. Smith, Stone, and Venable.


THURSDAY, February 2.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana
into two Territories, and making provision for the temporary government
thereof; and on motion to strike out the eighth section of the original
bill, amended as follows:

    “SEC. 8. The residue of the province of Louisiana, ceded to
    the United States, shall remain under the same name and form
    of government as heretofore, save only that the executive
    and judicial powers exercised by the former government of
    the province shall now be transferred to a Governor, to be
    appointed by the President of the United States: and that the
    powers exercised by the commandant of a post or district shall
    be hereafter vested in a civil officer, to be appointed by the
    President in the recess of the Senate, but to be nominated
    at the next meeting thereof for their advice and consent;
    under the orders of which commandant the officers, troops,
    and militia of his station shall be; who, in cases where the
    military have been used, under the laws heretofore existing,
    shall act by written orders and not in person; and the salary
    of the said officers, respectively, shall not exceed the rate
    of ---- dollars per annum. The President of the United States,
    however, may unite the districts of two or more commandants of
    posts into one, where their proximity or ease of intercourse
    will permit without injury to the inhabitants thereof. The
    Governor shall receive an annual salary of ---- dollars,
    payable quarter-yearly at the Treasury of the United States:”

It passed in the affirmative--yeas 16, nays 9, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Cocke, Condit,
Franklin, Hillhouse, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, J. Smith, Stone,
Venable, and Worthington.

NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Brown, Dayton, Ellery, Jackson, Nicholas, Potter,
S. Smith, and Wright.


TUESDAY, February 7.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill erecting Louisiana
into two Territories, and making provision for the temporary government
thereof, and agreed to sundry amendments; and on motion to agree to a
further amendment, as follows:

    “SEC. 7. All free male white persons, who are housekeepers,
    and who shall have resided one year at least in the said
    Territory, shall be qualified to serve as grand or petit jurors
    in the courts of the said Territory; and they shall, until the
    Legislature thereof shall otherwise direct, be selected in such
    manner as the judges of the said courts, respectively, shall
    prescribe, so as to be most conducive to an impartial trial,
    and to be least burdensome to the inhabitants of the said
    Territory:”

A motion was made to strike out from the beginning, to the words “and
they,” inclusive, for the purpose of inserting, “persons to serve as
grand and petit jurors in the courts of the said Territory.”

A division of the question was called for, and that it first be taken on
striking out; and on the question, Shall these words be struck out? it
was passed in the negative--yeas 10, nays 18, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Bradley, Brown, Hillhouse, Logan, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, John Smith, and Stone.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Baldwin,
    Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Maclay, Nicholas,
    Potter, Samuel Smith, Sumter, Venable, Wells, Worthington, and
    Wright.

On the question to agree to the original motion, it passed in the
affirmative--yeas 21, nays 7, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Baldwin,
    Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson, Logan, Maclay,
    Nicholas, Potter, Samuel Smith, Stone, Sumter, Venable, Wells,
    Worthington, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Bradley, Hillhouse, Olcott, Pickering,
    Plumer, and John Smith.


FRIDAY, February 17.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill erecting Louisiana
into two Territories, and making provision for the temporary government
thereof; and on motion to amend the bill, by striking out of section
10th, the words:

    “And no slave or slaves shall, directly or indirectly, be
    introduced into said Territory, except by a citizen of
    the United States removing into said Territory for actual
    settlement, and being at the time of such removal _bona fide_
    owner of such slave or slaves:”

It passed in the negative--yeas 9, nays 19, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Cocke, Dayton, Nicholas, John
    Smith, Stone, Venable, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Armstrong, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown, Condit,
    Ellery, Franklin, Hillhouse, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Olcott,
    Plumer, Potter, Israel Smith, Samuel Smith, Sumter, Wells, and
    White.

On motion to expunge from the same section, after the word “slaves,” the
words “and every slave imported or brought into said Territory, contrary
to the provisions of this act, shall thereupon be entitled to and receive
his or her freedom:”

It passed in the negative--yeas 11, nays 17, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Breckenridge,
    Cocke, Dayton, Jackson, Nicholas, Stone, Sumter, and Venable.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Bradley, Brown, Condit, Ellery, Franklin,
    Hillhouse, Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Plumer, Potter, Israel Smith,
    John Smith, Samuel Smith, Wells, White, and Wright.

On motion to insert, in the same section, line 3d, after the word
“States,” the words “or from any State authorizing the importation of
slaves from any foreign port or place:”

It passed in the negative--yeas 8, nays 13, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Brown, Hillhouse, Logan, Olcott, Plumer, John
    Smith, White, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson,
    Maclay, Nicholas, Potter, Israel Smith, Samuel Smith, Sumter,
    and Venable.

And having further amended the bill, and filled the blanks, it was agreed
that the question on its final passage be postponed until to-morrow.


SATURDAY, February 18.

_Erection of Louisiana into two Territories._

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill erecting Louisiana
into two Territories, and making provision for the temporary government
thereof; and on the question to agree to the final passage of this bill,
it was determined in the affirmative--yeas 20, nays 5, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Jackson,
    Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Potter, John Smith, Samuel Smith,
    Sumter, Venable, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Hillhouse, Olcott, Plumer, and Stone.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass, that it be engrossed, and that
the title thereof be “An act erecting Louisiana into two Territories, and
making provision for the temporary government thereof.”[6]


THURSDAY, February 23.

JOHN SMITH, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of New
York, in the room of De Witt Clinton, took his seat in the Senate,
and his credentials were read, and the oath prescribed by law was
administered to him by the President.


FRIDAY, February 24.

Agreeably to the resolution of yesterday, the Senate proceeded to elect
a doorkeeper, or assistant to James Mathers, Sergeant-at-Arms; and Henry
Timms was appointed.


SATURDAY, February 25.

JOHN ARMSTRONG, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
New York, in the room of Theodorus Bailey, took his seat in the Senate,
and his credentials were read, and the oath prescribed by law was
administered to him by the President.


SATURDAY, March 10.

_Election of President of the Senate, pro tem._

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the election
of a President _pro tempore_, as the constitution prescribes, and the
ballots having been collected and counted, a majority thereof was for the
Honorable JESSE FRANKLIN, who was accordingly elected President of the
Senate _pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States,
and acquaint him that the Senate have, in the absence of the VICE
PRESIDENT, elected the honorable JESSE FRANKLIN President of the Senate
_pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary make a like communication to the House of
Representatives.


TUESDAY, March 13.

_Impeachment of Judge Chase._

A message from the House of Representatives, by Messrs. J. RANDOLPH and
EARLY, two of their members, was received, as follows:

“_Mr. President_: We are ordered, in the name of the House of
Representatives and of all the People of the United States, to impeach
Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the
United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors; and to acquaint the
Senate that the House of Representatives will, in due time, exhibit
particular articles of impeachment against him, and make good the same.

“We are also ordered to demand that the Senate take order for the
appearance of the said Samuel Chase, to answer to the said impeachment.”

_Turnpike Road to the Ohio._

The Senate took into consideration the amendment reported by the
committee to the bill, entitled “An act authorizing the appointment of
Commissioners to explore the routes most eligible for opening certain
public roads;” and on the question to agree to the said amendment, as
follows:

Strike out, in the first section, after the word “proceed,” in the fourth
line, to the word “and,” in the seventh line, and insert, “to explore and
designate the most eligible route for a turnpike road, to lead from Fort
Cumberland, on the Potomac, to Wheeling, on the Ohio.”

It passed in the negative--yeas 13, nays 15, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Cocke, Dayton, Franklin,
    Pickering, Israel Smith, John Smith of Ohio, Samuel Smith,
    Stone, Sumter, Worthington, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley, Ellery,
    Hillhouse, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Nicholas, Olcott, Plumer,
    John Smith of New York, Venable, and White.

_Ordered_, That the bill be recommitted, and that Messrs. NICHOLAS,
WORTHINGTON, and DAYTON be the committee further to consider and report
thereon to the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, March 14.

_Impeachment of Judge Chase._

Mr. BALDWIN, from the committee to whom yesterday was referred the
message from the House of Representatives relative to the impeachment of
Samuel Chase, made report; which was read and adopted, as follows:

    “Whereas, the House of Representatives, on the 13th day of the
    present month, by two of their members, Messrs. John Randolph
    and Early, at the bar of the Senate, impeached Samuel Chase,
    one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the
    United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors, and acquainted
    the Senate that the House of Representatives will, in due time,
    exhibit particular articles of impeachment against him, and
    make good the same;

    “And likewise demanded that the Senate take order for the
    appearance of the said Samuel Chase to answer to the said
    impeachment. Therefore,

    “_Resolved_, That the Senate will take proper order
    thereon, of which due notice shall be given to the House of
    Representatives.”

    _Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Senate notify the House
    of this resolution.


MONDAY, March 19.

_Post Roads in States._

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, entitled “An act to
alter and establish certain post roads.”

On motion, to add the following after section third:

    “_And be it further enacted_, That two post roads shall be laid
    out, under the inspection of commissioners to be appointed by
    the President of the United States, one to lead from Tellico
    block-house, in the State of Tennessee, and the other from
    Jackson court-house, in the State of Georgia, by routes the
    most eligible, and as nearly direct as the nature of the ground
    will admit, to New Orleans.”

It passed in the affirmative--yeas 17, nays 10, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Breckenridge,
    Cocke, Dayton, Franklin, Jackson, Maclay, Nicholas, John Smith
    of Ohio, John Smith of New York, Samuel Smith, Stone, Sumter,
    Venable, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Bradley, Hillhouse, Logan, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Israel Smith, Tracy, and White.

And, sundry other amendments having been agreed to,

_Resolved_, That this bill do pass as amended.

_Seat of Government._

The bill for the temporary removal of the seat of Government of the
United States to the city of Baltimore was taken up for its second
reading.

[The debate which took place on this occasion, had progressed to some
length before the reporter entered the House. Mr. WRIGHT was then on the
floor, and had made a motion to postpone the further consideration of the
bill until the first Monday in May.]

Mr. W. assigned as reasons for this motion, that it was not his intention
in presenting the bill, that it should pass; but that it had been offered
with the view of acting as a spur to the inhabitants of Washington to
effect a more complete accommodation of Congress. He trusted and believed
it would have that effect; and the operation of the postponement would,
by hanging the bill over their heads, most powerfully tend to produce the
desirable result of a concentration of the city, and an augmentation of
accommodation.

Mr. JACKSON followed, and, in terms of appropriate energy, condemned
the proposition of removal. He said he should not have believed, but for
the express declaration of the gentleman from Maryland, that he would
have brought forward a bill the sole object of which was to frighten the
women and children of Washington. So far from the measure having the
desired effect avowed by the gentleman, if it had any effect whatever, it
would be to shake all confidence in the Government, to repress the very
accommodation desired.

Mr. J. denied the moral right of Congress to remove the seat of
Government; it had been fixed under the constitution, and without its
violation could not be changed.

Such a measure would indicate a prostration of plighted faith; would
destroy all confidence in the Government, from one end of the continent
to the other.

Gentlemen, in favor of this measure, should know its cost. Already had
the present seat of Government, in its origination and consequences, cost
the nation the assumption of the State debts to the amount of twenty-one
millions, and between one and two millions for public accommodation.
Would gentlemen be willing not only to lose all that had been expended,
but likewise to indemnify the proprietors in the city, whose assessed
property amounted to two and a half millions of dollars, and the
proprietors of property in the whole District, the amount of which he was
unable to state?

Mr. J. concluded by saying, he should vote against the postponement,
under the expectation that the Senate would take up the bill and reject
it by a majority so great, that no similar proposition should ever again
be brought before them.

Mr. ANDERSON declared himself hostile to the postponement, as he was
in favor of the passage of the bill, under certain modifications. He
considered Congress possessed the constitutional power of altering
the seat of Government; and he believed, from an experience of the
inconveniences attending the existing seat, it was their duty to change
it. He allowed that, in such an event, an obligation would arise to
indemnify the proprietors for the losses they would thereby sustain.
This, however, he considered the lesser evil; as the sum required to
make an indemnity would be less than that required for the improvements
contemplated, and which are necessary to accommodate the Government.

Mr. COCKE declared himself decidedly inimical to the bill. The permanent
seat of Government was fixed under the constitution, and the power did
not belong to Congress to alter it.

Mr. ADAMS strenuously contended against the right of Congress to
remove the seat of Government. To do so, would be to prostrate the
national faith, and to shake the confidence of the nation in the
Government. He considered the proposed measure as inexpedient as it was
unconstitutional; as it tended directly to defeat the object of the mover.

Mr. S. SMITH said, he should vote in favor of the postponement, because
he believed, if the bill were not postponed, it would consume more time
than could, at this late period of the session, be spared, without a
serious neglect of important business before Congress. He expressed his
regret at its introduction.

The question was then taken on the motion of postponement, and decided in
the negative--yeas 3, nays 24, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. I. Smith, S. Smith, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Armstrong, Baldwin, Bradley,
    Breckenridge, Cocke, Dayton, Franklin, Jackson, Logan, Maclay,
    Nicholas, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, John Smith of Ohio, John
    Smith of New York, Stone, Sumter, Tracy, Venable, White, and
    Worthington.

The bill was then read a second time.

Mr. DAYTON said, he had been instructed by the Legislature of New
Jersey, in case any prospect presented itself of a removal of the seat
of Government, to offer, in their name, the public buildings in Trenton
for their accommodation. He, therefore, gave notice that, in case the
bill went to a third reading, he should produce his instructions, and
move the substitution of Trenton in the room of Baltimore. At the same
time, he was free to declare his opinion of the impolicy of the proposed
measure. The provision of the constitution had arisen from an experience
of the necessity of establishing a permanent seat for the Government. To
avert the evils arising from a perpetual state of mutation, and from the
agitation of the public mind whenever it is discussed, the constitution
had wisely provided for the establishment of a permanent seat, vesting
in Congress exclusive legislation over it. While he declared this as his
creed, he begged it to be understood that there were, in his opinion,
some rightful grounds of removal. There were four such, two of which
were the following: if the place should be found a grave-yard for those
who resided in it, or if the inconveniences of conducting the machine of
government should be so great as to prevent the due transaction of the
public business. For the existence of these, no fault could be attached
to the District. If, therefore, a removal took place on their account,
Congress were bound to indemnify the proprietors. There were two other
grounds of removal, which would justify a removal without indemnity, as
they would be the effect of the misconduct of the inhabitants of the
District. These were, the evidence of a turbulent spirit, endangering
the safety of Congress, and of a determined resolution, arising from a
dissatisfaction which the Government or Congress expressed in favor of a
recession.

When he stated these grounds for removal, Mr. D. said, it was not from
any apprehension of their occurrence. On the contrary, he believed the
Government in perfect safety, and he was convinced, if any hostile arm
should be raised against it, the inhabitants of Columbia would be ready
to shed their blood in its defence.

Nothing could exceed his surprise at the motives expressed by the
gentleman from Maryland for bringing forward this measure. He should
have expected, if the gentleman wished to promote the interests of the
city, he would have imitated the example of the Athenians, who, in order
to make a particular fund devoted to theatrical exhibitions sacred, had
passed a law punishing with death any man who should move to divert it
from its allotted purpose; and that the honorable gentleman, instead of
bringing forward this bill, would have introduced one punishing with
death the man who should move a change of the seat of Government; so that
he who made the attempt might know that he did it with a halter around
his neck.

Mr. MACLAY moved to strike out the words “Baltimore,” and “Maryland,” in
the first section.

Motion agreed to--ayes 14, noes 10.

Mr. M. then observed, that he would concisely state the ideas which
influenced him on this subject. For the existing inconveniences of this
place, and the want of accommodation to which Congress was exposed, he
did not consider the inhabitants of Washington in the least to blame. The
causes from which these flowed, it was not in their power to control.
They arose, in a great measure, from the city being surrounded by seats
of trade, which naturally repressed its rise here. Those inconveniences
were, he believed, of a nature not to be cured by time, and, if there
was no constitutional obstacle, it would be the best policy to remove
immediately. He contended that no constitutional obstacle did exist. On
the contrary, he was of opinion that it was the duty of the Legislature,
in case the public good required it, to remove the seat of Government.
He believed that this place would not long remain the seat. The members
of the Government will become tired of remaining here, when they are
convinced that the inconveniences which they experience will not
promote the advantage even of their posterity. The single question then
is, whether less inconvenience will be produced by an immediate or a
protracted removal. He was clearly of opinion that the inconvenience of
removing, at this time, would be less than at a future day. He concluded
by saying, that he should not, himself, have brought forward this measure
at the present time. He would have waited for more conclusive proofs of
the insuperable inconveniences attending a residence at this place, when
opinions, at present variant, would be more united.

Mr. JACKSON said, the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. MACLAY) had picked
a hole in the bill, and what effect it would produce, he could not
pretend to say. If the word “Baltimore” had been suffered to remain, it
would have been rejected by a large majority.

Mr. J. then went at some length into a view of the unconstitutionality
of a removal, and the happy situation of Washington for the seat of the
Government. He said that he was far from being friendly, in the first
instance, to this measure, which might be called the hobby-horse of,
perhaps, the most illustrious man that ever lived. But, once adopted, it
became sacred in his eyes; and nothing short of an act of God, in the
shape of an earthquake, a plague, or some other fatal scourge, would
justify a removal; and, he trusted, that unless some such act occurred,
this would be the last time the measure was proposed.

The time would come, though he hoped to God neither his children nor
his children’s children would live to see it, when the population on
this side of the Mississippi would pass that river, and when the seat of
Government would be translated to its banks. Centuries would, however,
elapse before that period arrived.

Mr. ANDERSON said, there was no such word in the constitution as
“permanent,” applied to the seat of Government; nor did the constitution
prohibit the removal of it when the public interest should require it.
Believing that such would be the experience of the inconveniences of the
place, that Congress would certainly remove within five years, he was for
taking that step now. The ill accommodation of the place was manifest to
every man; nor did he believe that time would cure the evil. Such losses,
however, as should be sustained by the proprietors, he was ready to
remunerate. This was the least expensive course which could be pursued,
as to make the necessary improvements in this place will require at least
the annual sum of fifty thousand dollars for twenty years to come, and at
least thirty thousand dollars a year to keep the public buildings in a
state of repair. In addition to this immense expense was to be added, the
great loss of time which arose from the inconvenient arrangements of the
place, and the consequent expenditure of public money. For these reasons,
Mr. A. said, he should give a decided vote in favor of the bill.

Mr. JACKSON remarked, that the gentleman from Tennessee ought, in forming
his opinion of the constitutionality of removing the seat of Government,
to attend as well to the laws passed by Congress on the subject, as
to the provisions of the constitution itself. [Mr. J. here read the
article of the constitution on the subject.] He said that, according
to the rigid construction of this provision, it excluded altogether a
_temporary_ seat, after this part of the constitution was carried into
effect. Under this constitutional provision, Congress passed an act on
the 6th of July, 1790, not more than a year and a half after the first
meeting of the Legislature, and when many of the members of that body
had been members of the convention, and might, therefore, be presumed to
be the best acquainted with the true meaning of the constitution. This
act fixed a temporary and a permanent seat of Government. [Mr. J. read
it.] He then asked, can any thing be more clear and explicit? Does it not
show, in terms of unequivocal meaning, that it was the opinion of the men
best qualified to decide, that the seat of Government, once fixed under
the provision of the constitution, must be permanent? It was not then
imagined that the Government ought to be travelling about from post to
pillar, according to the prevalence of this or that party or faction. All
the ideas of that day were hostile to this wheelbarrow kind of Government.

Mr. WRIGHT contended that, while the constitution had sacredly and
irrevocably fixed the permanent seat of Government in this place,
Congress might make some other place the temporary seat.

Mr. ANDERSON said, that all that the law passed by Congress proved was,
that Congress, and not the constitution, had declared this place the
permanent seat. This law, like other laws, was subject to repeal.

Mr. ADAMS wished, on this subject, to be explicit. He asked what was the
meaning of the article of the constitution on this point, and all the
laws of Congress passed under it? From the formation of the constitution
until the removal of the Government to this place, but one sentiment
had existed, which was, that the seat of the Government once fixed
under the constitution, became the permanent seat. As to the idea of
the gentleman from Maryland, who says this is the permanent seat while
Congress are going from one place to another, he could not understand it.
The constitution says, the place fixed on by Congress, on the cession
of jurisdiction by the States, shall be the seat of Government. The
idea of a temporary seat implies, necessarily, two seats of Government.
But the expression in the constitution is “seat,” and that implies only
one seat. The reason of this provision of the constitution is obvious.
As the gentleman from Georgia has very justly observed, the Government
had been driven from post to pillar. The question, what place should be
the seat of Government, had never presented itself without enkindling
violent feelings; and it was supposed that the question would continue to
distract our public councils, until some permanent seat of Government was
fixed. To carry this into effect, the constitution interposed, and said,
ten miles square shall be given to Congress, where their power shall
be sovereign, and that shall be the seat of Government. Why give this
exclusive legislation, if their residence is not to be permanent? Would
it not be the acme of the ridiculous, for Congress to go to Philadelphia,
and still continue to exercise exclusive legislation here? Let us now
turn to the acts of Congress, and the proceedings had under them. [Mr.
A. here read the act of Congress fixing the seat of Government.] It will
appear that it was the intention of Congress that this should be the
permanent seat of the Government, from the public buildings erected. Thus
much as to the understanding of the Government. Now, as to the meaning
of Maryland and Virginia, who gave up the territory, and also gave
considerable sums of money for its improvement. Could this have possibly
been done under the contemplation that Congress would come here, and,
after staying three or four years, run off to different quarters of the
Union?

Now then, after this uniform opinion, entertained by Congress, by the
States of Maryland and Virginia, and by every man who has expressed an
opinion on the subject, until within a few years past, are we to be told
that it is possible to give a different construction to the constitution?
If any thing can fix a meaning to words, every thing which has occurred
to this day, unites to decide this the permanent seat of the Government.
These, said Mr. A., are my ideas. On the ground of expediency, if it were
admitted as applicable to the present question, I would not undertake
to say whether this is the most proper place for the residence of the
Government. Nor will I say that Congress could not, consistently, remove
in consequence of an act of God; that implies force, to which all human
institutions must give way. But, say gentlemen, if we remove, we must
indemnify the proprietors. But why indemnify if the constitution does not
make this the permanent seat of Government, as it has been understood to
be by every body until this day? Where is the propriety of indemnifying
the holders of property here, if this is not the permanent seat, more
than proprietors in Philadelphia or New York, where Congress formerly
met? This very argument, urged by the advocates of the bill, shows that
the constitution has made this the permanent seat. As to the idea of
some gentlemen, of granting millions for an indemnity, the thing is
impossible; it cannot be done; the people will not suffer it.

Mr. DAYTON replied to some of the remarks made in the course of
the debate, principally for the purpose of explaining his previous
observations.

When the question was taken, on ordering the bill to a third reading, and
passed in the negative--yeas 9, nays 19, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Armstrong, Breckenridge, Bradley,
    Maclay, Plumer, Stone, Tracy, and Worthington.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Cocke, Dayton, Franklin,
    Hillhouse, Jackson, Logan, Nicholas, Olcott, Pickering, I.
    Smith, S. Smith, J. Smith of Ohio, J. Smith of New York,
    Sumter, Venable, White, and Wright.

So the bill was lost.


TUESDAY, March 20.

_Wreck and Capture of the Frigate Philadelphia._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I communicate to Congress a letter from Captain Bainbridge,
    commander of the Philadelphia frigate, informing us of the
    wreck of that vessel on the coast of Tripoli, and that himself,
    his officers, and men, had fallen into the hands of the
    Tripolitans. This accident renders it expedient to increase
    our force and enlarge our expenses in the Mediterranean
    beyond what the last appropriation contemplated. I recommend,
    therefore, to the consideration of Congress, such an addition
    to that appropriation as they may think the exigency requires.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    MARCH 20, 1804.

The Message and papers therein referred to were read, and ordered to lie
for consideration.


TUESDAY, March 27.

_Adjournment._

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House, having finished the business before them, are about to adjourn to
the first Monday in November next.

The PRESIDENT then adjourned the Senate to the first Monday in November
next.




EIGHTH CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES.

_New Hampshire._--Silas Betton, Clifton Claggett, David Hough, Samuel
Hunt, Samuel Tenney.

_Vermont._--William Chamberlain, M. Chittenden, James Elliot, Gideon Olin.

_Massachusetts._--Phanuel Bishop, Jacob Crowninshield, Manasseh Cutler,
Richard Cutts, Thomas Dwight, William Eustis, Seth Hastings, Simeon
Larned, Silas Lee, Nahum Mitchell, Eben. Seaver, Tompson J. Skinner,
William Stedman, Samuel Taggart, Samuel Thatcher, Joseph B. Varnum, P.
Wadsworth, Lemuel Williams.

_Rhode Island._--Nehemiah Knight, Joseph Stanton.

_Connecticut._--Simeon Baldwin, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, Calvin
Goddard, Roger Griswold, John C. Smith, Benjamin Tallmadge.

_New York._--George Clinton, George Griswold, Josiah Hasbrouck, H. W.
Livingston, Andrew McCord, Samuel L. Mitchill, Beriah Palmer, John
Patterson, Oliver Phelps, Samuel Riker, Erastus Root, Peter Sailly,
Thomas Sammons, Joshua Sands, David Thomas, George Tibbits, Philip Van
Cortlandt, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Daniel C. Verplanck.

_New Jersey._--Adam Boyd, Ebenezer Elmer, William Helms, James Mott,
James Sloan, Henry Southard.

_Pennsylvania._--Isaac Anderson, David Bard, Robt. Brown, Thomas Bonde,
Joseph Clay, Frederick Conrad, Wm. Findlay, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna,
Joseph Heister, John Hoge, Michael Leib, John B. Lucas, Jno. Rea, Jacob
Richards, John Smilie, John Stewart, Isaac Van Horne, John Whitehill.

_Delaware._--Cæsar A. Rodney.

_Maryland._--John Archer, Walter Bowie, John Campbell, John Dennis,
William McCreery, Nicholas E. Moore, Joseph H. Nicholson, Thomas Plater.

_Virginia._--Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, John Dawson,
John W. Eppes, Edwin Gray, Thomas Griffin, David Holmes, John Geo.
Jackson, Walter Jones, Joseph Lewis, Andrew Moore, Anthony New, Thomas
Newton, John Randolph, Thomas M. Randolph, John Smith, James Stephenson,
Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, Alexander Wilson.

_North Carolina._--N. Alexander, Willis Alston, jr., Wm. S. Blackledge,
James Gillespie, James Holland, William Kennedy, Nathaniel Macon, Samuel
D. Purviance, Richard Stanford, Marmaduke Williams, Joseph Winston,
Thomas Wynns.

_South Carolina._--William Butler, Levi Casey, John B. Earle, Wade
Hampton, Benjamin Huger, Thomas Lowndes, Thomas Moore, Richard Wynn.

_Georgia._--Joseph Bryan, Peter Early, Samuel Hammond, Daniel Meriwether.

_Mississippi._--William Lattimore.

_Tennessee._--G. W. Campbell, Wm. Dickson, John Rhea.

_Kentucky._--Geo. M. Bedinger, John Boyle, John Fowler, Matthew Lyon,
Thomas Sanford, Matthew Walton.

_Ohio._--Jeremiah Morrow.


MONDAY, October 17, 1803.

This being the day appointed by a Proclamation of the President of
the United States, of the sixteenth of July last, for the meeting of
Congress, the following members of the House of Representatives appeared,
produced their credentials, and took their seats, to wit:

_From New Hampshire_--Silas Betton, Clifton Claggett, David Hough,
Samuel Hunt, and Samuel Tenney.

_From Massachusetts_--Phanuel Bishop, Manasseh Cutler, Jacob
Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, Thomas Dwight, William Eustis, Seth
Hastings, Nahum Mitchell, Ebenezer Seaver, William Stedman, Samuel
Taggart, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg Wadsworth, and Lemuel Williams.

_From Rhode Island_--Nehemiah Knight, and Joseph Stanton.

_From Connecticut_--Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, Calvin Goddard, Roger
Griswold, and John C. Smith.

_From Vermont_--William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, James Elliot, and
Gideon Olin.

_From New York_--Gaylord Griswold, Josiah Hasbrouck, Henry W. Livingston,
Andrew McCord, Samuel L. Mitchill, Beriah Palmer, Thomas Sammons, Joshua
Sands, David Thomas, Philip Van Cortlandt, and Daniel C. Verplanck.

_From Pennsylvania_--Isaac Anderson, David Bard, Robert Brown, Joseph
Clay, Frederick Conrad, William Findlay, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna,
Joseph Heister, William Hoge, Michael Leib, John Rea, Jacob Richards,
John Smilie, John Stewart, Isaac Van Horne, and John Whitehill.

_From Delaware_--Cæsar A. Rodney.

_From Maryland_--John Campbell, Wm. McCreery, Nicholas R. Moore, Joseph
H. Nicholson, and Thomas Plater.

_From Virginia_--Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Dawson, John W.
Eppes, Peterson Goodwyn, Edwin Gray, Thomas Griffin, David Holmes, John
G. Jackson, Walter Jones, Joseph Lewis, jun., Thomas Lewis, Anthony New,
Thomas Newton, jun., John Randolph, jun., Thomas M. Randolph, John Smith,
James Stephenson, and Philip R. Thompson.

_From Kentucky_--George Michael Bedinger, John Boyle, John Fowler,
Matthew Lyon, Thomas Sanford, and Matthew Walton.

_From North Carolina_--Nathaniel Alexander, Willis Alston, jun., William
Blackledge, James Holland, William Kennedy, Nathaniel Macon, Richard
Stanford, Marmaduke Williams, Joseph Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

_From Tennessee_--George Washington Campbell, William Dickson, and John
Rhea.

_From South Carolina_--William Butler, Levi Casey, John Earle, Wade
Hampton, Benjamin Huger, Thomas Moore, and Richard Winn.

_From Ohio_--Jeremiah Morrow.

And a quorum, consisting of a majority of the whole number, being
present, the House proceeded, by ballot, to the choice of a Speaker; and
upon examining the ballots, a majority of the votes of the whole House
was found to be in favor of NATHANIEL MACON, one of the Representatives
from the State of North Carolina: Whereupon, Mr. MACON was conducted
to the chair, from whence he made his acknowledgments to the House, as
follows:

    “_Gentlemen_: Accept my unfeigned thanks for the honor which
    you have conferred on me. The task which you have assigned
    me will be undertaken with great diffidence, but my utmost
    endeavors shall be exerted to discharge the duties of the Chair
    with fidelity. In executing the rules and orders of the House,
    I shall rely with confidence on the liberal and candid support
    of the House.”

The House proceeded, in the same manner, to the appointment of a Clerk;
and upon examining the ballots, a majority of the votes of the whole
House was found in favor of JOHN BECKLEY.

The oath to support the Constitution of the United States, as prescribed
by the act entitled “An act to regulate the time and manner of
administering certain oaths,” was administered by Mr. NICHOLSON, one of
the Representatives from the State of Maryland, to the SPEAKER; and then
the same oath or affirmation was administered by Mr. SPEAKER to all the
members present.

WILLIAM LATTIMORE having also appeared, as the Delegate from the
Mississippi Territory, the said oath was administered to him by the
SPEAKER.

The same oath, together with the oath of office prescribed by the said
recited act, was also administered by Mr. SPEAKER to the Clerk.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate, to inform them that a
quorum of this House is assembled, and have elected NATHANIEL MACON, one
of the Representatives for North Carolina, their Speaker; and that the
Clerk of this House do go with the said message.

A message from the Senate informed the House that a quorum of the Senate
is assembled, and ready to proceed to business; and that, in the absence
of the VICE PRESIDENT of the United States, the Senate have elected the
Honorable JOHN BROWN their President, _pro tempore_.

_Resolved_, That Mr. J. RANDOLPH, jun., Mr. R. GRISWOLD, and Mr.
NICHOLSON, be appointed a committee on the part of this House, jointly,
with such committee as may be appointed on the part of the Senate, to
wait on the President of the United States, and inform him that a quorum
of the two Houses is assembled, and ready to receive any communications
he may be pleased to make to them.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have
appointed a committee on their part, jointly, with the committee
appointed on the part of this House, to wait on the President of the
United States, and inform him that a quorum of the two Houses is
assembled, and ready to receive any communications he may be pleased to
make to them.

_Resolved_, That unless otherwise ordered, the daily hour to which the
House shall stand adjourned, during the present session, be eleven
o’clock in the forenoon.

Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, Jr., from the joint committee appointed to wait on the
President of the United States, and notify him that a quorum of the two
Houses is assembled, and ready to receive any communication he may be
pleased to make to them, reported that the committee had performed that
service, and that the President had signified to them that he would make
a communication to this House, to-day, in writing.

A communication was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES to
the two Houses of Congress. The said communication was read, and referred
to the committee of the whole House on the state of the Union. [See
Senate proceedings of this date, for the Message, _ante_ page 4.]


TUESDAY, October 18.

Several other members, to wit: from Pennsylvania, JOHN B. C. LUCAS;
from Maryland, DANIEL HEISTER; from Virginia, JOHN CLOPTON, and JOHN
TRIGG; from North Carolina, SAMUEL D. PURVIANCE; and from Georgia, DAVID
MERIWETHER, appeared, produced their credentials, were qualified, and
took their seats in the House;

_President’s Message._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the state of
the Union; and, after some time spent therein, the Committee rose and
reported the following resolutions:

    1. _Resolved_, That so much of the President’s Message as
    relates to the regulations proper to be observed by foreign
    armed vessels within the jurisdiction of the United States; to
    the restraining of our citizens from entering into the service
    of the belligerent powers of Europe; and to the exacting from
    all nations the observance, towards our vessels and citizens,
    of those principles and practices which all civilized people
    acknowledge; be referred to a select committee.

    2. _Resolved_, That so much of the President’s Message as
    relates to the adopting of measures for preventing the flag
    of the United States from being used by vessels not really
    American, be referred to the Committee of Commerce and
    Manufactures.

    3. _Resolved_, as the opinion of this committee, That so much
    of the Message of the President of the United States as relates
    to our finances, ought to be referred to the Committee of Ways
    and Means.

The House proceeded to consider the said resolutions, and the same being
again read, were agreed to by the House.

_Ordered_, That Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, jr., Mr. NICHOLAS R. MOORE, Mr.
GAYLORD GRISWOLD, Mr. CROWNINSHIELD, Mr. BLACKLEDGE, Mr. RODNEY, and Mr.
JOHN RHEA, of Tennessee, be appointed a committee pursuant to the first
resolution.


WEDNESDAY, October 19.

Another member, to wit, PETER EARLY, from Georgia, appeared, produced his
credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.

_Mourning for Samuel Adams._

Mr. J. RANDOLPH observed that it had lately been announced to the public
that one of the earliest patriots of the Revolution had paid his last
debt to nature. He had hoped that some other gentleman, better qualified
for the task, would have undertaken to call the attention of the House to
this interesting event. It could not, indeed, be a matter of deep regret
that one of the first statesmen of our country has descended to the grave
full of years and full of honors; that his character and fame were put
beyond the reach of that time and chance to which every thing mortal is
exposed; but it became the House to cherish a sentiment of veneration for
such men--since such men are rare--and to keep alive the spirit to which
they owed the constitution under which they were then deliberating. This
great man, the associate of Hancock, shared with him the honor of being
proscribed by a flagitious ministry, whose object was to triumph over the
liberties of their country, by trampling on those of her colonies. With
his great compatriot he made an early and decided stand against British
encroachment, whilst souls more timid were trembling and irresolute. It
is the glorious privilege of minds of this stamp to give an impulse to a
people and fix the destiny of nations.

Mr. R. said, that he felt himself every way unequal to the attempt of
doing justice to the merits of their departed countryman. Called upon by
the occasion to say something, he could not have said less. He would not,
by any poor eulogium of his, enfeeble the sentiment which pervaded the
House, but content himself with moving the following resolution:

    _Resolved, unanimously_, That this House is penetrated with a
    full sense of the eminent services rendered to his country in
    the most arduous times by the late Samuel Adams, deceased; and
    that the members thereof wear crape on the left arm for one
    month, in testimony of the national gratitude and reverence
    towards the memory of that undaunted and illustrious patriot.

Mr. ELLIOTT spoke as follows:

Mr. Speaker: If any apology could be necessary for a new member,
unversed in Parliamentary proceedings, to offer for rising so early in
the session, it would be, that the topic which arrests his attention is
connected with the illustrious and ever memorable name of Samuel Adams.
The eloquence of the gentleman from Virginia I shall not attempt to
rival; his remarks were peculiarly impressive, and the more so from
his remarking that he was unable to do justice to the subject. I have
been extremely affected by his calling the attention of the House to
the circumstance that the name of that patriot was united with that
of John Hancock, in an exemption from the general pardon which the
British Government offered to those American revolutionists, whom they
dared to style rebels. The longer I should address the House upon this
subject, the more feeble would be my language, as the greater would be my
sensibility. I shall, therefore, only further observe, that I shall most
cordially support the motion of the gentleman from Virginia.

The question was then taken up on Mr. RANDOLPH’s motion: which was agreed
to unanimously.

Mr. NICHOLSON observed that, on occasions like the present, it had been
usual for the House to adjourn. He, therefore, moved an adjournment;
which was carried.


THURSDAY, October 20.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, SAMUEL THATCHER; from
New York, JOHN SMITH; and from Maryland, JOHN ARCHER, appeared, produced
their credentials, were qualified, and took their seats in the House.

The House then proceeded, by ballot, to the appointment of a Chaplain to
Congress, on the part of this House; and, upon examining the ballots, a
majority of the votes of the whole House was found in favor of the Rev.
WILLIAM PARKINSON.


FRIDAY, October 21.

Two other members, to wit: from New York, JOHN PATTERSON and ERASTUS
ROOT, appeared, produced their credentials, and took their seats in the
House.

_Resolved_, That the resolution of the tenth of December, one thousand
eight hundred and one, authorizing Thomas Claxton to employ an additional
assistant, two servants, and two horses, be, and the same is hereby,
continued in force during this and the next session: and that the said
Thomas Claxton be allowed a further sum of one dollar and twenty-five
cents, to be paid in like manner, to enable him to increase the number of
his attendants.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have
appointed the Rev. Dr. GANTT, a Chaplain to Congress, on their part.


SATURDAY, October 22.

_Appropriation for the Louisiana Treaty._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    In my communication to you of the 17th instant, I informed you
    that conventions had been entered into with the Government of
    France for the cession of Louisiana to the United States.
    These, with the advice and consent of the Senate, having now
    been ratified, and my ratification exchanged for that of the
    First Consul of France, in due form, they are communicated to
    you for consideration in your legislative capacity. You will
    observe that some important conditions cannot be carried into
    execution, but with the aid of the Legislature; and that time
    presses a decision on them without delay.

    The ulterior provisions, also suggested in the same
    communication, for the occupation and government of the
    country, will call for early attention. Such information
    relative to its government, as time and distance have permitted
    me to obtain, will be ready to be laid before you within a
    few days. But, as permanent arrangements for this object may
    require time and deliberation, it is for your consideration
    whether you will not, forthwith, make such temporary provisions
    for the preservation, in the meanwhile, of order and
    tranquillity in the country, as the case may require.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    OCT. 21, 1803.

Mr. HUGER hoped the reading of the treaty and conventions would be
dispensed with, and that they would be printed for the use of the members.

Mr. RANDOLPH hoped they would be read.

The reading of course was proceeded with, which being finished,

Mr. RANDOLPH moved a reference of the Message, and of the documents
accompanying it, to the whole House on Monday; which motion was agreed to
without a division.

Mr. RANDOLPH begged leave to submit a resolution, arising out of the
Message, which he hoped would be considered at that time, for the purpose
of referring it to the same committee to whom had been just referred the
Message:

    _Resolved_, That provision ought to be made for carrying into
    effect the treaty and convention concluded at Paris on the
    30th April, 1803, between the United States of America and the
    French Republic.

Referred to the same committee, without a division.


MONDAY, October 24.

_The Louisiana Treaty._

Mr. GRISWOLD moved the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to cause to be laid before this House a copy of the
    treaty between the French Republic and Spain, of the first
    of October, one thousand eight hundred, together with a copy
    of the deed of cession from Spain, executed in pursuance of
    the same treaty, conveying Louisiana to France, (if any such
    deed exists;) also copies of such correspondence between the
    Government of the United States and the Government or Minister
    of Spain, (if any such correspondence has taken place,) as
    will show the assent or dissent of Spain to the purchase of
    Louisiana by the United States; together with copies of such
    other documents as may be in the Department of State, or any
    other Department of this Government, tending to ascertain
    whether the United States have, in fact, acquired any title to
    the province of Louisiana by the treaties with France of the
    thirtieth of April, one thousand eight hundred and three.

Mr. GRISWOLD said that, by adverting to the Message of the President
respecting the treaty and conventions lately concluded between the United
States and the French Government, he found that the President, speaking
on the subject, observes: “As permanent arrangements for this object
require time and deliberation, it is for your consideration whether you
will not forthwith make such temporary provisions for the preservation,
in the meanwhile, of order and tranquillity in the country, as the case
may require.” He recommends to the immediate attention of Congress the
passage of some temporary laws. This being the case, and the subject
being about to be brought before the House, it became important that
they should know distinctly what they had obtained by the treaty; and
whether there were any territory belonging to the United States to take
possession of, or any new subjects to govern. Inasmuch as if no new
territory or subjects were acquired, it was perfectly idle to pass even
temporary laws for the occupation of the one, or the government of the
other.

In the treaty lately concluded with France, the treaty between France
and Spain is referred to; only a part of it is copied. The treaty
referred to must be a public treaty. In the nature of things it must
be the title-deed for the province of Louisiana. The Government must
have a copy of it. As there is but a part recited, it is evidently
imperfect. It becomes therefore necessary to be furnished with the whole,
in order to ascertain the conditions relative to the Duke of Parma; it
also becomes necessary to get the deed of cession; for the promise to
cede is no cession. This deed of cession, Mr. G. also presumed, was in
the possession of Government. It was also important to know under what
circumstances Louisiana is to be taken possession of, and whether with
the consent of Spain, as she is still possessed of it. If it is to be
taken possession of with her consent, the possession will be peaceable
and one kind of provision will be necessary; but if it is to be taken
possession of in opposition to Spain, a different provision may be
necessary. From these considerations he thought it proper in the House to
call upon the Executive for information on this point. Other important
documents may, perhaps, likewise be in the hands of the President.

Mr. RANDOLPH hoped the resolution would not be agreed to. He was well
apprized of the aspect which it was in the power of ingenuity to give to
a refusal, on the part of that House, to require any information which
gentlemen might think fit to demand of the Executive, however remotely
connected with subjects before them. But the dread of imputations
which he knew to be groundless should never induce him to swerve from
that line of conduct which his most sober judgment approved. Did he
indeed conceive that the nation, or the House, entertained a doubt
of our having acquired new territory and people to govern; could he
for a moment believe that even a minority, respectable as to numbers,
required any other evidence of this fact than the extract from the treaty
which had just been read, he would readily concur with the gentleman
from Connecticut in asking of the Executive, whether indeed we had
a new accession of territory and of citizens, or, as that gentleman
had been pleased to express himself, subjects to govern. He hoped the
gentleman would excuse a small variation from his own phraseology,
since, notwithstanding the predilection which some Governments and some
gentlemen manifested for this form, Mr. R. asked for himself the use of
such as were more familiar to American ears and American constitutions.

The Executive has laid before this House an instrument, which he tells
us has been duly ratified, conveying to the United States the country
known under the appellation of Louisiana. The first article affirms the
right of France, to the sovereignty of this territory, to be derived
under the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, which it quotes. The third article
makes provision for the future government, by the United States, of its
inhabitants; and the fourth provides the manner in which this territory
and these inhabitants are to be transferred by France to us. There
has been negotiated a convention, between us and the French Republic,
stating, in the most unequivocal terms, that there does exist on her part
a right to the country in question, which is supported by the strongest
possible evidence, and pledging herself to put us in possession of that
right, so soon as we shall have performed those stipulations, on our
part, in consideration of which France has conveyed to us her sovereignty
over this country and people. From the nature of our Government, these
stipulations can only be fulfilled by laws to the passing of which the
Legislature alone is competent. And when these laws are about to be
passed, endeavors are made to impede, or frustrate, the measure, by
setting on foot inquiries which mean nothing, or are unconnected with
the subject, and this is done by those who have always contended that
there was no discretion vested in this House by the constitution, as to
carrying treaties into effect. If, sir, gentlemen believe that we must
eventually do that which rests with us, towards effecting this object,
to what purpose is this inquiry? Mr. R. begged the House not to impute
to him any disposition to countenance this monstrous doctrine, whose
advocates now found it so difficult to practise. On the contrary, he
held in the highest veneration the principle established in the case of
the British Treaty, and the men by whom it was established, that, in all
matters requiring legislative aid, it was the right and duty of this
House to deliberate, and upon such deliberation, to afford, or refuse,
that aid, as in their judgments the public good might require. And he
held it to be equally the right of the House to demand such information
from the Executive, as to them appeared necessary to enable them to form
a sound conclusion on subjects submitted, by that department, to their
consideration. But those who then contended that this House possessed no
discretion on the subject, that they were bound implicitly to conform
to the stipulations, however odious and extravagant, into which the
treaty-making power might have plunged the nation--those who then said
that we cannot deliberate, are now instituting inquiries to serve as the
basis of deliberation--(for if we are not to deliberate upon the result,
why institute any inquiry at all?)--inquiries, which are in their very
nature deliberation itself. But whilst he arraigned the consistency of
other gentlemen, Mr. R. said that it behoved him to assert his own.
Information on subjects of the nature of that which they were then
discussing, might be required for two objects: to enable the House to
determine whether it were expedient to approve a measure which on the
face of it carried proof of its impolicy; or to punish ministers who may
have departed from their instructions--who may have betrayed the interest
confided by the nation to their care.

To illustrate this remark, let us advert to the case of the Treaty
of London, generally known as Mr. Jay’s treaty. That instrument had
excited the public abhorrence. The objections to carrying it into
effect were believed insuperable. This sentiment pervaded the House of
Representatives, and when they demanded information from the Executive,
they virtually held this language: “Sir, we detest your treaty--we feel
an almost invincible repugnance to giving it our sanction--but if, by
the exhibition of any information in possession of the Executive, we can
be convinced that the interests of the United States have been supported
to the utmost extent;--that, wretched as this instrument is, the terms
are as good as were attainable; and that, bad as those terms are, it is
politic under existing circumstances to accept them, we will, however
reluctantly, pass the laws for carrying it into effect. The present
case, if he understood any thing of the general sentiment, was, happily,
of a different nature. The treaty which they were then called upon to
sanction, had been hailed by the acclamations of the nation. It was not
difficult to foresee, from the opinions manifested in every quarter,
that it would receive the cordial approbation of a triumphant majority
of that House. If such be the general opinion--if we are not barely
satisfied with the terms of this treaty, but lost in astonishment at the
all-important benefits which we have so cheaply acquired, to what purpose
do we ask information respecting the detail of the negotiation? Has any
one ventured to hint disapprobation of the conduct of the ministers who
have effected this negotiation? Has any one insinuated that our interests
have been betrayed? If, then, we are satisfied as to the terms of this
treaty, and with the conduct of our ministers abroad, let us pass the
laws necessary for carrying it into effect. To refuse--to delay, upon
the plea now offered, is to jeopardize the best interests of the Union.
Shall we take exception to our own title? Shall we refuse the offered
possession? Shall this refusal proceed from those who so lately affirmed
that we ought to pursue this very object at every national hazard? I
should rather suppose the eagerness of gentlemen would be ready to
outstrip the forms of law in making themselves masters of this country,
than that, now, when it is offered to our grasp, they should display an
unwillingness, or at least an indifference, for that which so lately was
all-important to them. After the message which the President has sent us,
to demand, if indeed we have acquired any new subjects, as the gentleman
expresses it, which renders the exercise of our legislative functions
necessary, would be nothing less than a mockery of him, of this solemn
business, and of ourselves. Cautionary provisions may be introduced into
the laws for securing us against every hazard, although, from the nature
of our stipulations, we are exposed to none. We retain in our own hands
the consideration money, even after we have possession.”

Mr. R. expressed himself averse to demand the Spanish correspondence.
The reasons must be obvious to all. The possession of Louisiana by us,
will necessarily give rise to negotiations between the United States and
Spain, relative to its boundaries. These have probably commenced, and are
now pending. He hoped, therefore, the House would go into committee on
the Message of the President, and after resolving to pass the requisite
laws, if further information shall be wanting in relation to the mode of
taking possession, or any other object of detail, the Executive might be
called upon to furnish it.

Mr. GODDARD did not intend to enter upon a long discussion of the
resolution; but it seemed to him that the reasons of the gentleman from
Virginia for opposing it were very erroneous. On what ground was the
opposition made? Altogether on the ground that Spain had actually made
the cession to France. Mr. G. apprehended no such impression had been
made on the House by the information before them. In the first article of
the treaty they learned what the title of France was. The treaty says,

    “Whereas, by the article the 3d of the treaty concluded at St.
    Ildefonso, the 9th Vendemiaire, an 9, (1st October, 1800,)
    between the First Consul of the French Republic and His
    Catholic Majesty, it was agreed as follows:

    “His Catholic Majesty promises and engages, on his part, to
    cede to the French Republic, six months after the full and
    entire execution of the conditions and stipulations therein
    relative to his Royal Highness the Duke of Parma, the colony
    or province of Louisiana, with the same extent that it now has
    in the hands of Spain, and that it had when France possessed
    it; and such as it should be after the treaties subsequently
    entered into between Spain and other States.

    “And whereas, in pursuance of the treaty, and particularly of
    the third article, the French Republic has an incontestable
    title to the domain and to the possession of the said
    territory; the First Consul of the French Republic, desiring
    to give to the United States a strong proof of his friendship,
    doth hereby cede to the said United States, in the name of the
    French Republic, for ever and in full sovereignty, the said
    territory, with all its rights and appurtenances, as fully and
    in the same manner as they have been acquired by the French
    Republic in virtue of the above-mentioned treaty, concluded
    with his Catholic Majesty.”

Mr. GODDARD asked whether the conclusion followed that France had an
incontestable title to Louisiana? There was no such evidence. If in
virtue of this treaty we purchase a promise on the part of His Catholic
Majesty to cede, and not an incontestable title, he would ask if the
promise constituted a title? France only says, we cede all our title.
This, and this only, is the language of the instrument. If this is
the case, is it not proper to inquire whether there are other acts
by which Spain has ceded Louisiana to France? Such acts may exist.
Certain stipulations were made by France to Spain, on which the cession
depended. Do we not then wish to know whether these stipulations have
been fulfilled and whether they are binding, or whether Spain has waived
them? Are there in existence any documents to that effect? It has been
hinted that such documents exist in the newspapers; but are we, in an
affair of this magnitude, to be referred to the dictum of a newspaper? He
apprehended that this was a novel mode of legislation.

Mr. RANDOLPH said, if the gentleman from Connecticut would confine his
motion to the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, he should be ready to acquiesce in
it, though he did not believe that instrument would throw any new light
on the subject.

Mr. GREGG said his wish was that the resolution should be divided, and
that the Treaty of St. Ildefonso only should be requested. It had been
conceded that it might be of some use in ascertaining the limits of
the cession. To the other members of the resolution he was opposed. He
therefore moved a division of the question.

Mr. GRISWOLD remarked that it would be more orderly to move the striking
out of the last paragraph.

Mr. THATCHER said, gentlemen objecting to this resolution had taken
different grounds. Some oppose it as inconsistent with the sentiments
that prevailed in the case of the British Treaty; others, because it is
premature, and others, because it is unnecessary. He did not expect the
first objection from any member on that floor; much less did he expect
it from the quarter in which it originated. The advocates of the motion
were charged with inconsistency. He was not a member of the House at
the time of the British Treaty, but, on referring to the Journal, it
would be perceived that the object of gentlemen who then called for
papers was to go into the merits of the British Treaty. It would not be
denied that the ground then taken by gentlemen on the other side was,
that the House had a right to examine the merits of the treaty, and to
the assertion of that right it was that the President answered. We now
say that it is not necessary for us to act in our legislative capacity,
intending, if it shall appear to be necessary, not to withhold acting.
Mr. T. therefore conceived that they exhibited no inconsistency, as they
did not purpose at this time to go into the merits of the treaty, and as
they acknowledged the treaty, if constitutionally made, to be binding.
But they wanted information on subjects of legislation.

Mr. NICHOLSON was extremely glad to find that gentlemen on the other
side of the House had at length abandoned the ground which they had
taken some years ago. He was rejoiced that they were now willing to
acknowledge, what they had heretofore most strenuously denied, that the
House of Representatives had a constitutional right, not only to call for
papers, but to use their discretion in carrying any treaty into effect.
That it must now be their impression was evident, or their conduct was
surely unaccountable. Why else do they call for papers, why inquire into
our title to the province of Louisiana? If the doctrine of a former day
was still to be adhered to, why urge this inquiry? If gentlemen are
consistent with themselves, if they have not forgot the lessons which
they inculcated upon the ratification of the British Treaty, this House
has no right to call for papers, no right to make inquiry, no right to
deliberate, but must carry this treaty into effect, be it good or bad;
must vote for all the necessary measures, whether they are calculated
to promote the interests of the United States or not. The doctrines
of old times, however, are now given up, the ground formerly taken is
abandoned. We shall no longer hear that the Executive is omnipotent, and
that the representatives of the people are bound to vote, blindfolded,
for carrying into effect all treaties which the President and the Senate
may think proper to make and ratify. He thanked the gentlemen for the
admission, and hoped that the country would profit by it hereafter.

He was happy to say that this was not now, nor ever was, the doctrine
of himself and his friends. They meant to deliberate, they meant to use
their discretion in voting away the treasure of the nation. He agreed
with gentlemen, that if a majority of the House entertained any doubt as
to the validity of the title we have acquired, they ought to call for
papers; and he had no doubt, if there was any dissatisfaction, they would
call. He himself should have no objection to vote for the resolution if
it was confined to proper objects, not indeed to satisfy himself, for he
was already fully satisfied, but to satisfy other gentlemen; to satisfy
the American people, that the insinuations thrown out about the title,
are totally without foundation. The resolution in its present shape,
however, was highly improper; it looked to extrinsic circumstances,
and contemplated an inquiry into subjects totally unconnected with the
treaty with France. What, said Mr. N., has Spain to do in this business?
Gentlemen ask if she has acquiesced in our purchase, and call for her
correspondence with our Government. What is the acquiescence of Spain to
us? If the House is satisfied, from the information laid on the table,
that Spain had ceded Louisiana to France, and that France had since
ceded it to the United States, what more do they require? Are we not an
independent nation? Have we not a right to make treaties for ourselves
without asking leave of Spain? What is it to us whether she acquiesces or
not? She is no party to the treaty of cession, she has no claim to the
ceded territory. Are we to pause till Spain thinks proper to consent, or
are we to inquire, whether, like a cross child, she has thrown away her
rattle, and cries for it afterwards?

With regard to the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, Mr. N. said, he should
have no objection to its being laid before the House, if it was in the
possession of the Executive. In all probability, however, this was not
the case, as it was known to be a secret treaty on other subjects of
great importance between France and Spain. As to the deed of cession
spoken of, he really did not understand what was meant, for he imagined
it was not expected a formal deed of bargain and sale had been executed
between two civilized nations, who negotiated by means of ambassadors. If
there were any other papers which could give gentlemen more information,
he had no objection, either, that these should be laid before them.
Not indeed for his own satisfaction, but for that of those who were
not already satisfied, if there were any of that description. One very
important paper, he knew from high authority, was certainly in existence,
and possibly might be in the power of the Executive. This was a formal
order, under the royal signature of Spain, commanding the Spanish
officers at Orleans to deliver the province to the French Prefect, which
he considered equal, perhaps superior to any deed of cession; for it was
equal to an express recognition on the part of Spain, that France had
performed all the conditions referred to in the Treaty of St. Ildefonso.
It was an acknowledgment that Spain had no further claims upon Louisiana,
and would show that any interference on her part ought to have no
influence on the American Government.

Mr. MITCHELL said he rose to express his sentiments against the whole
body of the resolution under debate. But his disinclination to adopt it
did not arise from any doubt of the right which the House possessed to
call upon the Executive for information. He had no hesitation to ask the
President for papers whenever it was necessary to obtain them. And it was
equally clear to him that whenever that dignified officer was properly
applied to, he would comply cheerfully with the request of Congress,
or of either branch of it. He owned that in some cases it would be the
duty of the House to pursue this mode of inquiry, and equally would it
be the duty of the head of the Executive Department to give his aid and
countenance.

In the present stage of the proceedings respecting the treaty and
conventions with France concerning Louisiana, he deemed it improper to
embarrass the business by an unseasonable call upon the Executive for
papers. The President had already communicated various information on
this subject, in his Message on the first day of the session. Additional
information was given in his Message of the 21st, wherein he told the
House that the ratification and exchanges had been made. This was
accompanied with instruments of cession and covenant concluded at Paris
between our ministers and the agents of the French Republic. All this
information we had already on our tables. This the President had put
the House in possession of from his own sense of duty. This obligation
was imposed on him by the constitution, which declares that he shall,
from time to time, give to Congress information of the state of the
Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient. Mr. M. said he had a firm belief that
the President had complied with this constitutional injunction. He
had communicated such intelligence as he had received; and if he was
possessed of any thing else needful for the deliberation of the House,
he was willing to think the Chief Magistrate of the Union would have
spontaneously imparted it.

The question was taken on agreeing to the first member of the resolution,
as follows:

    _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to cause to be laid before this House a copy of the
    treaty between the French Republic and Spain, of the 1st of
    October, 1800.

The House divided--ayes 59, noes 59. The SPEAKER declaring himself in the
affirmative, the motion was carried.

Mr. RODNEY suggested an alteration in the second member of the
resolution, so as to read “instrument,” instead of “deed.”

Mr. GRISWOLD had no objection to the modification.

The second member, so modified, was read as follows:

    “Together with a copy of the instrument of cession from Spain,
    executed in pursuance of the same treaty conveying Louisiana to
    France, (if any such instrument exists.)”

Mr. HUGER confessed his impressions to be favorable to the treaty, though
the arguments urged that day, certainly possessed great weight. He was
rather of opinion that no such instrument as that referred to in the
resolution existed. But if it did exist, its publication would certainly
be satisfactory to the people and the House. He declared himself ready to
vote for carrying the treaty into effect.

Mr. NICHOLSON did not know whether his remarks had been correctly
understood. He did not know whether the document he alluded to could
strictly be called the instrument of cession. He had drawn an amendment
to this part of the resolution, which he would propose, if in order, to
wit:

    “Or other instrument showing that the Spanish Government had
    ordered the province of Louisiana to be delivered to France.”

The SPEAKER said, the House having agreed to insert the word
“instrument,” it was not in order to receive a substitute.

Mr. HUGER moved to reconsider the vote of the House in favor of the
insertion of the word “instrument.”

Motion lost--ayes 24.

The question was then taken on the second member, as above stated, and
lost--ayes 34.

The question was then taken on the third member, viz:

    “Also, copies of such correspondence between the Government
    of the United States and the Government or Minister of Spain,
    (if any such correspondence has taken place,) as will show the
    assent or dissent of Spain to the purchase of Louisiana by the
    United States:”

And lost--ayes 34.

The question was then taken on the last member of the motion, and lost,
without a division, viz:

    “Together with copies of such other documents as may be in
    the Department of State, or any other department of this
    Government, tending to ascertain whether the United States
    have, in fact, acquired any title to the province of Louisiana
    by the treaties with France of the 30th of April, 1803.”

The question recurring on the whole of the resolution, as amended,

Mr. NICHOLSON moved to amend the second member by adding to the end
thereof;

    “Together with a copy of any instrument in possession of the
    Executive, showing that the Spanish Government has ordered the
    province of Louisiana to be delivered to the Commissary or
    other agent of the French Government.”

Agreed to--ayes 64.

The question was then taken by yeas and nays on the whole of the original
motion, amended as follows:

    “_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to cause to be laid before the House a copy of
    the treaty between the French Republic and Spain, of the
    1st October, 1800, together with a copy of any instrument
    in possession of the Executive, showing that the Spanish
    Government has ordered the province of Louisiana to be
    delivered to the Commissary or other agent of the French
    Government:”

And lost--yeas 57, nays 59.

_Amendment to the Constitution._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the report of
a select committee on propositions of amendment to the constitution.

The report was read, as follows:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds of
    both Houses concurring_, That the following article be proposed
    to the Legislatures of the different States as an amendment to
    the Constitution of the United States, which, when ratified by
    three-fourths of the said Legislatures, shall be valid to all
    intents and purposes as a part of the said constitution, viz:

    “In all future elections of President and Vice President, the
    Electors shall name in their ballots the person voted for as
    President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice
    President, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of
    the same State with themselves. The person having a majority of
    all the Electors for President shall be the President; and if
    there shall be no such majority, the President shall be chosen
    from the highest numbers, not exceeding three, on the list
    for President, by the House of Representatives, in the manner
    directed by the constitution. The person having the greatest
    number of votes as Vice President shall be the Vice President,
    and in case of an equal number of votes for two or more persons
    for Vice President, they being the highest on the list, the
    Senate shall choose the Vice President from those having such
    equal number, in the manner directed by the constitution.”

Mr. DAWSON observed, that at the time of the adoption of the
constitution, that part of it which related to the election of a
President and Vice President had been objected to; and evils likely to
occur had been foreseen by some gentlemen at that day. Experience had
shown that they were not mistaken. Every gentleman in that House knew
the situation in which the country had been placed by the controverted
election of a Chief Magistrate; it was one which he trusted never would
return. It had been a subject much reflected on by the people, and by
the State Legislatures, several of which had declared their approbation
of the principle contained in the resolution reported by the committee.
The House had two years since ratified a similar amendment by a
constitutional majority of two-thirds. At that time no objections were
made to the principle of the amendment. All the objection then made was
on account of the lateness of the day and thinness of the House. Mr. D.
considered it unnecessary to make any further remarks at that time, as he
could not anticipate any objections that might be urged. He moved that
the Committee should rise and report the resolution without amendment.

Mr. J. CLAY, though in favor of the principle of the amendment, was
of opinion that, as to some of its parts, it required alteration. He
therefore moved:

    “But if no person have such majority, then the House of
    Representatives shall immediately proceed to choose by ballot
    from the two persons having the greatest number of votes,
    one of them for President; or if there be three or more
    persons having an equal number of votes, then the House of
    Representatives shall in like manner, from the persons having
    such equality of votes, choose the President; or if there be
    one person having a greater number of votes--not being a
    majority of the whole number of Electors appointed--than any
    other person, and two or more persons who have an equal number
    of votes one with the other, then the House of Representatives
    shall in like manner, from among such persons having the
    greater number of votes and such other persons having an
    equality of votes, choose the President.”

Mr. VAN CORTLANDT thought the amendment liable to objection.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL was in favor of the principle contained in the
amendment. He considered it to be the duty of this House, in introducing
an amendment to the constitution on this point, to secure to the people
the benefits of choosing the President, so as to prevent a contravention
of their will as expressed by Electors chosen by them; resorting to
legislative interposition only in extraordinary cases: and when this
should be rendered necessary, so guarding the exercise of legislative
power, that those only should be capable of legislative election who
possessed a strong evidence of enjoying the confidence of the people.
This was the true spirit and principle of the constitution, whose object
was, through the several organs of the Government, faithfully to express
the public opinion. For this reason he was in favor of the proposed
amendment. By it we shall make a less innovation on the spirit of the
constitution than by rejecting it, and adopting the report of the select
committee. There were obvious reasons why the persons from whom a choice
may be made should be fewer in case of a designation of the office than
heretofore. At present the whole number of electoral votes is one hundred
and seventy-six. As the constitution now stands, four candidates might
have an equal number of votes, or three might have a majority, viz: one
hundred and seventeen each. According to the proposed amendment, but one
can have a majority, and if two persons should be equal and highest, it
is not probable that the third candidate will have many votes.

Mr. GRISWOLD said it was very difficult to ascertain the precise import
of the amendment offered by the gentleman from Pennsylvania by barely
hearing it read from the Chair. In the meaning therefore which he
gave it, he might perhaps be mistaken. If not mistaken, it involved a
principle and implied a change, which he had never before heard suggested
on that floor, or in the part of the country from which he came. It
is well known to every member, that under the constitution as it at
present stands, the votes given for a President in this House are by
States, and not according to the majority of the members of the whole
body. The amendment, as reported by the select committee, preserves this
original feature of the constitution by prescribing that the election
shall be proceeded with as pointed out by the constitution. But the
present amendment varies this mode, according to which it is to be made
without respect to States. Of course a majority of the members are to
decide. He submitted it to gentlemen whether they were willing in this
way to sacrifice the interests and rights of the smaller States. If
this be the intention of gentlemen, we ought to have time to deliberate
on the subject before it is pressed to a decision. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania will explain whether this is his intention.

Mr. J. CLAY begged leave explicitly to state, for the satisfaction of the
gentleman from Connecticut, that it was not his intention to change that
part of the constitution which prescribed that the votes should be by
States; and if it would induce the gentleman to vote for the resolution
he had moved, he would add the words of the constitution, viz:

    “But in choosing the President the votes shall be taken by
    States, the representation from each State having one vote; a
    quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members
    from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States
    shall be necessary to a choice.”

These words were accordingly added.

Mr. DAWSON observed that this proposition had been submitted to the
select committee, who had considered it more objectionable than that
reported. Their object was to innovate as little as possible on the
constitution. A great part of it referred to cases so extremely remote
as were not likely to happen. The only material change it made was to
reduce the number of persons from whom a choice should be made from three
to two. At present the election for a President and Vice President was
made from the five highest on the list. As, according to the proposed
amendment, a designation of the persons voted for as President and
Vice President was to be made, it was considered that by giving the
three highest to the House of Representatives, from which to choose a
President, and the two highest to the Senate, from which to choose a Vice
President, the spirit of the constitution would not be changed. He hoped
therefore the report of the committee would be agreed to. He believed
it comprehended all cases which were probable; and he further believed
that if they spent a month they would not devise an amendment that would
provide for all possible cases that may happen.

Mr. CLOPTON said he rose to express his approbation of the amendment
offered by the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. CLAY.) He said that
indeed the amendment could not but be acceptable to him, inasmuch as it
corresponded with the ideas he had the honor to express to the committee
on this subject the other day. He begged leave now to make a few remarks
in addition to those which he had then stated. He said, if any thing
is to be lamented as a defect in the fundamental principles of our
Government, that defect perhaps consists in a departure from the plain
and simple modes of immediate election by the people as to some of the
branches of the Government. He did not mean however now to discuss, nor
did he know that he ever should discuss, this point. The Constitution of
the United States having established a different principle in respect to
the election of the several departments of the Government, except that
branch of the Legislature which this House composes; and the object of
the proposed amendment to the constitution not being the transmutation of
a fundamental principle, but merely an alteration in the mode heretofore
directed of electing one branch of the Government according to the
principle already established, his business and his object was to state
to this committee those ideas which occurred to him on this occasion as
suited to the subject as it now stands before the committee.

Mr. C. said that most seriously considering the principles of the
Government in such a point of view as he had the honor to state to
the committee, he was irresistibly impressed with the opinion that a
legislative election of President or Vice President, whenever resorted
to, should be restrained to the smallest number above a unit, or to those
persons who have equal electoral votes. He considered it as a position
clearly and unquestionably true, that if the field of election, when
not decided by the voice of the people themselves, should be left too
wide, more chances will there always be for the introduction of abuses
in determining on a choice, if those whose province it shall be to
decide, should be actuated by a spirit adverse to the public sentiment.
Results ungrateful to the public feeling might indeed become sources of
discontent truly to be lamented. The demon of discord might be called
forth, and stalking over our land, might unfortunately produce a state
of things very different from that peaceful, tranquil state, which would
follow a decision more conformable to the will of the people. Such a
decision he believed would be ensured were the election to be confined
to those two persons only who had received the most ample testimony
of the public confidence, or to those who had been stamped with equal
testimonials of that confidence.

Mr. SMILIE would wish one principle altered in the report of the select
committee, viz: that which confined the election of the President to the
three highest persons voted for. It was impossible for human wisdom to
provide for all cases that might occur. Their time was not well spent
in providing for cases extremely remote. He had but one object in view,
the designation of office; and the more simple the proposition, the more
likely they were to obtain this object. It should be recollected that the
constitution was the act of the people, and ought not to be altered till
inconveniences actually arise under it. He believed, though particular
parts might be defective in theory, they ought not to be changed till
practical inconveniences had been experienced. No such inconvenience had
yet been felt from choosing the President from the five highest on the
list. Is it, then, prudent to embarrass the great principle, in which
they generally concurred, with incidental propositions, when there was no
necessity for them? This amendment was to obtain the assent of thirteen
legislative bodies before it would be binding. The simpler, then, the
proposition, the more likely it was to succeed. His idea, therefore, was
to leave the constitution as it now stood, so far as it related to a
choice being made from the five highest, and only so far to change it as
related to a designation of the office.

Mr. SANFORD said the great object of the amendment ought to be to prevent
persons voted for as Vice President from becoming President. If the
amendment effected this, it was sufficient. All other innovation upon the
constitution was improper; and no danger could arise from extending the
right of the House of Representatives to making a choice from the five
highest.

Mr. RODNEY said that in the select committee he had been in favor of
the number stated in the constitution. He was not for innovating on the
constitution one tittle more than was absolutely necessary. As to the
mere designation of office, the people looked for and expected it; and
if that were obtained, they would be satisfied. He well knew that if
amendments to this simple proposition were multiplied, objections to the
whole would also be increased. Having been originally in favor of five,
and thinking the inconveniences apprehended by some gentlemen not likely
to occur, he should vote in favor of the amendment of the gentleman from
Maryland, principally for the reason assigned by the gentleman from
Connecticut, that it would allow to the smaller States a larger scope of
choice.

Mr. ELLIOT hoped the amendment of the gentleman from Maryland would not
prevail; and coming, as he did himself, from a small State, he trusted
the House would pardon him for assigning his reasons for that hope. He
felt as much confidence in the House of Representatives as the gentleman
from Connecticut; but he was of opinion that their discretion ought
to be limited. The amendment will give the House of Representatives
the unqualified power of electing from the whole number on the list of
persons voted for as President, and on that ground he opposed it. It
was said to be a question of larger and smaller States, and those who
represent the smaller States were called upon to check the usurpation of
the larger States. Our system was undoubtedly federative, and there might
be danger of a usurpation of the large States if the small ones were not
protected by the constitution. His wish was that they might be so guarded.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL said he, too, represented a small State, and was
anxious to preserve the rights of the small States. But in a great
constitutional question, while these rights were not lost sight of,
principle ought also to be regarded. This he conceived to be his duty,
whatever effect it might have upon the State he represented. For this
reason he considered it proper to express his opinions on the present
occasion. It was a vital principle to preserve the constitution as pure
as possible. This rendered it necessary to show that the proposition of
the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. CLAY) came nearer to the principle
of the constitution than that offered by the gentleman from Maryland.
He had already observed that, there being at present no designation,
four was the smallest possible number from which a choice could be made:
to this number but one was added, making, altogether, five. In future
elections there will be one hundred and seventy-six Electors, and if
there be a designation of office, but one person can have a majority. To
confine the choice to two persons will, therefore, in principle, approach
as near as possible to the original principle of the constitution.

Mr. C. was in favor of preserving that part of the constitution which
directed the election to be made by States, wishing as little innovation
as possible on the principles of the constitution. He did not, however,
conceive a mere change of words dangerous, but the establishment of a
principle that deprived the people of the power of electing those who
possessed the largest share of their confidence. He was decidedly in
favor of whatever had this effect, as according with the true spirit of
the constitution; and he was, therefore, opposed to the amendment of the
gentleman from Maryland. His own opinion, too, was that it was best to
express in one article whatever related to the election of President and
Vice President, than refer to the constitution; by which the provisions
on that subject would be rendered much clearer.

The question was then taken on Mr. NICHOLSON’s amendment, and lost--ayes,
29, noes 77.

Mr. RANDOLPH said he came to the House under the impression that another
subject would have occupied their attention on account of its primary
importance, not meaning, however, to disparage the importance of an
amendment to the constitution. But on a subject which must be discussed
in a few days, if at all, it was improper that time should be lost. The
proposed amendment to the constitution was not, he believed, so extremely
pressing as to require immediate attention. The subject to which Mr. R.
had expected the attention of the House would have been first directed,
was the Treaty with France. Hoping that the committee would have decided
on the amendment at an early hour, he had refrained from any motion. But
perceiving that a decision was not likely soon to be made, he would move
that the committee should rise, for the purpose of taking up the treaty
respecting Louisiana.

Mr. DAWSON opposed the rising of the committee.

The question was taken on Mr. RANDOLPH’s motion, and carried--yeas 60,
nays 55. When the committee rose.

And on motion, the House adjourned.


TUESDAY, October 25.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the Message
from the President of the United States, of the twenty-first instant,
enclosing a treaty and conventions entered into and ratified by the
United States and the French Republic; to which Committee of the whole
House was also referred a motion for carrying the same into effect.

Mr. G. GRISWOLD said he had hoped that some gentleman, in favor of the
resolution under consideration, would have risen to assign his reasons
in favor of it. But no gentleman friendly to its adoption having risen,
and feeling himself embarrassed, he would take the liberty of suggesting
his doubts as to the propriety of the resolution. He hoped the committee
would have the candor to believe that, in stating those doubts which hung
upon his mind, his object was not to delay the progress of the measures
contemplated, but to gain information.

In reflecting, for the short time during which the subject had been
before him, he had not been able to pursue it in all its bearings, nor
to solve all the difficulties it presented. He had first asked himself
where was to be found the constitutional power of the Government to
incorporate the territory, with the inhabitants thereof, in the Union
of the United States, with the privileges of citizens of the United
States--is there any such power? And if there is, where is it lodged?
In giving his opinion on the constitutional right of making treaties,
he would say that it was vested in the President and Senate, and that a
treaty made by them on a subject constitutionally in their treaty-making
power, was valid without the assent of this House. This House had, to
be sure, the physical power of refusing the necessary means to carry
treaties into effect; but this power was essentially different from that
conferred by the constitution. But if the treaty-making power should be
exceeded, if it should be undertaken to make it operate upon subjects not
constitutionally vested, he had a right to say that it was his duty not
to carry it into effect. Even should its provisions be highly beneficial,
it was no less their constitutional duty to resist it. He would not
undertake to say that his mind was perfectly fixed, but he entertained
doubts--serious doubts; and he hoped gentlemen would candidly give them
answers.

Mr. RANDOLPH rose for the purpose of satisfying, so far as was in his
power, the doubts expressed by the gentleman from New York (Mr. G.
GRISWOLD). He had listened with great pleasure to the candid exposition
which the gentleman had given of his objections, and from the temper
which he had manifested, Mr. R. relied on being able to satisfy some
of his scruples on this subject. The objections which have been urged
to the motion before the committee, resolved themselves into arguments
against the constitutionality, and arguments against the expediency of
the treaty proposed to be carried into effect. As it would be needless
to repel objections of this last kind, unless those of the first
description could be satisfactorily answered, he should first reply to
the observations which had been made on the constitutional doctrine.

He understood the gentleman from New York as denying that there existed
in the United States, as such, a capacity to acquire territory; that,
by the constitution, they were restricted to the limits which existed
at the time of its adoption. If this position be correct, it undeniably
follows that those limits must have been accurately defined and generally
known at the time when the Government took effect. Either they have been
particularly described in the constitutional compact, or are referred to
as settled beyond dispute, and universally acknowledged. But this was not
the fact, in either case. The constitution not only did not describe any
particular boundary, beyond which the United States could not extend,
but our boundary was unsettled on our north-eastern, southern, and
north-western frontier, at the time of its adoption. But perhaps we shall
be told, that, although our limits were in dispute with our English and
Spanish neighbors, still there were certain boundaries specified in the
Treaty of Paris, of 1783, which were the actual boundaries of the United
States. It was, however, a well attested fact--one of which we possessed
official information from the Executive--that the limits assigned us by
that treaty were incapable of being established. A line running west,
from the Lake of the Woods, not touching the Mississippi at all--it
followed that the United States were without limits beyond the source
of the Mississippi. It will not be denied, that, among the powers which
the Government possesses under the constitution, there exists that of
settling disputes concerning our limits with the neighboring nations.
This power was not only necessary in relation to the disputed boundaries
on the side of Canada and Florida, but was indispensable to a government
over a country of indefinite extent. The existence of this power will
not be denied: it has been exercised in ascertaining our north-eastern
and southern frontier, and it involves in it the power of extending the
limits of the Confederacy. Let us suppose that the Commissioners, under
the Treaty of London, had determined the river St. John or St. Lawrence
to be the _true_ St. Croix--would not that part of the province of New
Brunswick or Quebec which lies on this side of those rivers at this time
have been a part of the United States? Suppose the northern boundary of
Florida had been fixed, under the Treaty of San Lorenzo, to extend from
the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf; would not all the country north of this
line and east of the Mississippi--part of the very country conveyed by
the treaty lately negotiated, and which gentlemen conceived we could not
constitutionally hold--would not that country, at this time, compose a
part of the United States? That the constitution should tie us down to
particular limits, without expressing those limits; that we should be
restrained to the then boundaries of the United States, when it is in
proof to the committee that no such bounds existed, or do now exist, was
altogether incomprehensible and inadmissible. For, if the constitution
meant the practical limits of the United States, the extent of country
which we then _possessed_--our recent acquisitions, on the side of
Canada and the Natchez, could not be defended. But, sir, said Mr. R.,
my position is not only maintainable by the reason of the constitution,
but by the practice under it. Congress have expressed, in their own
acts, a solemn recognition of the principle, that the United States, in
their federative capacity, may acquire, and have acquired, territory.
It will be recollected, that adverse claims once existed between the
United States and the State of Georgia, in relation to a certain tract
of country between the northern boundary of the Spanish possessions and
what we contended was the southern limit of Georgia--the United States
asserting that the country in question was the property of the United
States, in their confederate capacity, and the State of Georgia claiming
it as hers. Although I have always advocated the claim of that State,
it never was on the principle of an incapacity in the United States to
acquire territory, or any other which affects the question now before
us. It is true, sir, we appointed commissioners to settle the matter
in dispute, amicably, with Georgia; but in the mean time we assumed
the jurisdiction, erected a government over the country, and thereby
established the principle that the United States, as such, could acquire
territory; the country in question, as we contended, never having been
included within the limits of any particular States, and being ceded to
the Confederacy by the Treaty of 1783. But perhaps it may be answered,
that this acquisition, being made anterior to the date of the present
constitution, cannot affect any limitation or restriction, which it may
have provided in relation to this subject; and that to prove that the
old confederation could acquire territory, is not to prove the same
capacity in the present system of Government. To this I reply, that the
constitution contains no such expressed limitation, nor can any be fairly
inferred from it: and that if the old confederation--a mere government of
States--a loosely connected league--all of whose powers, with many more,
are possessed by the present Federal Government--if this mere alliance of
States could rightfully acquire territory in their allied capacity, much
more is the existing Government competent to make such an acquisition. To
me the inference is irresistible.

But the gentleman does not rest himself on this ground alone. He does not
embark his whole treasure in a single bottom. Granting that the United
States are not destitute of capacity to acquire territory, he denies
that this acquisition has been made in a regular way--Congress, says
he, alone is competent to such an act. In this transaction he scents
at a distance Executive encroachment, and we are called upon to assert
our rights, and to repel it. If any usurpation of the privileges of
Congress, or of this House, be made to appear, I pledge myself to that
gentleman to join him in resisting it. But let us inquire into the fact.
No gentleman will deny the right of the President to initiate business
here, by message, recommending particular subjects to our attention. If
the Government of the United States possess the constitutional power
to acquire territory from foreign States, the Executive, as the organ
by which we communicate with such States, must be the prime agent in
negotiating such an acquisition. Conceding, then, that the power of
confirming this act, and annexing to the United States the territory thus
acquired, ultimately rests with Congress, where has been the invasion
of the privileges of that body? Does not the President of the United
States submit this subject to Congress for their sanction? Does he not
recognize the principle, which I trust we will never give up, that no
treaty is binding until we pass the laws for executing it--that the
powers conferred by the constitution on Congress cannot be modified, or
abridged, by any treaty whatever--that the subjects of which they have
cognizance cannot be taken, in any way, out of their jurisdiction? In
this procedure nothing is to be seen but a respect, on the part of the
Executive, for our rights; a recognition of a discretion on our part
to accord or refuse our sanction. Where, then, is the violation of our
rights? As to the initiative, in a matter like this, it necessarily
devolved on the Executive.

Mr. R. said, that he would not dilate upon the importance of the
navigation of the Mississippi, which had been the theme of every tongue,
which we now possessed unfettered by the equal claim of the nation
holding the west bank, a fruitful source of quarrel; but he would call
the attention of the committee to a report which had been made at the
last session and to which publicity had lately been given.

I am not surprised, Mr. Chairman, that in a performance so replete with
information, a single error should be discovered, especially as it does
not affect the soundness of its conclusion. As long ago as the year 1673,
the inhabitants of the French province of Canada explored the country on
the Mississippi. A few years afterwards (1685) La Salle, with emigrants
from old France, made a settlement on the Bay of St. Bernard, and at
the close of the 17th century, previous to the existence of Pensacola,
another French settlement was made by the Governor, D’Ibberville, at
Mobile, and on the Isle Dauphin, or Massacre, at the mouth of that bay.
In 1712, a short time previous to the peace of Utrecht, Louis XIV.
described the extent of the colony of Louisiana (by the settlements) in
his grant of its exclusive commerce to Crozat. Three years subsequent
to this, the Spanish establishment at Pensacola was formed, as well
as the settlement of the Adais on the river Mexicana. After various
conflicting efforts, on both sides, the bay and river Perdido was
established, (from the peace of 1719,) as the boundary between the
French province of Louisiana on the one side and the Spanish province
of Florida on the other: this river being nearly equi-distant between
Mobile and Pensacola. Near the close of the war between England and
France, rendered memorable for the unexampled success with which it was
conducted by that unrivalled statesman, the great Lord Chatham, Spain
became a party on the side of France. The loss of the Havana, and other
important dependencies, was the immediate consequence. In 1762, France,
by a secret treaty of cotemporaneous date with the preliminary Treaty of
Peace, relinquished Louisiana to Spain, as an indemnity for her losses,
sustained by advocating the cause of France. By the definitive Treaty of
1763, France ceded to England all that part of Louisiana which lies east
of the Mississippi, except the island of New Orleans--the rest of the
province to Spain. It is to be observed that although France ostensibly
ceded this country to England, virtually the cession was on the part of
Spain; because France was no longer interested in the business, but as
the friend of Spain, (having previously relinquished the whole to her,)
and because in 1783 restitution was made by England, not to France, but
to Spain, England having acquired this portion of Louisiana, together
with the Spanish province of Florida, annexed to the former that part
of Florida which lies west of the Apalachicola and east of the Perdido;
thereby forming the province of West Florida.

It is only in English geography, and during this period, from 1763 to
1783, that such a country as West Florida is known. For Spain, having
acquired both the Floridas in 1783, re-annexed to Louisiana the country
west of the Perdido subject to the government of New Orleans, and
established the ancient boundaries of Florida; the country between the
Perdido and Apalachicola being subject to the Governor of St. Augustine.
By the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, Spain cedes to France “the province
of Louisiana with the same extent that it now has in the hands of
Spain:” viz: to the Perdido, “and that it had when France possessed it
to the Perdido--and such as it should be after treaties subsequently
entered into between Spain and other powers;” that is, saving to the
United States the country given up by the Treaty of San Lorenzo. We
have succeeded to all the right of France. If the navigation of the
Mississippi alone were of sufficient importance to justify war, surely
the possession of every drop of water which runs into it--the exclusion
of European nations from its banks, who would have with us the same
causes of quarrel, did we possess New Orleans only, which we have had
with the former possessors of that key of the river; the entire command
of the Mobile and its widely extended branches, scarcely inferior in
consequence to the Mississippi itself--watering the finest country and
affording the best navigation in the United States--surely these would be
acknowledged to be inestimably valuable.

Mr. PURVIANCE.--I am clearly and decidedly in favor of the resolution on
your table, premising the appropriations for carrying the treaty between
France and this country into effect; and I sincerely regret, that in
doing so, I shall act adversely to the general sentiment of the gentlemen
with whom it is my pleasure and my pride to confess I have hitherto
politically officiated.

It is true I am, and always have been, opposed to the general tenor of
the present Administration. It has not appeared to me to possess that
bold commanding aspect--that erect and resolute front--which ought to be
assumed by the Executive of a free people, when claiming satisfaction
for a wrong sustained. It has not shown that strong, muscular, athletic
shape, which is calculated to intimidate aggression, or which is enabled
to resist it; nor do I think that it has manifested that firm, dignified,
manly tone of virtue and of spirit, which, resting on the love of a free
people, and conscious of their strength, can ask for the prompt, direct,
and unequivocal satisfaction to which it is entitled, and, being denied,
can take it. It has not appeared like the veteran chief, ready to gird
his loins in defence of his country’s rights; but, if I may be allowed to
use the _magna componere parvis_, it has, to my mind, somewhat resembled
a militia subaltern, who, in time of war, directed his men not to fire on
the enemy, lest the enemy might fire again.

Under such an Administration, I have thought that it would be better
to have the ceded territory on any terms than not to have it at all.
If we have not the spirit or the means of doing ourselves justice,
would it not be better that we bribe those who might be in a situation
to molest us, and thus put it out of their power to do us any injury,
which we cannot or which we will not avenge? There are but two ways
of maintaining our national independence--men and money. Since we did
not use the first, we must have recourse to the last. One of these two
we should be compelled to resort to if France gained possession of
Louisiana, and we had better resort to it now. I deny that they have
as yet gained possession: they have not received a delivery of the
four redoubts which garrison and command the country, nor have they a
single armed soldier there, except those which are particularly attached
to the equipage of the Colonial Prefect. If, sir, we were obliged to
resort to the necessity of purchasing their friendship, after they had
procured an establishment, it would not be confined to one instance of
humiliation and acknowledgment on our part, or one instance of insult
only on theirs. If we purchase this friendship once, we should be
compelled to make annual contributions to their avarice, and be annually
subjected to their insolence. Repeated concessions would only produce a
repetition of injury, and, at last, when we had completely compromitted
our national dignity, and offered up our last cent as an oblation to
Gallic rapacity, we would then be further from conciliation than ever.
The spirit of universal domination, instead of being allayed by those
measures which had been intended for its abatement, would rage with
redoubled fury. Elated by those sacrifices which had been intended to
appease it, it would still grow more fierce; it would soon stride across
the Mississippi, and every encroachment which conquest or cunning could
effect might be expected. The tomahawk of the savage and the knife of the
negro would confederate in the league, and there would be no interval of
peace, until we should either be able to drive them from their location
altogether, or else offer up our sovereignty as a homage of our respect,
and permit the name of our country to be blotted out of the list of
nations for ever.

I confess there are many gentlemen of that nation for whom I entertain
the sincerest esteem; but although I love some of them as friends, they
will pardon me when I say that I do not like all of them as neighbors.
Blood, havoc, and devastation, have for some years past encircled their
proximity, and circumstances equally disastrous and equally improbable
have already taken place. Do we want any evidences of this? We can find
them in Switzerland, in Italy, in Egypt, in Hanover, in France itself.
We have seen the ancient throne of the Capets tumbled from its base; we
have seen the tide of succession which had flowed on uninterruptedly for
ages dammed up for ever; we have seen the sources of the life blood royal
drained dry. And by whom? By the pert younglings of the day.

    “An eagle towering in his pride of flight
    Was, by a mousing owl, hawkt at and killed.”

We have afterwards seen these puny upstarts, when their hands had been
reddened in the slaughter pens of Paris, kicked from their seats, and a
Corsican soldier embellished with the majesty of the Bourbons. We have
seen one half of the Old World subjected to his dominion, and the other
half alarmed at his power. And is it thought, sir, that America alone,
with an army scarcely sufficient to defend our garrisons, with a navy
scarcely sufficient to punish a Bashaw, with a treasury incommensurate to
our engagements, and an Executive unwilling to strain our energies--is
it, I say sir, for America alone, under these circumstances, singly to
withstand that gigantic nation, fighting on her own ground, fed from
her own granaries, and furnished from her own arsenals? The time once
was, indeed, when we could have redressed our own wrongs, and had an
opportunity of doing so; but that necessity and that opportunity, I take
it sir, have now both passed away.

Yes, thank God! We have now a treaty, signed by themselves, in which
they have voluntarily passed away the only means of annoyance which they
possessed. But I do not thank the honorable gentleman who is at the
head of our Executive. At the time this negotiation was commenced there
could not be the smallest hope of its being carried into effect. The
French Consul had obtained it perhaps for the express purpose of carrying
into effect his favorite scheme of universal domination; it might give
him the chance of injuring the British, controlling the Spaniards, and
dismembering America. Compared with these objects a handful of bank stock
was of no more consequence to him than a handful of sand. His fleet and
army were ready to sail, and his colonial prefect had already arrived.
But, mark! The King of Great Britain, who at this crisis I take to have
been by far the most able negotiator we had, declares war. The scene is
now changed. That which France had refused to our intercessions, she was
now compelled to grant from mere necessity. A state of warfare took place
about the last of March, and the treaty was signed soon afterwards. As
long as I retain the small stock of understanding which it has pleased
God to give me, I shall never be induced to believe, that it was owing
in the smallest degree to the efficacy of diplomatic representation. The
mind of that great man (Buonaparte) is not made of such soft materials
as to receive an impress from the collision of every gentle hand.
Stern, collected, and inflexible, he laughs to scorn the toying arts of
persuasion; his soul is a stupendous rock, which the rushing of mighty
waters cannot shake from its place. No, sir; had it not been for this
happy coincidence of circumstances, the personal solicitations of our
ministers would have been regarded with as listless an ear as if they had
been whispered across the ocean.

Mr. ELLIOT.--Mr. Chairman, although in the short time since I have
had the honor of a seat on this floor, I have several times risen in
debate, that circumstance scarcely diminishes my diffidence at the
present moment. Uneducated in the schools, and unpractised in the arts,
of parliamentary eloquence, it is with no inconsiderable degree of
diffidence that I rise upon the present occasion. There are occasions,
however, where even the eye of timidity should sparkle with confidence;
and there are questions in the discussion of which the finger should
be removed from the lip of silence herself. And such is every occasion
and every question involving the existence, the infraction, or even the
correct and just construction of that constitution which is the palladium
of our privileges, and the temple of our glory. If I might be permitted
to borrow a metaphorical expression from one of the most celebrated
commanders of antiquity, who declared that he intended to spread all
his sails on the ocean of war, I would say that it is with fear and
trembling I presume to launch my little feeble bark on the vast ocean of
eloquence and literature (_pointing to the federal members_) by which I
am surrounded. If, however, the remark be just, that it is even sweet and
glorious to die for one’s country, surely the humbler sacrifice of native
diffidence may with propriety be expected and exacted from a juvenile
American Representative.

Whatever minuter shades or minor differences of opinion may exist
among the American people, there is one point in which we shall all
meet with cordial unanimity. We all unite in an ardent devotion to the
constitution. He who is not devoted to it is unworthy of the honorable
name of an American. I lament that it is necessary to speak particularly
of myself; but duty, not only to myself, but to my constituents, a
numerous and respectable section of the American people, demands it.
It may be objected to me, and with truth, that there was a time when I
professed sentiments hostile to some of the most important provisions in
the constitution. It was not, however, at the time when the constitution
was submitted to the people. I was then in infancy and obscurity,
deprived of the means, and even of the hopes of education. I had yet read
much and reflected more. My ardent and excursive eye had wandered rapidly
over the wide field of ancient history; I thought I beheld my country,
like the Roman Republic in the age of Cato, the sport of every wind and
of every wave. As far as I understood the constitution, I admired it and
wished for its adoption. But when an elegant anonymous writer predicted,
as the consequence of its adoption, that “liberty would be but a name,
to adorn the short historic page of the halcyon days of America,” I
trembled and shuddered for the possible consequences. If in the plenitude
of juvenile self-sufficiency (and who has not been young?) I have since
fancied that I could form a more perfect constitution, that dream of the
imagination has long been past. I have long been sincerely and ardently
attached to the constitution.

The treaty before us is of an immense consequence, and my attention was
early turned to the subject. From the moment of my election, I have
devoted many studious and laborious hours to the subjects connected with
it, and I have anticipated all the objections against it; none of those
presented this day by the gentleman from New York, who opened the debate,
or by the gentlemen who followed him on the same side, have struck my
mind as novel. The question of the constitutionality of the treaty first
presents itself. It is said to be unconstitutional, because it enlarges
the territory of the United States. To reduce the arguments of gentlemen
on this head to syllogistic form, they would not strike the mind with
great force. The constitution is silent on the subject of the acquisition
of territory. By the treaty we acquire territory; therefore the treaty
is unconstitutional. It has been well remarked by an eminent civilian,
that those are not the most correct and conclusive reasoners who are
very expert at their _quicquids_, their _atquis_, and their _ergos_;
but those, who, from correct premises, by just reasoning, deduce correct
conclusions. This question is not to be determined from a mere view of
the constitution itself, although it may be considered as admitted that
it does not prohibit, in express terms, the acquisition of territory. It
is a rule of law, that in order to ascertain the import of a contract,
the evident intention of the parties, at the time of forming it, is
principally to be regarded. This rule will apply, as it respects the
present question, to our constitution, of which it may be said, as the
great Dr. Johnson said of the science of the law, that it is the last
result of human wisdom acting upon human experience. The constitution
is a compact between the American people for certain great objects
expressed in the preamble, [Mr. E. here read the preamble,] in language
to which eloquence and learning can add no force or weight. Previous to
the formation of this constitution there existed certain principles of
the law of nature and nations, consecrated by time and experience, in
conformity to which the constitution was formed. The question before
us, I have always believed, must be decided upon the laws of nations
alone; and under this impression I have examined the works of the most
celebrated authors on that subject.

I recollect a time, sir, when a foreign minister in this country, at
a moment when genius, fancy, and ardent patriotism, were lords of the
ascendant over learning, wisdom, and experience, spoke of the law of
nations and its principles as mere worm eaten authorities, and aphorisms
of Vattel and others. I also recollect that the illustrious man who is
now President of the United States was then Secretary of State, and that
he delivered the unanimous sentiments of the American people when, in
his reply to that minister, he observed that something more than mere
sarcasms of that kind was necessary to disprove those authorities and
principles; and that, until they were disproved, the American nation
would hold itself bound by them. This is the man, sir, who has been so
injuriously calumniated within these walls this morning, and upon whom
such a torrent of bitter eloquence has been poured by the gentleman from
North Carolina (Mr. PURVIANCE;) a gentleman who is himself a model of
eloquence, uniting all the excellencies of Cicero and Demosthenes, and
all other orators, ancient and modern.

The American people, in forming their constitution, had an eye to that
law of nations, which is deducible by natural reason and established by
common consent, to regulate the intercourse and concerns of nations.
With a view to this law the treaty-making power was constituted, and by
virtue of this law, the Government and the people of the United States,
in common with all other nations, possess the power and right of making
acquisitions of territory by conquest, cession, or purchase. Indeed the
gentlemen who deny us the right of acquiring by purchase, would probably
allow us to keep the territory, were it obtained by conquest.

Colonies, or provinces, are a part of the eminent domain of the nation
possessing them, and of course are national property; colonial territory
may be transferred from one nation to another by purchase; this purchase
can be effected by treaty alone, as nations do not, like individuals,
execute deeds, and cause them to be recorded in public offices; that
department of the Government of the nation purchasing, which possesses
the treaty-making power generally, is competent to make treaties for that
purpose. These positions are established by the laws of nations, and are
applicable to the case before us. [Here Mr. E. read a variety of extracts
from Vattel to establish these positions, and observed that they were
corroborated by Grotius, Puffendorf, and other eminent writers on the law
of nature and nations, whose works he had consulted.]

A mere recapitulation, and that not a tedious one, of these principles
and authorities, will now answer the present purpose. Colonies have
always been considered as national property, although the law or practice
of nations, in this instance, may not conform to the law of nature.
Greece treated her colonies with peculiar indulgence: Rome considered
any privileges which hers were suffered to possess, as mere matters
of grace, not of right. The one was a natural and tender parent, the
other a cruel stepmother. Yet I have no recollection that the Grecian
colonies in Asia Minor, Italy, or even at Ionia, were represented in the
Amphyctionic Council, the General Assembly of the States of Greece. The
claim of the British Colonies, which now constitute the United States,
to be represented in that body by which they were taxed, though just in
itself, was novel and unwarranted by the practice of nations. Thank God
the claim was successful, and in consequence of it, we are now here as
the representatives of the American people, deliberating upon their most
important interests. It is unnecessary to reiterate the other positions;
they are undeniable in themselves, and their applicability to the present
case will hardly be disputed. If the treaty be extremely pernicious, or
has not been made by sufficient authority, or has been made for unjust
purposes, it is void by the laws of nations.

The expediency of the treaty is another question, and an important one.
I once hoped that the interests of our country would never require an
extension of its limits, and I regret even that that necessity now
exists. Evils and dangers may be apprehended from this source, and great
evils and dangers may possibly result. But the regions of possibility
are illimitable; those of probability are marked by certain well-defined
boundaries, obvious to all men of reason and reflection, and, in the
language of the poet,

    “As broad and obvious to the passing clown,
    As to the letter’d sage’s curious eye.”

If we cannot find, in the peculiar principles of our form of government,
and in the virtue and intelligence of our citizens, a sufficient security
against the dangers from a widely extended territory, in vain shall we
seek it elsewhere. There is no magical quality in a degree of latitude
or longitude, a river or a mountain. And it has been well remarked, that
every danger from this quarter might have been apprehended before the
acquisition of this territory. The Roman Empire, or that of Alexander in
the zenith of its glory, was scarcely capable of containing a greater
population than the territory of the United States; and men conversant
with history do not wonder at the transient existence and rapid ruin
of those empires. I repeat it, Mr. Chairman, we must look for our
security in principles and circumstances inapplicable to the ancient
nations. With the present question of expediency, I confess, sir, are
naturally intermingled many considerations, infinitely interesting
to the future peace, prosperity, felicity, and glory of our beloved
country. The physical strength of a nation depends upon an aggregation
of circumstances, amongst which, compactness of population, as well as
territory, may be reckoned; our population may become too scattered; but
this too is only a possible event. These possible evils ought not to be
put in competition with the certain advantage which we derive from the
acquisition.

But a gentleman tells us that the Administration hold out to us an Eden
of the western world, a land flowing with milk and honey, while they have
obtained nothing but a dreary and barren wilderness. Perhaps, if the
gentleman be correct, the acquisition is scarcely the less important.
To demonstrate the advantages of this purchase, it is not necessary to
describe Louisiana as an Elysian region--to describe it as Homer does
the Fortunate Islands, a region, on whose auspicious climate even winter
smiles, where no bleak wind blows from its mountains, and no gale is felt
but the zephyr, diffusing health and pleasure. But from geographical
information, defective as it is, and from reasonable analogies, we may
conclude that, with the exception of some considerable tracts, it is a
country fertile and salubrious. Geography points us to China, Persia,
India, Arabia Felix, and Japan, countries situated in corresponding
latitudes, which, though always overshadowed by the horrid gloom of
despotism, are always productive, and teach us by analogy that Louisiana,
in natural fertility, is probably equal to those beautiful oriental
regions.

The gentleman from North Carolina (Mr. PURVIANCE) says, he shall vote
for carrying the treaty into effect, because the possession of the
territory is important, and the Administration not having, as it ought
to have done, made use of men to obtain it, he will consent to make use
of money. He has applied many curious epithets to the Administration.
He wishes for an Administration _athletic_ and _muscular_, meaning, I
suppose, like the wrestlers in the Grecian circus, or the gladiators
in that of Rome. When I came within these walls, sir, I ardently hoped
that the voice of party would be silent during the discussion of this
subject, and I did not expect to hear the Administration attacked in
the language of vulgarity, malignity, and factious fury. When it is
thus assailed, shall its defenders be silent? During the last session
of Congress, an extraordinary degree of agitation was produced in the
public mind by an egregious violation of our rights by an officer of the
Spanish Government. Neither the people nor the Government were deficient
in that spirit which the gentleman extols, but they were not governed by
false ideas of national honor, and they were acquainted with the law of
nations; they knew that we had no right to make the _denunciatio belli_
precede the _repetitio rerum_--a declaration of war precede a demand for
justice.

Mr. SANFORD did not rise to make a display of his talents. Those who
had confided to him the representation of their interests could have no
such expectations, as they had unfortunately selected a plain Western
farmer. He was sorry to see so much time wasted. He begged the House
would recollect the time within which it was necessary to pass laws
for carrying the treaty into effect. Much has been said of a breach of
the constitution; but has any man shown it? The constitution does not
prohibit the powers exercised on this occasion; and not having prohibited
them, they must be considered as possessed by Government. In his opinion,
it was necessary to carry the treaty into immediate effect. This done,
other measures would require attention which would afford an ample
harvest for the talents and eloquence of gentlemen with which, on any
other occasion, he would be highly pleased.

Mr. THATCHER was sorry to be obliged, at this late hour, to state his
reasons for voting against the resolution; but he should not discharge
his duty to his constituents, were he to refrain from expressing his
ideas. These reasons he should state as briefly as possible. This
resolution is general, and contemplates two objects; it calls for the
occupation and government of Louisiana, and for an appropriation of
fifteen millions of dollars. He had hoped that, on a question of such
national importance, they would have been allowed the papers necessary
for its elucidation. But gentlemen have denied us this privilege. As the
question, whether the treaty should be carried into effect, is a great
constitutional question, I shall, in my remarks, confine myself to the
constitutional objections against the treaty. Two objections have been
made arising from the 3d and 7th articles of the treaty.

The third provides that “the inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be
incorporated in the union of the United States, and admitted as soon as
possible, according to the principles of the federal constitution, to
the enjoyment of all the rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens
of the United States; and in the mean time they shall be maintained and
protected in the free, enjoyment of their liberty, property, and the
religion which they profess.”

I conceive, said Mr. T., that the only sound doctrine is, not that which
has been stated by the gentleman from Kentucky, (Mr. SANFORD,) that
whatever power is not prohibited by the constitution is agreeable to it,
but that such powers as are not given are still held by the States or the
people. No arguments have been addressed to prove that the constitution
delegates such a power. The gentleman from Vermont, (Mr. ELLIOT,) who has
gratified us with so long and flowery a speech, and who has ransacked
Vattel, and various other eminent authors on the laws of nations, has
proved that where the United States have a right to make a treaty, a
treaty may be made. But these authorities do not apply unless he prove
that the constitution gives the powers exercised in the present instance.
The confederation under which we now live is a partnership of States, and
it is not competent to it to admit a new partner but with the consent
of all the partners. If such power exist, it does not reside in the
President and Senate. The constitution says new States may be admitted by
Congress. If this article of the constitution authorizes the exercise of
power under the treaty, it must reside with the Legislature, and not with
the President and Senate.

The gentleman from Virginia says, the principle contained in the third
article of the treaty has been already recognized by Congress, and has
instanced our treaties with Spain and Great Britain respecting the
adjustment of our limits. By adverting to these treaties, it will be seen
that there was then no pretence that we had acquired new territory. They
only establish our lines agreeably to the Treaty of Peace. Certainly
then the facts are not similar, and there exists no analogy of reasoning
between the two cases. The gentleman from Virginia asks whether we could
not purchase the right of deposit at New Orleans? But the argument
meant to be conveyed in this question does not apply. We had the right
before this treaty was formed; nor did we, in consequence of that right,
undertake to admit the people of New Orleans into the Union.

Mr. CROWNINSHIELD.--Mr. Chairman: I rise, sir, to correct the gentleman
from North Carolina in one particular; he has stated that the First
Consul of France signed the treaty ceding Louisiana to the United States
after the declaration of war by Great Britain against France. I believe
he is mistaken, sir, for the Louisiana treaties were signed the 30th
April, and Great Britain issued a declaration of war against France on
the 17th of May. If I am right, the gentleman might have spared himself
the trouble of detracting from the merits of the Executive on this great
occasion.

Now I am up, I beg leave to state to the committee some of the reasons
why I shall give my vote in favor of the treaties.

A resolution is on the table which recommends that provision ought to
be made to carry into effect the late treaties with France, which cede
Louisiana to the United States. Feeling as I do that we have acquired
this country at a cheap price, that it is a necessary barrier in the
Southern and Western quarters of the Union, that it offers immense
advantages to us as an agricultural and commercial nation, I am highly
in favor of the acquisition, and I shall most cordially give my vote in
approbation of the resolution.

What, sir, shall we let slip this golden opportunity of acquiring New
Orleans and the whole of Louisiana for the trifling sum of fifteen
millions of dollars, when one-quarter part of the purchase money will
be paid to our own citizens, the remainder in public stock, which we
are not obliged to redeem under fifteen years? I trust, sir, we shall
not omit to seize the only means now left to us for getting a peaceable
possession of the finest country in the world. The bargain is a good one,
and considering it merely in that light, we ought not to relinquish it. I
have no doubt that the country acquired is richly worth fifty millions of
dollars, and it is my opinion that we ought not to hesitate a moment in
passing the resolution on the table.

We have now an opening for a free trade to New Orleans and Louisiana,
which we never had before, and I hope we shall embrace it. Let us ratify
the treaties, with all their provisions, and we shall see that in less
than three years we have gained the greatest advantages in our commerce.
I wish we may immediately proceed to adopt the resolution before the
committee.

Mr. MITCHILL rose and said, he entreated the indulgence of the committee
for rising at so late a stage of the debate, when seven hours have
already been employed in the sitting of the day. And the reason of his
request was, that such extraordinary doctrines have been advanced against
carrying into effect the treaty with France which cedes Louisiana to our
nation, and such repeated allusions have been made to the sentiments
which he submitted to the House during the debate of yesterday, that he
felt himself called upon to attempt a reply, and therein to show that the
grounds taken by the gentlemen of the opposition are neither strong nor
tenable. Although the subject is ample and copious, he should endeavor to
condense his remarks, to so moderate a compass, as not to trespass long
upon the patience of the committee.

My colleague, said Mr. M., who opened the debate this morning, (Mr. G.
GRISWOLD,) displayed in his speech the objections raised against the
resolution on the table, so fully, that he almost exhausted the subject.
For, in listening attentively to the reasoning of the gentleman from
Virginia, who followed him, (Mr. J. LEWIS,) and of the other gentleman
from Virginia, who spoke next, (Mr. GRIFFIN,) he could not discern that
any new or additional matter of much consequence had been urged. Nor did
he discover much more than a repetition in substance of his colleague’s
reasoning, in what had been urged by the gentleman from Mass., (Mr.
THATCHER,) and the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. GRISWOLD;) though
the statement of their objections had received a form and coloring
diversified according to the skill and ingenuity of each.

The gentlemen, Mr. Chairman, who resist the provisions necessary to the
completion of this treaty, do so because they say it has been ratified
by the President and Senate in open violation of the constitution of
the United States, and is, therefore, no treaty, but a nullity, an
instrument void _ab initio_, not a part of the supreme law of the land,
and consequently not binding upon Congress or the nation. They draw this
bold and extraordinary conclusion from the style and meaning of the
3d and 7th articles of the treaty. The former of these, they say, is
unconstitutional, because it proposes to annex a new territory, with its
inhabitants, to our present dominion; the latter, because it abolishes
for a term of years the discriminating duties of tonnage and impost
within the ceded territory, giving a preference there to France and
Spain, and leaving those duties unaltered in all the ports of the Union.

By the third article, it is agreed that the inhabitants of the ceded
territory shall be incorporated into the Union of the United States
as soon as possible, according to the principles of the federal
constitution, and be admitted to the enjoyment of all the rights,
advantages, and immunities of the citizens of the United States; and
in the mean time they shall be maintained and protected in the free
enjoyment of their liberty, property, and the religion which they profess.

On expounding this article, my colleague has declared that the President
and Senate have no power to acquire new territory by treaty, and he
argues that our people are to be for ever confined to their present
limits. This is an assertion directly contrary to the powers inherent
in independent nations, and contradictory to the frequent and allowed
exercise of that power in our own nation. We are constantly in the
practice of receiving territory by cession from the red men of the
West, the aborigines of our country. The very treaty mentioned in the
President’s Message, with the Kaskaskias Indians, whereby we have
acquired a large extent of land, would, according to this doctrine,
be unconstitutional; and so would all the treaties which add to the
size of our statute book, with the numerous tribes of the natives on
our frontiers. According to this construction, all our negotiations
so happily concluded with those people, whom we ever have uniformly
acknowledged as the sovereigns of the soil, are nugatory, and to be
holden for naught. He said, he was perfectly aware of the answer which
would be made, that we held all our national domain, under Great Britain,
by virtue of the treaty concluded at Paris in 1783. What, after all, was
the amount of that cession by England? Certainly not a conveyance of a
country which never was theirs, but rightfully belonged to the Indian
natives; for it was, in its true construction, merely a _quit claim_ of
the pretensions or title of the land which the English had obtained by
conquest and treaty from the French. By that negotiation, the United
States obtained a bare relinquishment of the claims and possessions of
those two powerful nations. But the paramount title of the original
inhabitants was not affected by this. However contemptuously the rights
of these rude and feeble tribes had been regarded by the Europeans,
their descendants in these States had considered them with recognition
and respect. Until the Indians sold their lands for an equivalent, the
humane and just principles of the American Government acknowledged
them to be the only legitimate owners. And the sovereignty acquired by
treaty or purchase to our Government was derived from the title which
the natives transferred to them as grantees in a fair bargain and sale.
Such, Mr. M. argued, were the rules of true construction, and these rules
admitted and acted upon by the Federal Government; and yet, according
to the novel doctrine of this day, every treaty with the natives for
parcels of their country, although hitherto deemed lawful, would be an
unconstitutional act. According to this notion, every treaty for lands,
held with the aborigines since the organization of the Government, was
a violation of the constitution. And thus this invaluable instrument,
this bulwark of our liberties, had been violated perhaps twenty times
or more, since we began to buy the surplusage of their hunting grounds.
The Indian tribes are as much aliens as any other foreign nations. Their
lands are as much foreign dominion as the soil of France or Spain. Yet we
have gone on to annex the territories which they sold us, to our present
territory, from the time we acquired independence, and no mortal, until
this debate arose, Mr. Chairman, has so much as thought that thereby a
breach of the constitution was made. My colleague is surely entitled to
great credit for his perspicuity in finding out that all our great and
wise predecessors in administering this Government have been plunderers
and constitution-breakers. But, sir, the just judgment on this subject
is, that the Presidents and Senate of the United States have heretofore
acted constitutionally in acquiring by purchase foreign dominions from
the alien Indians. And by a parity of reasoning, they have acted not
only constitutionally, but eminently for the interest of the country, in
buying Louisiana from the white men, its present sovereigns.

But, independent of correct principles and steady precedent in favor of
the acquirement of new territory, it may be worth while to mention a
few of the strange consequences which flow from the doctrine which the
gentlemen of the other side of the House contend for. According to their
reasoning, if by any force of the currents of the ocean, or any conflicts
of the winds and the waves, a new surface of earth should emerge from
the neighborhood of Cape Hatteras, it would be unconstitutional to take
possession of it. Yet it appears to me, sir, very like an absurdity to
say the United States would break their bond of union by erecting a
light-house on it. Suppose that, by volcanic action, islands should be
suddenly elevated from the bottom of the neighboring Atlantic, as they
have repeatedly risen from the depths of the Mediterranean, would it be
unconstitutional to take possession of them? So far from it, there would
on the other hand be a duty in the Government to assume the dominion of
all adjacent islands. Again; suppose for a moment that our present limits
were full of people, would it be unconstitutional to purchase additional
territory for them to settle upon? Must the hive always contain its
present numbers, and no swarm ever go forth? At this rate we should,
before a great lapse of time, arrive at a _plenum_ of inhabitants, and
if no new settlement could be obtained for them, the Chinese custom of
infanticide must be tolerated to get rid of those tender little beings
for whom food enough could not be procured, to rear them to manhood. And
thus, when this _maximum_ of population shall have arrived, there would
be no constitutional power to purchase and possess any of the waste lands
on this or the other side of the Mississippi, for them to spread and
thrive upon. A doctrine against which, he confessed, his understanding
revolted.

Our Government having in this manner the right of acquiring additional
territory, had very often exercised that right by actual purchases and
by possessions and settlements afterwards. The whole of the recent State
of Ohio and of the Indiana Territory was obtained and peopled in this
manner. And in the settlement of limits both on the side of Florida
and Nova Scotia, the principle had again and again been acted upon;
and, strange to tell, nobody, until this eventful time, had possessed
acuteness enough to find out the error.

But the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Chairman, (Mr. GRISWOLD,)
contends that even if we had a right to purchase soil, we have no
business with the inhabitants. His words, however, are very select; for
he said, and often repeated it, that the treaty-making power did not
extend to the admission of foreign nations into this confederacy. To this
it may be replied that the President and Senate have not attempted to
admit foreign nations into our confederacy. They have bought a tract of
land, out of their regard to the good of our people and their welfare.
And this land, Congress are called upon to pay for. Unfortunately for the
bargain, this region contains civilized and Christian inhabitants; and
their existence there, it is alleged, nullifies the treaty. The gentleman
construed the Constitution of the United States very differently from the
manner in which Mr. M. himself did. By the third section of the third
article of that instrument, it is declared, that Congress shall have
power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting
the territory and other property of the United States, and nothing
therein contained shall be construed so as to prejudice any claim of the
United States, or of any particular State.

In the case of Louisiana no injury is done either to the nation or
to any State belonging to that great body politic. There was nothing
compulsory upon the inhabitants of Louisiana to make them stay and submit
to our Government. But if they chose to remain, it had been most kindly
and wisely provided, that until they should be admitted to the rights,
advantages, and immunities of citizens of the United States, they shall
be maintained and protected in the enjoyment of their liberty, property,
and the religion which they profess. What would the gentleman propose
that we shall do with them? Send them away to the Spanish provinces, or
turn them loose in the wilderness? No, sir, it is our purpose to pursue a
much more dignified system of measures. It is intended, first, to extend
to this newly acquired people the blessings of law and social order. To
protect them from rapacity, violence, and anarchy. To make them secure
in their lives, limbs, and property, reputation, and civil privileges.
To make them safe in the rights of conscience. In this way they are to
be trained up in a knowledge of our own laws and institutions. They
are thus to serve an apprenticeship to liberty; they are to be taught
the lessons of freedom; and by degrees they are to be raised to the
enjoyment and practice of independence. All this is to be done as soon
as possible; that is, as soon as the nature of the case will permit; and
according to the principles of the federal constitution. Strange! that
proceedings declared on the face of them to be constitutional, should
be inveighed against as violations of the constitution! Secondly, after
they shall have been a sufficient length of time in this probationary
condition, they shall, as soon as the principles of the constitution
permit, and conformably thereto, be declared citizens of the United
States. Congress will judge of the time, manner, and expediency of this.
The act we are now about to perform will not confer on them this elevated
character. They will thereby gain no admission into this House, nor into
the other House of Congress. There will be no alien influence thereby
introduced into our councils. By degrees, however, they will pass on
from the childhood of republicanism, through the improving period of
youth, and arrive at the mature experience of manhood. And then, they may
be admitted to the full privileges which their merit and station will
entitle them to.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said that a sense of duty alone could have induced
him to rise at that late hour. He wished to call the attention of the
committee to a stipulation in the Treaty of London. [Here Mr. R. read
an extract from the third article of that treaty, whereby the United
States are pledged not to impose on imports in British vessels from
their territories in America, adjacent to the United States, any higher
duties than would be paid upon such imports, if brought into our Atlantic
ports in American bottoms.] In this case, he said, gentlemen could not
avail themselves of the distinction taken by his friend from Maryland
(Mr. NICHOLSON) between a Territory and a State, even if they were so
disposed--since the ports in question were ports of a State. The ports
of New York, on the Lakes, were as much ports of that State, as the city
of New York itself; they had their custom-house officers, were governed
by the same regulations as other ports,--duties were exacted at them;
and yet, under the article of the British Treaty which had been just
read, British bottoms could and did enter them subject to no higher
duties than were paid by American bottoms in the Atlantic ports. Mr.
R. said that he did not mean to affirm that this exemption made by the
Treaty of London was constitutional, so long as a distinction prevailed
between American and British bottoms in other ports. He had never given
a vote to carry that treaty into effect--but he hoped the gentlemen from
Connecticut--both of whom he believed had done so; one of whom, at least,
he knew had been a conspicuous advocate of that treaty--he hoped that
gentleman (Mr. GRISWOLD) would inform the committee how he got over the
constitutional objection to this article of the Treaty of London, which
he had endeavored to urge against that under discussion. How could the
gentleman, with the opinion which he now holds, agree to admit British
bottoms into certain ports, on the same terms on which American bottoms
were admitted into American ports, generally? thereby making that very
difference,--giving that very preference to those particular ports of
certain States, which he tells us cannot constitutionally be given to the
port of New Orleans--although that port is not within any State, and,
if his (Mr. GRISWOLD’s) doctrine be correct, not even within the United
States!

The gentleman from Connecticut professed a wish that this important
discussion should be conducted with moderation and candor. In this
sentiment he concurred. He was therefore altogether unprepared, after
this preamble, to hear the gentleman from Connecticut represent the
treaty in question as conceding the most valuable commercial privileges
to France and Spain, and thereby sapping the very foundation of our own
carrying trade. In the spirit of candor the stipulations in question
would be viewed, not as conceding advantages in trade to those nations,
but as securing them to ourselves. The article in question did indeed
profess to grant, for a limited time, to French and Spanish vessels,
laden with the products of their respective countries, admission into
the ports of the ceded territory, on equal terms with our own ships.
But, although nominally an advantage has been conceded to these nations,
substantially their situation was changed for the worse, and the benefit
in fact conferred on us. For what were our rights in these ports, and
what were theirs, setting aside the treaty? The treaty then had rendered
our situation more eligible and theirs less so. How then could gentlemen
declare that it was calculated to injure our carrying trade? when by it
our trade was put on the footing of absolute security, while that of
France and Spain was admitted under considerable restrictions, enjoying
in but one particular, and for twelve years only, an equality with ours.
Their trade, before on so superior a footing, had descended from its
pre-eminence in privilege, and given way to ours; and yet gentlemen warn
us of the destruction of our carrying trade, and commercial prosperity,
from the very source which has enlarged and secured both. The enemies
of the treaty, therefore, are the advocates of the trade of France and
Spain, and the enemies so far of our own; since, by retaining things in
their present posture, they would continue to those nations the superior
advantages which they now enjoy in the ports of Louisiana, they would
continue the restrictions which heretofore have fettered our commerce
to that country, and they would refuse to put our trade on a footing
superior to that of France and Spain.

On the subject of expediency, the gentleman had undervalued the country
west of the Mississippi, and had declared that he considered the barren
province of Florida as more important to us. Mr. R. asked if the country
west of the Mississippi were not valuable, according to the gentleman’s
own statement, since it afforded the means of acquiring Florida, which
he prized so highly, from Spain? He had no doubt of the readiness of
that power to relinquish Florida, in itself a dead expense to her--only
valuable as an out-work to her other possessions, and now insulated by
those of the United States--for a very small portion of the country which
we claimed in virtue of the treaty under discussion.

He denied the correctness of the doctrine advanced by the same gentleman,
that the stipulation entered into by France, in time of war, to raise the
Duke of Parma to the throne of Etruria, bound her to obtain a recognition
of that King from every power of Europe. All which concerned us in
that treaty had been recited in ours with France. By the Treaty of St.
Ildefonso His Catholic Majesty stipulates “to redeliver (_retroceder_)
to the French Republic, six months after the full and entire execution
of the conditions and stipulations herein relative to His Royal Highness
the Duke of Parma, the colony or province of Louisiana.” What these
stipulations were is certainly known only to the parties themselves,
for they never were officially made public, although we are at no loss
to conjecture them. Nor are we at all concerned whether France has or
has not complied with them. Because in a treaty executed at Madrid, six
months after, in March, 1801, they show that they consider the former
treaty as having passed the title to the country to France. The fifth
article is as follows:

    “This treaty being in pursuance of that already concluded
    between the First Consul and His Catholic Majesty, by which
    the King delivers to France possession of Louisiana, the
    contracting parties agree to carry into effect the said
    treaty,” &c.

Spain, therefore, being satisfied as to the stipulations entered into by
France in the Treaty of San Ildefonso, declares herself in the second
treaty ready to redeliver the country to her whenever she was ready to
receive it, and Mr. R. said, he had it from high authority that the royal
mandate to that effect was in the hands of the Minister of the French
Republic near the United States, and would be forwarded to the existing
Government of Louisiana so soon as the treaty should be confirmed on our
part.

Having departed considerably from the particular point on which he wished
to be satisfied by the gentleman from Connecticut, who had spoken first,
(Mr. GRISWOLD,) he would again recall the attention of that gentleman
to the third article of the Treaty of London, and request that he would
reconcile its provisions to the doctrine which he had advanced on the
seventh article of the treaty then before the committee.

The committee now rose. Mr. SPEAKER resumed the Chair, and Mr. DAWSON
reported that the committee had, according to order, had the said
message, treaty, conventions, and motion, under consideration, and come
to several resolutions thereupon; which he delivered in at the Clerk’s
table, where the same were read, as follows:

    1. _Resolved_, That provision ought to be made for carrying
    into effect the treaty and conventions concluded at Paris on
    the thirtieth of April, one thousand eight hundred and three,
    between the United States of America and the French Republic.

    2. _Resolved_, That so much of the Message of the President,
    of the twenty-first instant, as relates to the establishment
    of a Provisional Government over the territory acquired by the
    United States, in virtue of the treaty and conventions lately
    negotiated with the French Republic, be referred to a select
    committee; and that they report by bill, or otherwise.

    3. _Resolved_, that so much of the aforesaid conventions as
    relates to the payment, by the United States, of sixty millions
    of francs to the French Republic, and to the payment, by the
    United States, of debts due by France to citizens of the United
    States, be referred to the Committee of Ways and Means.

The House proceeded to consider the said resolutions at the Clerk’s
table: Whereupon the first resolution being again read, was, on the
question put thereupon, agreed to by the House--yeas 90, nays 25, as
follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jr., Nathaniel Alexander, Isaac Anderson,
    John Archer, David Bard, George Michael Bedinger, Phanuel
    Bishop, William Blackledge, John Boyle, Robert Brown, William
    Butler, George W. Campbell, Levi Casey, Martin Chittenden,
    Clifton Claggett, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph Clay, Matthew
    Clay, John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, Jacob Crowninshield,
    Richard Cutts, John Dawson, William Dickson, John Earle,
    Peter Early, James Elliot, John W. Eppes, William Eustis,
    William Findley, John Fowler, Peterson Goodwyn, Edwin Gray,
    Andrew Gregg, Wade Hampton, John A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck,
    Joseph Heister, William Hoge, David Holmes, Samuel Hunt, John
    G. Jackson, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight,
    Michael Leib, John B. C. Lucas, Matthew Lyon, Andrew McCord,
    William McCreery, David Meriwether, Samuel L. Mitchill,
    Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New,
    Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah
    Palmer, John Patterson, Samuel D. Purviance, John Randolph,
    jun., Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea
    of Tennessee, Jacob Richards, Cæsar A. Rodney, Erastus Root,
    Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver, John Smilie,
    John Smith of New York, John Smith of Virginia, Richard
    Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John Stewart, David Thomas, Philip R.
    Thompson, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Joseph A. Varnum,
    Daniel C. Verplanck, Matthew Walton, John Whitehill, Marmaduke
    Williams, Richard Winn, Joseph Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--William Chamberlin, Manasseh Cutler, Samuel W. Dana,
    John Davenport, Thomas Dwight, Calvin Goddard, Thomas Griffin,
    Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings, David Hough,
    Joseph Lewis, jun., Thomas Lewis, Henry W. Livingston, Nahum
    Mitchill, Thomas Plater, Joshua Sands, John Cotton Smith,
    William Stedman, James Stephenson, Samuel Taggart, Samuel
    Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, Peleg Wadsworth, and Lemuel Williams.

The second resolution being again read, and amended at the Clerk’s table,
was, on the question put thereupon, agreed to by the House, as follows:

    _Resolved_, That so much of the Message of the President, of
    the twenty-first instant, as relates to the occupation and
    establishment of a Provisional Government over the Territory
    acquired by the United States, in virtue of the treaty and
    conventions lately negotiated with the French Republic, be
    referred to a select committee; and that they report by bill,
    or otherwise.

_Ordered_, That Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, jr., Mr. JOHN RHEA, of Tennessee, Mr.
HOGE, Mr. GAYLORD GRISWOLD, and Mr. BEDINGER, be appointed a committee,
pursuant to the said resolution.

The third resolution reported from the Committee of the whole House,
being again read, was agreed to by the House.


THURSDAY, October 27.

Another member, to-wit, ABRAM TRIGG, from Virginia, appeared, produced
his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill from
the Senate, entitled, “An act to enable the President of the United
States to take possession of the territories ceded by France to the
United States, by the treaty concluded at Paris on the thirtieth of April
last, and for other purposes.”

The bill having been read, by paragraphs, as follows:

    _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
    the United States of America, in Congress assembled_, That the
    President of the United States be, and he is hereby, authorized
    to take possession of and occupy the territories ceded by
    France to the United States, by the treaty concluded at Paris,
    on the thirtieth day of April last, between the two nations;
    and that he may for that purpose, and in order to maintain in
    the said territories the authority of the United States, employ
    any part of the army and navy of the United States, and of the
    force authorized by an act passed the third day of March last,
    entitled, “An act directing a detachment from the militia of
    the United States, and for erecting certain arsenals,” which he
    may deem necessary; and so much of the sum appropriated by the
    said acts as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated for the
    purpose of carrying this act into effect; to be applied under
    the direction of the President of the United States.

    SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That, until Congress shall
    have made provision for the temporary government of the said
    territories, all the military, civil, and judicial powers,
    exercised by the officers of the existing government of the
    same, shall be vested in such person and persons, and shall be
    exercised in such manner, as the President of the United States
    shall direct.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said he was apprised that the bill was of such a nature
as seemed to delegate to the President of the United States a power, the
exercise of which was intended to have but a short duration; he was also
aware, that some such power was necessary to be vested in the Executive,
to enable him to take possession of the country ceded by France. But he
could conceive no cause for giving a latitude, as to time, so extensive
as that allowed by the second section, which says, that “until Congress
shall have made provision for the temporary government of the said
territories, all the military, civil, and judicial powers, exercised by
the officers of the existing government of the same, shall be vested
in such person or persons, and shall be exercised in such manner, as
the President of the United States shall direct.” If we give this power
out of our hands, it may be irrevocable until Congress shall have made
legislative provision; that is, a single branch of the Government, the
Executive branch, with a small minority of either House, may prevent
its resumption. He did not believe that, under any circumstances, it
was proper to delegate to the Executive a power so extensive; but if
proper under certain circumstances, he was sure it was improper under
present circumstances. As he conceived it proper to deal out power to
the Executive with as sparing a hand as was consistent with the public
good, he should move an amendment to substitute in the place of the words
“Congress shall have made provision for the temporary government of the
said territories”--these words, “the expiration of the present session
of Congress, unless provision for the temporary government of the said
territories be sooner made by Congress.” So that if Congress shall
make provision for the government of the territory at any time during
the session, the power of the President will cease, and at any rate
at the expiration of the session. In other words, this amendment will
compel Congress to take early measures for reducing this enormous power,
delegated to the Executive, by the establishment of a government for the
people of Louisiana.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD moved to strike out the whole of the second section,
which would supersede the motion of the gentleman from Virginia. He made
this motion to obtain an explanation respecting the nature and extent
of the delegated power. That section provides “that until Congress
shall have made provision for the temporary government of the said
territories, all the military, civil, and judicial powers, exercised by
the officers of the existing government of the same, shall be vested in
such manner, as the President of the United States shall direct.” I wish
to know, said Mr. Griswold, whether any gentleman can inform me what the
military, civil, and judicial powers, exercised by the officers of the
existing province are; for we are about to confirm them, and direct their
execution by the authorities of the United States.

It is probable that some of them may be inconsistent with the
Constitution of the United States. We have certain restrictions on powers
exercised under it. For instance, that the _habeas corpus_ shall not
be suspended in cases of invasion or rebellion, and a variety of other
restraints. It is for this reason that I think we ought to have some
knowledge of the powers exercised in Louisiana, before we confirm them in
the lump; and in order to obtain this information, I move to strike out
the section.

Mr. ELLIOT rose to second the motion of the gentleman from Connecticut,
and to express his coincidence in the sentiments of that gentleman on
this subject. He would never consent to delegate, for a single moment,
such extensive powers to the President, even over a Territory. Such a
delegation of power was unconstitutional. If such a provision as that
contemplated by the section were necessary, it became Congress itself to
enter upon the task of legislation.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH had hoped that some other member would have given the
gentleman from Connecticut the satisfaction he asked in relation to the
provisions of the section proposed to be stricken out. No one having
risen, he would do it himself as well as he was able. That gentleman
asks whether we know the civil, military, and judicial powers that
subsist in Louisiana; and contends that it is necessary we should know
them before they are transferred to the Executive of the United States.
If the section were to stand as it now does, Mr. R. said he would be
as unwilling as the gentleman from Connecticut to agree to it. But,
with the proposed limitation, he saw no substantial objection to it. He
was one of those who did not know with precision what the subsisting
civil, military, and judicial powers exercised in Louisiana were; and
yet he saw not the difficulty which the gentleman had stated, as to the
temporary transfer of the powers to the Executive with the limitation
proposed--and wherefore? Because, in the nature of things, it was almost
impossible to take possession of the country without the exercise of such
powers at some point of time, and if they should be exercised but for a
single moment, such exercise would be as hostile to the principles of the
gentleman as the exercise of them for a whole year.

I ask, said Mr. R., whether if the country should be taken possession
of on the principles advocated by the gentleman on a former day, these
powers would not all have attached to the Executive? Suppose, instead
of assuming the civil government of the territory, it had been taken
possession of by storm, by an army of 40 or 50,000 soldiers--will the
gentleman contend, that under such circumstances, the privilege of the
_habeas corpus_ or trial by jury would have been invaded? Undoubtedly
not. If the gentleman will advert with precision to the first section, he
will perceive that it is contemplated to take possession in such a manner
as will give the United States security in that possession. For though
we might not doubt the disposition of the Government of France to give
us a secure possession, or apprehend difficulty from any other quarter,
yet it would be recollected that there were citizens or subjects in the
territory requiring some government. It was not impossible that on taking
possession there may be some turbulent spirits, who, having at heart the
advancement of personal schemes, may be disposed to resist. It would be
unwise then in Congress to delay making the requisite provision, until
necessity claimed it, and until, perhaps, after Congress had adjourned.

Gentlemen will see the absolute necessity of the path chalked out by
the Senate. They will see the necessity of the United States taking
possession of the country in the capacity of sovereigns, in the same
extent as that of the existing government of the province. After having
taken possession, and being in the secure enjoyment of the country, it
will be extremely proper to guard against any apprehended Executive
invasion of right. This step will then be politic, and it will be
observed that the section as amended enjoins this duty upon Congress. If,
however, the gentleman from Connecticut will show us any way in which
the country may be taken possession of, with security, and by which the
people may enjoy all the rights and franchises of citizens of the United
States immediately, I shall be happy to give it the sanction of my vote.
But to my mind this appears impossible.

Mr. GRISWOLD thought it extraordinary that the gentleman from Virginia
should call upon him to propose a plan for avoiding the difficulties
that would apparently result from the system proposed by the bill, when
it had only that day been laid upon their tables, and had been yesterday
refused to be referred to a select committee; and of consequence, no
time for reflection had been allowed. Under these circumstances, it was
indeed extraordinary that he should be expected to propose a plan. He
confessed he was unable to offer any. To do it would doubtless require
time and deliberation. It was sufficient for him that the bill infringed
the constitution. By the second section it is proposed to transfer to
the President of the United States all the powers, civil, military, and
judicial, exercised at present in that province. What are those powers?
No gentleman is able to inform me. It may be presumed that they are
legislative; the President, therefore, is to be made the legislator of
that country; that they are judicial, the President, therefore, is to be
made judge; that they are executive, and so far they constitutionally
devolve on the President. Hence, we are about making the President the
legislator, the judge, and the executive of this territory. I do not,
said Mr. G., understand that, according to the constitution, we have a
right to make him legislator, judge, and executive, in any territory
belonging to the United States. Though, therefore, on this occasion, I
feel no jealousy of the abuse of the powers conferred on the President,
yet I cannot agree to them, because I consider them repugnant to the
constitution.

The argument that the powers are necessary, though unconstitutional,
is no argument with me. If gentlemen can so explain the section, as to
show to the satisfaction of the committee that it is competent to this
House to transfer to the President all these powers, I shall have no
objection to the section; but until this is done, it is my duty to vote
for striking it out. And though it is impossible for me, at this moment,
to devise a plan for overcoming these difficulties, yet I trust, if time
be allowed, there will be found wisdom enough in the committee to devise
one. To the first section, authorizing the taking possession of the
country, so far as I can understand it, I can see no objection.

Mr. NICHOLSON was opposed to striking out the second section, as he did
not perceive the evils contemplated by the gentleman from Connecticut.
The question is, whether we shall take immediate possession of this
country, or wait till this body shall have time to form such a government
as shall be hereafter likely to render the people happy, under laws
according to the provisions of the constitution? I think, said Mr. N.,
it will be injudicious to delay taking the possession, until such a
government shall be formed. The only question then that can be started
is, whether the second section of this bill violates the constitution. On
this point I differ entirely from the gentleman from Connecticut. I do
not see in it any violation of the constitution. The gentleman supposes
that by adopting the provisions of the second section we shall vest all
the civil, military, and judicial powers of the existing Government of
Louisiana in the President. But it clearly is not so. We vest in him the
appointment of the persons who shall exercise these powers, but we do
not delegate to him the exercise of the powers themselves. Is there any
difference between this, and the provisions of the ordinance of 1787,
which relates to territorial governments? By that ordinance, and I have
never heard its constitutionality questioned, all the civil, military,
and judicial powers are vested in such persons as the President may
appoint.

Mr. MITCHILL expressed his wish that the section of the bill might stand.
To strike it out would be to make void all the proceedings respecting the
province of Louisiana, on which Congress had been engaged with so much
care and diligence. We had purchased the country, and made arrangements
to pay for it; and now, with the consent of France, possession is to be
taken; when behold! an objection is made to that part of the intended
statute which confers on the President the power to occupy and hold it
peaceably for the nation.

But, let it be examined fairly what Congress are meditating to do. The
third section of the fourth article of the constitution contemplates
that _territory_ and other _property_ may belong to the United States.
By a treaty with France the nation has lately acquired title to a new
_territory_, with various kinds of public _property_ on it or annexed to
it. By the same section of the constitution, Congress is clothed with
the power to dispose of such _territory_ and _property_, and to make all
needful rules and regulations respecting it. This is as fair an exercise
of constitutional authority as that by which we assemble and hold our
seats in this House. To the title thus obtained, we wish now to add
the possession; and it is proposed that for this important purpose the
President shall be duly empowered. There is no person in the nation to
whom this can be so properly confided as to the President.

Mr. DANA said if the amendment proposed by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania were inserted, it might imply that we may pass laws that
were unconstitutional; it was, therefore, superfluous. It is objected
to the scope of the second section, that it is unconstitutional; insert
the amendment and it nullifies it. The gentleman from New York (Mr.
MITCHILL) has referred to a subject with which he is well conversant. He
is correct in stating that the formal style of the English acts is in
the name of the King. In the formal style of the acts of Parliament, the
King is legislator; but will it be inferred from this circumstance that
he is the real legislator? The gentleman is too well acquainted with the
constitution and laws of that country, not to know that the King, though
nominally the dispenser of justice, cannot himself sit upon the bench,
and that this has been the case since the act of settlement. He might, in
support of this position, refer to the declaration of a celebrated Chief
Justice of England, who had said that the honor of the Crown had nothing
to do with the courts of justice.

The gentleman is equally unfortunate in his remarks on the power of
Congress to make rules for the government of a Territory. It is objected
to this, that in this case you make no laws at all. Is it to make laws,
to say a man may do as he pleases? The proposed government is not even
provisional or circumscribed. Insufficient also is any argument deducible
from the ordinance establishing territorial governments. He presumed the
ordinance alluded to was that of 1787. Under that ordinance the President
is authorized to appoint the judges of the Territory; but once appointed,
they hold their offices during good behavior. Who, under that ordinance,
make the laws? Neither the judges nor the President. No laws can be
accepted but such as have received the sanction of a representative body.
What is proposed by the bill? That all powers, military, civil, and
judicial, exercised by the officers of the existing government, shall
be vested in such persons, and shall be exercised in such manner as the
President shall direct. He may, under this authority, establish the whole
code of Spanish laws, however contrary to our own; appoint whomsoever
he pleases as judges, and remove them according to his pleasure; thus
uniting in himself all the power, legislative, executive, and judicial.
This, though a complete despotism, gentlemen may perhaps say is
necessary. If so, let the military power be exercised by the President as
commander-in-chief of the armies.

Mr. EUSTIS said it was possible the bill under consideration might in its
details be objectionable, but in principle it was certainly sound. The
Government of the United States has a constitutional right to acquire
territory, and they have consequently a right to take possession of it
when acquired. The taking possession of it was not only the right, but
the duty of the Government. And how is this to be effected? Will any
gentleman venture to propose a delay until Congress shall have passed a
new code of laws? Are gentlemen, at this late day, to be informed that
this would be to throw away one of the most valuable acquisitions made by
our country since the adoption of the constitution, or the Declaration
of Independence? As the gentleman, last speaking, rightly observes, the
entire government of Spain ceases on our taking possession. Are we then
to abandon the people to anarchy?

As to the extent of the power vested in the Executive, it arises from
necessity. This is a new case altogether. There is no doubt that on
many particular subordinate points, respecting the secure possession of
this country, difficulties may present themselves. But Mr. E. presumed
and expected that the same wisdom that acquired it, would preside over
the councils of the nation to meet and overcome those difficulties. The
second section of the bill contemplates the transfer to officers of the
United States, of the same powers now exercised. It may be that the
exercise of all these powers will not be necessary; while it is possible
that others may be necessary. There may be difficulties of various
kinds. He should name none. But as they arise, it will be the duty of the
Government to be prepared to meet them. He would, therefore, wish this
act rather to increase than curtail them; and that the President should
be authorized not only to continue all necessary existing powers, but
to institute such other powers as may be necessary for the well-being
of the Territory. Till when? Until this House and the other branch of
the Legislature shall make the necessary laws. The powers delegated by
the bill are imposed by the imperious circumstances of the case. What if
forcible possession shall prove necessary, and the innocent inhabitants
should be slaughtered, through a want of the powers necessary to preserve
tranquillity and good order; whose will, under such circumstances, will
be the governing one? Will not the President, in such event, have all the
powers now given him?

Mr. R. GRISWOLD.--The powers proposed to be conferred by the gentleman
are without limits. It may be necessary for the welfare of the people,
to secure their religion. The President may be, therefore, constituted
grand inquisitor, he may also be made a king, and likewise a judge, for
the good of the people. I am not, said Mr. G., willing myself to give
him such extensive powers. I can, however, well account for certain
gentlemen urging on this occasion the old French argument of “imperious
necessity.” But such a pretext can never justify me in giving a vote that
will violate the constitution. I can, in truth, see no such necessity, as
provision can be made for admitting these people to the enjoyment of all
the privileges stipulated by the treaty, without involving a violation of
the constitution. Gentlemen may criminate, as they please, the motives of
those who are for restraining this extension of executive power; but I
trust, whatever may be the feelings of gentlemen, that the committee will
not be impressed with the same opinion entertained by them; but that if
they consider this delegation of power as repugnant to the constitution,
they will not agree to it, or, in other words, to the investiture of the
President with absolute power over this province. If, on the other hand,
they think the delegation is constitutional, they will feel no repugnance
to agreeing to it; because, as I observed before, the power will be of
short duration, and will not, probably, be abused.

As to the idea of some gentlemen, that this territory, not being a part
of the United States, but a colony, and that therefore we may do as we
please with it, it is not correct. If we acquire a colony by conquest
or purchase--and I believe we may do both--it is not consistent with
the constitution to delegate to the President, even over a colony thus
acquired, all power, legislative, executive, and judicial; for this
would make him the despot of the colony. Mr. G. concluded his remarks
by observing that he had no jealousy of the abuse of this power by the
President; but not being, in his opinion, authorized by the constitution,
he could not agree to vote for it.

Mr. SMILIE said, this subject struck him differently from other
gentlemen. If it appeared clear to him that the constitutional right to
delegate the powers contemplated by the second section did not exist, he
should vote against it. But he entertained no doubt on this point. He
knew that it had been doubted whether the constitution authorized the
Government of the United States to acquire territory; but those doubts
were this day abandoned. He agreed in opinion with the gentleman from
Massachusetts, (Mr. VARNUM,) that the Constitution of the United States
did not extend to this territory any further than they were bound by
the compact between the ceding power and the people. On this principle
they had a right, viewing it in the light of a colony, to give it such
government as the Government of the United States might think proper,
without thereby violating the constitution; when incorporated into the
Union, the inhabitants must enjoy all the rights of citizens. He would
thank gentlemen to show any part of the constitution that extends either
legislative, executive, or judicial power, over this territory. If none
such could be shown, it must rest with the discretion of the Government
to give it such a system as they may think best for it. At the same time,
Mr. S. said, he would pledge himself to be among the first to incorporate
the territory in the Union, and to admit the people to all the rights of
citizens of the United States.

Mr. RODNEY.--When a constitutional question is made, and constitutional
objections urged by a respectable member of this House, they shall always
receive from me a respectful attention. On this occasion I shall endeavor
to answer the objections, and remove the doubts entertained by some
gentlemen. I believe we shall find that, by adopting the second section
of the bill under consideration, we shall not infringe the constitution
in the remotest degree. No person is more opposed to the extreme of
absolute and unlimited power, or to vesting in any man that authority
which, by not being circumscribed within known bounds, may be easily
abused. No man can be more opposed to the exercise by the President of
powers exercised by the Spanish inquisition, and authorized by other
Governments. But cases may occur where, for a moment, powers to which,
without an absolute necessity, no one would agree, become necessary to be
vested in some department of the Government; and I am in favor of this
section for the reasons assigned by my friend from Virginia, to wit, that
the exercise of the powers delegated will be confined to a short space,
and will be of no further duration than shall be necessary to obtain the
end of a secure possession of the Territory.

The United States, it is acknowledged, have a right to extend their
territory beyond that which they possessed when the constitution was
formed. If, then, there exist the right to acquire territory, there is
a consequence of the laws that pervade all civilized nations, which
will show not only the constitutionality but the propriety also of this
section. It is a received principle of the law of nations, that, when
territory is ceded, the people who inhabit it have a right to the laws
they formerly lived under, embracing the whole civil and criminal code,
until they are altered or amended by the country to whom the cession is
made. This is the received principle of the law of nations, and operates
wherever the right to acquire territory is previously given. I will
put a plain case, on the ground so commonly of late resorted to, that
of acquiring territory by war. The right to make war is vested by the
constitution in the Government of the United States. Suppose we had gone
down the Mississippi, and favored the wishes of some of our citizens.
Would not gentlemen, in that case, have acknowledged that we should have
possessed the right of laying contributions? Should we not have had the
right of saying to those who exercised the powers of government in that
country, “Begone! We will make new arrangements; the powers of government
shall be exercised by such particular organs as we like. Your laws and
your religion shall be preserved; but your officers shall be replaced by
ours.” Under the laws of nations we should have enjoyed all these powers.

But, independent of this power conferred by the law of nations, I am
inclined to think the provisions of the constitution apply to this
case. There is a wide distinction between States and Territories, and
the constitution appears clearly to indicate it. By examining the
constitution accurately, it will be found that the provision relied upon
by the gentleman from Connecticut will not avail to support his argument.
It will appear that it is to operate in the case of States only. By
the third section of the fourth article of the constitution, it is
declared that “the Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all
needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
belonging to the United States; and nothing in this constitution shall
be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States or any
particular State.”

This provision does not limit or restrain the authority of Congress with
respect to Territories, but vests them with full and complete power to
exercise a sound discretion generally on the subject. Let us not be told
this power, from its greatness, is liable to abuse. If arguments are
drawn from the abuse against the use of power, I know no power which may
not be abused, and it will follow that the same arguments that are urged
against the use of this power may be urged against the use of all power.

We may be told that, in the government of the North-western Territory,
there are certain fixed rules established. But by a recurrence to the
ordinance for the government of that Territory, and to the laws of
Congress subsequently made, it will be seen that Congress have conceived
themselves to be possessed of the right, and have actually exercised the
power, to alter the Territory, by adding to or taking from it as they
thought proper, and by making rules variant from those under which it was
originally organized.

In the Territories of the United States, under the ordinances of
Congress, the governor and the judges have a right to make laws. Could
this be done in a State? I presume not. It shows that Congress have a
power in the Territories, which they cannot exercise in States; and that
the limitations of power, found in the constitution, are applicable to
States and not to Territories.

The question was then put on striking out the second section, and
lost--ayes 30.

The bill was ordered to be engrossed for a third reading to-morrow.


FRIDAY, October 28.

_Louisiana Treaty._

The bill sent from the Senate, entitled “An act to enable the President
of the United States to take possession of the territories ceded by
France to the United States, by the treaty concluded at Paris on the
thirtieth of April last, and for the temporary government thereof,”
together with the amendments agreed to yesterday, was read the second
time, as follows:

    _Be it enacted, by the Senate and House of Representatives of
    the United States of America, in Congress assembled_, That the
    President of the United States be, and he is hereby, authorized
    to take possession of and occupy the territory ceded by France
    to the United States, by the treaty concluded at Paris on the
    thirtieth of April last, between the two nations; and that he
    may for that purpose, and in order to maintain in the said
    territories the authority of the United States, employ any
    part of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the
    force authorized by an act passed the third day of March last,
    entitled ‘An act directing a detachment from the militia of the
    United States, and for erecting certain arsenals,’ which he
    may deem necessary, and so much of the sum appropriated by the
    said act as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated for the
    purpose of carrying this act into effect; to be applied under
    the direction of the President of the United States.

    SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That, until the expiration
    of the present session of Congress, or unless provision
    be sooner made for the temporary government of the said
    territories, all the military, civil, and judicial powers
    exercised by the officers of the existing Government of the
    same, shall be vested in such person and persons, and shall be
    exercised in such manner as the President of the United States
    shall direct, for maintaining and protecting the inhabitants of
    Louisiana in the full enjoyment of their liberty, property, and
    religion.

On the question, Shall the bill pass? the yeas and nays were required,
and stood--yeas 89, nays 23, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, Isaac Anderson, John Archer, David Bard,
    George M. Bedinger, Samuel Bishop, William Blackledge, John
    Boyle, Robert Brown, William Butler, George W. Campbell, John
    Campbell, Levi Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph Clay, Matthew
    Clay, John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, Jacob Crowninshield,
    Richard Cutts, John Dawson, William Dickson, John Earle, Peter
    Early, John W. Eppes, William Eustis, William Findlay, John
    Fowler, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew Gregg, Wade Hampton, John
    A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Daniel Heister, Joseph Heister,
    William Hoge, James Holland, David Holmes, Benjamin Huger,
    Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Michael
    Leib, John B. C. Lucas, Matthew Lyon, Andrew McCord, William
    McCreery, David Meriwether, Samuel L. Mitchill, Nicholas R.
    Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas
    Newton, jr., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer,
    John Patterson, Samuel D. Purviance, John Randolph, jr., Thomas
    M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee,
    Jacob Richards, Cæsar A. Rodney, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons,
    Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver, John Smilie, John Smith of New
    York, John Smith of Virginia, Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton,
    John Stewart, David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg,
    John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B.
    Varnum, Daniel C. Verplanck, Matthew Walton, John Whitehill,
    Marmaduke Williams, Richard Winn, Jos. Winston, and Thomas
    Wynns.

    NAYS.--William Chamberlain, Martin Chittenden, Clifton
    Claggett, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, Thomas Dwight, James
    Elliot, Calvin Goddard, Thomas Griffin, Gaylord Griswold, Roger
    Griswold, Seth Hastings, Joseph Lewis, jr., Thomas Lewis, Henry
    W. Livingston, Nahum Mitchell, Thomas Plater, Joshua Sands,
    John Cotton Smith, William Stedman, James Stephenson, Samuel
    Tenney, and Samuel Thatcher.


SATURDAY, October 29.

_Mourning for Edmund Pendleton._

Mr. EUSTIS rose and observed, that within a few days past the House were
called upon to take notice of an event which, perhaps, would be more
interesting to posterity than to the present generation; the death of one
of those illustrious patriots who, by a life devoted to his country, had
bequeathed a name and an example to posterity which he would not attempt
to describe. He had information that another of these sages, EDMUND
PENDLETON, of Virginia, had paid the last tribute to nature.

On this occasion he begged leave to offer to the House the following
resolution:

    _Resolved_, That this House, impressed with a lively sense
    of the important services rendered to his country by EDMUND
    PENDLETON, deceased, will wear a badge of mourning for thirty
    days, as an emblem of their veneration for his illustrious
    character, and of their regret that another star has fallen
    from the splendid constellation of virtue and talents which
    guided the people of the United States in their struggle for
    Independence.

The resolution was immediately taken up, and agreed to--ayes 77.


WEDNESDAY, November 2.

_Road to Natchez and New Orleans._

Mr. MITCHILL called the attention of the House to a subject of
considerable importance, growing out of our possessions on the
Mississippi. He stated that the mail to Natchez was at present
transported by a route circuitous and difficult of performance. The
Cherokee country, which constituted a part of it, was so destitute of
water and articles of subsistence, as to render it necessary for the
conveyor of the mail to carry whatever himself or his horses required.
Even the water used was carried in goat skins. A great portion of the
country was likewise infested with robbers. The measure he proposed was
to inquire by what means the carriage of the mail to the Natchez and New
Orleans could be facilitated, so as to abridge the time now consumed, and
lessen the dangers and difficulties attending the transportation. Mr.
M. believed a route might be pursued whereby four hundred miles could
be saved in the present distance to the Natchez. Mr. M. desired such an
inquiry to be made into the means of accomplishing this important object,
as should, while it tended to promote the great political and commercial
interests of the country, convince the Indian tribes that our object was
not to invade their rights. He further observed, that the usual voyage
to New Orleans was about thirty days. If the route by land should be
improved, that place might be probably reached in ten days. He therefore
offered the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads
    be directed to inquire by what means the mail may be conveyed
    with greater facility and dispatch, than it is at present,
    between the City of Washington, and the Natchez and New Orleans.

Agreed to without a division.


MONDAY, November 7.

Another member, to wit, OLIVER PHELPS, from New York, appeared, produced
his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


THURSDAY, November 10.

Another member, to wit, JAMES GILLESPIE, from North Carolina, appeared,
produced his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


MONDAY, November 14.

A petition of Andrew Moore, of the State of Virginia, was presented to
the House and read, complaining of an undue election and return of Thomas
Lewis, to serve as a member in this House, for the district composed of
the counties of Greenbrier, Kenawha, Monroe, Botetourt, and Rockbridge,
in the said State.

_Ordered_, That the said petition be referred to the Committee of
Elections.


TUESDAY, November 15.

Another member, to wit, GEORGE TIBBITS, from New York, appeared, produced
his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


THURSDAY, November 17.

_Postage of Newspapers._

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL.--There is a subject to which I wish to draw
the attention of the House. It is, sir, the postage charged on the
transportation of newspapers in the mail. This subject I conceive of
sufficient importance to meet the attention of this House, as it affects
the means of acquiring political information in the different parts of
the Union.

I presume it will not be denied, that the most effectual way of
rendering the people at large useful citizens, and of securing to them
their liberties and independence, would be to increase the sources of
information, make them well acquainted with their political rights,
and also with the proceedings of their Government. So long as they are
informed on those subjects, so long they will be disposed to acquiesce
in, and support such measures as may be calculated to promote the general
good, but will be prepared to resist any attempts that may be made to
infringe their rights by those in power. It is believed that newspapers
are the most general and effectual means of disseminating political
information among the citizens at large; and it ought therefore to be the
object of Government to facilitate their circulation as much as possible.
I conceive, sir, the most direct way to attain this object would be to
cause them to be transported in the mail free of postage.

The moneys arising from the postage on newspapers cannot certainly
be such an object to Government, as would justify the principle of
laying a tax on information, or pursuing any measures that would have
a tendency to diminish, in the least degree, the means by which it may
be acquired. It seems to be admitted by all those who have considered
the subject, that the Post Office establishment was never intended as
a paramount source of revenue; and therefore we find that the moneys
arising therefrom have not generally been taken into the calculation,
in the estimates of our finances. The whole amount of the postage on
newspapers I believe to be very inconsiderable, as an item of revenue;
and a great proportion of it, as I am informed, is given to the deputy
postmasters for keeping the accounts of such postage, and for collecting
the same: and if information is to be relied upon, many of those deputy
postmasters, who are allowed about fifty per cent on the amount of
postage thus collected, are of opinion that the labor of keeping those
accounts and of collection, exceeds this compensation; and they would
be well satisfied that no such postage existed. If this statement be
correct, it will go a great way to prove the measure impolitic.

But perhaps it may be said that the postage to be collected on
newspapers, has a tendency to ensure their arrival at the places of
destination, and the delivery of them to those to whom they are directed.
This, upon investigation, will, I believe, be found not to be the case.
It is made the duty of the postmasters, by law, to forward and deliver
newspapers, as well as letters,--they act upon oath, and if a sense of
propriety in their conduct, and the obligation of an oath, would not
induce them to perform their duty in this respect, it cannot be expected
that the paltry emolument accruing to them from their part of one cent,
or one and a half cents on each newspaper, would have that effect;
and even this sum must be still less relied upon, as an inducement,
when it is considered, as already stated, that the labor required in
keeping accounts for this purpose and in collection, is not in reality
compensated by the sum received. In order, therefore, to bring this
subject fairly before the House, I move that the House come to the
following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That so much of the act to establish post-offices
    and post roads in the United States as charges a postage on the
    transmission of newspapers ought to be repealed.

_Ordered_ to lie on the table.


FRIDAY, November 18.

Two other members, to wit: JOSEPH BRYAN, and SAMUEL HAMMOND, from
Georgia, appeared, presented their credentials, were qualified, and took
their seats in the House.


MONDAY, November 21.

Two other members, to wit: SIMEON BALDWIN and BENJAMIN TALLMADGE, from
Connecticut, appeared, produced their credentials, were qualified, and
took their seats in the House.


WEDNESDAY, November 23.

_Repeal of the Bankrupt Law._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
resolution, offered by Mr. NEWTON, for repealing the Bankrupt law.

The resolution was advocated by Messrs. NEWTON, ELLIOT, SMILIE, HASTINGS,
STANFORD, and RANDOLPH; and opposed by Messrs. JACKSON, EARLY, SKINNER,
and EUSTIS.

The advocates of repeal observed that though the resolution had lain
on the table for a considerable time, purposely with a view to collect
public opinion, no remonstrance hostile to it had been received from any
part of the Union, and that this circumstance indicated the unfavorable
sentiment entertained of the bankrupt system; and that even among those
most materially interested in its provisions, a dead silence prevailed.
Some gentlemen were averse to the repeal, inasmuch as the law would
expire by its own limitation, in a few years; but the House should
recollect that in the mean time they were responsible for all its evils
and iniquities. If, too, it should be suffered to die a natural death,
the inevitable effect would be that those who are now struggling to avoid
bankruptcy will precipitate themselves into such a situation as to avail
themselves of its benefit.

With regard to the principle of the present bankrupt system, and probably
of any other bankrupt system that could be devised, it was unjust,
inasmuch as it favored one class of citizens, the merchants, at the
expense of all other classes; to advance the interest of the first it
sacrificed the interests of all the other members of the community. To
prove this, it was only necessary to illustrate it by the common case of
a merchant availing himself of the benefits of bankruptcy, and thereby
cancelling the demands of the mechanic or the farmer who might be his
creditor; and of the same individual mechanic or farmer, the debtors of
another merchant, remaining his debtor with their property subject at
any period of their life to his seizure. In the case of the insolvent
merchant his debts were totally discharged; whereas in the case of the
insolvent mechanic and farmer, they were of eternal obligation. The
preferable system was that established by the several States, which
existed before the bankrupt system, and which still existed, extending to
all insolvent debtors the same relief.

It was contended that the partial operation of the bankrupt system had
the most mischievous influence on the morals of the mercantile world.
That it operated as an impunity to fraud and negligence; that it created
extensive credits, and excited a spirit of the most prodigal expenditure;
that although the American merchants were probably the most honest and
certainly the most able and enterprising in the world, the facility with
which credits were obtained, and the impunity with which risks were
incurred, had, under the auspices of this law, introduced into their
private expenditures a ruinous extravagance; and that nothing was more
common than to see a merchant, of but small capital, living at an expense
superior to that of the European trader who had realized his plum, and at
an expense which shamed the frugal disbursements of the affluent planter.
What were the effects? The scene of luxury and splendor was enjoyed for a
few years, and was succeeded by a failure. Did it become the Legislature
to encourage, or repress this spirit?

The principle of the bankrupt system was inequitable as it regarded the
relation of debtor and creditor. However it might be averred to the
contrary, it was a truth that its provisions operated to the advantage
of the debtor, and of course to the detriment of the creditor. There
was no weight in the remark that the commission was taken out at the
instance of the creditor, as that was merely a nominal act, a creditor
usually being made use of who was the friend of the bankrupt. That it
operated to the benefit of the debtor was clear from its liberating all
his future acquisitions, after availing himself of the benefit of a
commission, from seizure: whereas, under an insolvent law, the person
alone was released. That hence sprang up a ten-fold temptation to fraud
under this act, over that which existed under the common insolvent laws.
For that under the latter an insolvent debtor, if guilty of a fraudulent
concealment of property, could at any future period be called upon
to satisfy the claims of his creditors by a delivery of his visible
property; while, under this law, the bankrupt may live in the greatest
splendor, even ostentatiously displaying his property, without rendering
it liable to seizure. Fraud once successfully perpetrated and concealed,
every restraint is removed; and so deleterious had this effect been that
it had manifestly inflicted a deep wound upon the confidence of man with
man in the ordinary transactions of life.

It was further contended, that while justice and humanity dictated the
liberation from arrest of the body of the unfortunate debtor, justice
inhibited the exoneration of property from going to satisfy just debts;
that the obligation, wherever the ability existed, to pay just debts,
was eternal, and that this law, in having a retro-active effect, was
unjust. Evils infinitely greater had been inflicted by inconsiderate
and fraudulent debtors taking refuge in the provisions of the bankrupt
law than from all the inhumanity exercised by merciless creditors over
unfortunate debtors. That the principle of the bankrupt law was also
retro-active, inasmuch as it destroyed the grade of dignity existing in
many of the States, by which a bonded debt obtained a preference over an
open account; that it absolutely impaired the subsisting contract between
the person holding and the person signing the bond.

It was remarked that the principle of the bankrupt law, however good in
theory, could never be carried into effect, as had been proved by a long
course of British experience, without a recurrence to those sanguinary
laws which they had introduced for the prevention and punishment of
fraud, but which were so abhorrent to our code of laws that public
opinion could not tolerate them.

The expenses of going through the forms of bankruptcy constituted no
inconsiderable objection to the system. The appointment of a Commissioner
was understood to be in no small degree lucrative, and the various
processes through which the bankrupt was compelled to go, in practice,
reduced the little property he had left to a state still less. Indeed,
from the practical effects of the system, it would appear that it had
been made more for the emolument of the Commissioner than for the benefit
of the creditor.[7]

However necessary this system might be in England, who owed almost the
whole of her prosperity to trade, it became not a nation, the leading
feature of whose character was agriculture, to tread in her footsteps;
but, on the contrary, to avert rather than to hasten the period when such
a system would be rendered necessary; that, in truth, the spirit of trade
in this country was sufficiently vigorous, and only required the common
protection given to all other occupations, to prosper to every beneficial
purpose.

In the commercial world, the honest, though unfortunate merchant, had
nothing to fear from his creditors. A long experience had shown that
the mercantile world felt with sympathy and acted with magnanimity to
the unfortunate. In addition to these objections, it was urged that the
bankrupt law was injurious, as it enlarged the sphere of the Federal
courts. The constitution was a system of compromise. Many powers were
given without a view to their immediate exercise. It did not, therefore,
follow that, because the power given to establish a uniform system
of bankruptcy was given, it must now be exercised. The powers of the
General Government, if not too great, were sufficiently great. It became
Congress, therefore, neither to take from nor add to the powers of the
State courts. To increase the powers of the Federal courts, through the
operation of the bankrupt system, was to derogate from the powers of
the State courts. The State tribunals were weak enough, without thus
trenching upon them.

The authorities under this law not only went to enlarge the powers of
the Federal Government generally, but particularly to the extension of
executive power. The appointment of Commissioners of Bankruptcy was an
additional weight thrown into the scale of executive patronage. The
power of that department ought to be viewed with an eye of jealousy, and
the House, however willing to allow to it the enjoyment of all fair and
necessary power, ought vigilantly to guard against its undue increase.
It might be answered that this evil might be removed by placing the
appointment of the Commissioners in the hands of the courts. But this
would not be the effect. The Judicial Department, in the aspect of its
political weight, was not to be contemned. So long as it remains, as
fixed by the constitution, it will rest for support somewhere--it will
naturally ally itself to some other department of the Government, and
the inducements to such alliance will be most naturally held out by
the Executive; but however peculiar circumstances might at this time
indicate otherwise, such a tendency was a kind of political gravity,
which, however it might for a time be checked, would eventually exert its
influence.

On the other hand, the opponents of the repeal observed that the
silence of the public on the subject indicated neither hostility nor
opposition to the present system of bankruptcy; if it indicated any
prevailing sentiment, it was that of confidence in the judgment of their
representatives. If the system really was so unpopular as some gentlemen
had represented it to be, their tables would ere this have been covered
with memorials for its repeal, whereas not a single petition to that
effect had been presented during the session.

They contended that it would be true policy to suffer the act to expire
by its own limitation. Little more than two years would elapse before
the arrival of that period. This conduct was dictated by the undisputed
fact that the present system had been adopted as an experiment. Hence
the limitation of the act. This experiment was now in a fair course of
trial. Little more than three years had elapsed since its commencement,
and sufficient time had not yet passed to test the goodness or the
badness of the principle it involved. It was a fact that the distresses
of the commercial world called forth such a system when it was formed
in the year 1800; it was a fact that it had done much good; and it
might be that a system of bankruptcy, improved to the extent of which
it was susceptible, would be of permanent utility. Amendments, radical
amendments, the system certainly required; and should the House determine
not to destroy it, the amendments could and doubtless would be made.

It was believed that the general sentiment of the nation concurred in the
propriety of affording some relief to the distresses of the commercial
world. On the form and extent of that relief great contrariety of opinion
existed. It was the opinion of well-informed merchants and of the best
writers, that a greater relief should be afforded to the misfortunes of
men engaged in trade than in other occupations. To the argument that the
proper relief to be extended should be left to the determination of the
States, the objection that the laws of the different States were on this
point various and contradictory, was conclusive. Trade, of all human
occupations, embraced the widest range. Its operations were confined to
no particular State or climate, but pervaded the whole world. It was
of great importance then, if practicable, that laws in relation to it
should be equally wide with this extensive range. Though this was utterly
impracticable, yet it was practicable to make the same laws pervade a
whole nation. Of this opinion were the venerable patriots of 1789, who
framed the constitution; such was the spirit of the constitution itself;
and such its language in speaking of uniform laws respecting imports,
bankruptcies, and intercourse between the several States. Not that the
power to pass such laws was imperative: but they manifested the sense
of that body and the spirit of the instrument, that all laws on those
subjects should be uniform throughout the United States.

To the argument, that the exoneration of property from the payment of
just debts was a violation of justice, it was replied, that however
correct the principle might be in ordinary cases, it did not hold in
commercial concerns. In other employments an inability to comply with
contracts was generally the result of idleness or imprudence; but so
great and inevitable were the risks attendant on commerce, that no human
prudence could guard against them.

Of trade, credit was the life; without it, it could not exist. In this
country, too, it was the great source of revenue. How impolitic then was
it, in a country where the whole of the revenue, and much of the wealth
of its citizens, depended upon trade, to adopt regulations which would
repress mercantile exertion and enterprise.

It was contended, that it was not true that the principle of a bankrupt
law operated in favor of the debtor; the reverse was the case, and
constituted one of the strongest arguments of its superiority to
insolvent laws, under which the time of surrender was left to the option
of the debtor; whereas, under a bankrupt law, the creditor, whenever he
had reason to apprehend the fraud or failure of his debtor, could take
out a commission under the bankrupt law; the creditor may arrest the
prodigal or unjust career of the debtor; while, under the insolvent law,
the debtor rarely surrenders his property, until he has squandered nearly
the whole, or until he has made a fraudulent transfer of it. Such was the
operation of the principle of a good bankrupt system; with regard to the
present it was admitted that its provisions were unfair, and operated
frequently the other way.

A leading argument in favor of a bankrupt system was that it multiplied
checks against fraud; there would of course be less temptation to commit
fraud, as the chances of concealing it diminished. In most countries the
terrors of an awful punishment awaited the commission of fraud under this
act, even the terrors of death. Though it might not be sound policy in
this country to make punishments so terrible, yet it was always within
the power of the Legislature to make transgressions so penal, as to guard
against the apprehended evils.

It was contended that one great object of the constitution in bestowing
this power on the General Government was the establishment of national
credit upon the broad principles of justice; such was the effect of the
system of bankruptcy by which the same obligations were imposed upon the
merchants of all States in their relation to each other, and towards
foreigners. Remove this system, and you virtually re-enact the partial
and varying laws of the different States. In Virginia, for instance,
the person only of the debtor is liberated, while in Maryland both
person and property are liberated. Will not the citizen of one State
acquire advantages over the citizen of another, and will not foreigners
have reference in their dealings to the laws of the States, and prefer
dealing with the citizens of that State where there shall exist the
greatest security for the recovery of their debts? Will not the citizen
of one State remove into another, and evade the operation of the laws
of the States where contracts were made? The friends of the repeal say
the bankrupt system is retrospective in its operation. That was true,
inasmuch as it changed the relations of debtor and creditor. But what
will the repeal do? Contracts have been made under the contemplated
existence of the act for a fixed period. By repealing it before that
period arrives, you likewise change again the relations of debtor and
creditor.

About four o’clock, the debate being closed, the question on the
resolution to repeal, was taken and carried in the affirmative, ayes 94.

The Committee rose, and the House immediately took up their report, on
agreeing to which the yeas and nays were required, and were, yeas 99,
nays 13, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, Isaac
    Anderson, John Archer, Simeon Baldwin, David Bard, George M.
    Bedinger, Silas Betton, Phanuel Bishop, William Blackledge,
    John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William Butler,
    George W. Campbell, Levi Casey, William Chamberlain, Martin
    Chittenden, Thomas Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton,
    Frederick Conrad, Jacob Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, Samuel
    W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dawson, William Dickson, Thomas
    Dwight, John B. Earle, James Elliot, John W. Eppes, William
    Findlay, John Fowler, James Gillespie, Calvin Goddard, Peterson
    Goodwyn, Edwin Gray, Andrew Gregg, Thomas Griffin, Gaylord
    Griswold, Roger Griswold, Samuel Hammond, Wade Hampton, John A.
    Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Seth Hastings, Joseph Heister, William
    Hoge, David Holmes, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah
    Knight, Michael Leib, Joseph Lewis, jun., John B. C. Lucas,
    Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Nahum Mitchell, Thomas Moore,
    Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Gideon Olin,
    Beriah Palmer, John Patterson, John Randolph, jun., John Rea of
    Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee, Jacob Richards, Cæsar A.
    Rodney, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer
    Seaver, John Smilie, John C. Smith, John Smith of Virginia,
    Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, William Stedman, James
    Stephenson, John Stewart, Samuel Taggart, Benjamin Tallmadge,
    Samuel Tenney, David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg,
    John Trigg, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Matthew Walton,
    John Whitehill, Marmaduke Williams, Richard Winn, Joseph
    Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--John Campbell, Joseph Clay, Peter Early, William
    Eustis, Daniel Heister, Benjamin Huger, John G. Jackson,
    Thomas Lowndes, William McCreery, Nicholas R. Moore, Joseph H.
    Nicholson, Tompson J. Skinner, John Smith of New York.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in, pursuant to the said
resolution; and that Mr. NEWTON, Mr. HAMMOND, Mr. TALLMADGE, Mr. VAN
CORTLANDT, and Mr. MARMADUKE WILLIAMS, do prepare and bring in the same.


THURSDAY, November 24.

_Amy Dardin._

On the motion of Mr. CLAIBORNE, the House resolved itself into a
Committee of the Whole on the report of the Committee of Claims on the
petition of Amy Dardin. The report is unfavorable to the prayer of the
petitioner.

On agreeing to this report, a discussion took place which occupied the
greater part of the day. Messrs. J. C. SMITH, GREGG, and MACON supported,
and Messrs. CLAIBORNE, SMILIE, and ELLIOT opposed the report; when the
question was taken on agreeing to the report of the Committee of Claims
and lost--ayes 32.

Mr. CLAIBORNE then moved a resolution, “that the prayer of Amy Dardin is
reasonable and ought to be granted.”

Messrs. CLAIBORNE and NICHOLSON supported and Messrs. GRISWOLD and
GREGG opposed this resolution, which, on the question being taken, was
carried--ayes 61, nays 38.

The committee then rose, and reported their agreement to the resolution.

Mr. GREGG moved an amendment directing the proper accounting officer of
the Treasury to settle the claim of Amy Dardin, on the same principle
with similar cases, the statute of limitations notwithstanding.

Messrs. GRISWOLD and GREGG supported, Messrs. NICHOLSON and CLAIBORNE
opposed the amendment.

A concurrence in the report was then agreed to, and the Committee of
Claims instructed to bring in a bill.


FRIDAY, November 25.

_Ordered_, That the petition of Memucan Hunt, William Polk, and Pleasant
Henderson, for themselves and others, addressed to the General Assembly
of the State of North Carolina; also, sundry resolutions of the said
Assembly, respecting a claim for the value of certain lands in the State
of Tennessee, presented to this House on the nineteenth of January, one
thousand eight hundred and two, and the report of a select committee
thereon, made the twenty-fourth of March, in the same year, be referred
to the committee this day appointed on the memorial of the Legislature of
Tennessee.


_Bankrupt Law._

Mr. NEWTON called for the order of the day on the bill to repeal an act
to establish a uniform system of bankruptcy throughout the United States;
and the House then resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the
said bill.

Mr. VARNUM moved an amendment, extending the period of repeal to the
first of January, 1804, instead of from the passage of the act; and
afterwards varied the motion, so as to leave the period of repeal blank.

This motion was supported by Messrs. R. GRISWOLD, EARLY, and SKINNER; and
opposed by Messrs. SMILIE, NEWTON, RODNEY, and HASTINGS. Lost--ayes 25.

On motion of Mr. R. GRISWOLD, an amendment was introduced, directing the
completion of all proceedings under commissions taken out previous to the
repeal.

The committee then rose and reported the bill with the above amendment,
in which the House immediately concurred, and ordered, without a
division, the bill to be engrossed for a third reading on Monday.

[The bill is concise, and is confined to repealing the bankrupt act,
saving cases where commissions have been taken out previously to the
passage of the act, at which time the repeal takes effect.]


MONDAY, November 28.

_Public Roads._

On the call of Mr. JACKSON, the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the following resolution:

    “_Resolved_, That provision be made, by law, for the
    application of one-twentieth part of the net proceeds of the
    land lying within the State of Ohio, sold, or to be sold by
    Congress, from and after the 30th day of June, 1802, to the
    laying out, and making public roads, leading from the navigable
    waters emptying into the Atlantic, to the Ohio river, and to
    the said State of Ohio: in conformity with the act of Congress,
    entitled ‘An act to entitle the people of the eastern division
    of the territory north-west of the river Ohio, to form a
    constitution, and State government, and for the admission of
    such State into the Union on an equal footing with the original
    States; and for other purposes,’ passed upon the 30th April,
    1802, as well as the act passed the 3d of March, 1804, in
    addition to and in modification of the propositions contained
    in the act aforesaid; and the ordinance of the convention of
    the State of Ohio, bearing date the 29th day of November, 1802.”

Mr. JACKSON called for the reading of the acts of Congress which were
referred to in the resolution, which was done: he then moved that the
committee rise and report their agreement.

Mr. VARNUM said he hoped the question would be taken separately on the
resolution.

Mr. JACKSON hoped that gentlemen opposed to the resolution would rise at
that time and express their opinions.

Mr. NICHOLSON was opposed to the resolution, but was prevented from
indisposition from expressing his sentiments; he would do it at a future
period.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH was sorry that the indisposition of his friend from
Maryland should prevent him from delivering his sentiments on this
occasion. He was himself unprepared to speak on this question, but it
appeared to him, from a complete view of the subject some time since,
that the resolutions contravened one of the provisions of the law to
which it was referred; by reverting to that law, it would be found that
in one of the propositions offered by Congress to the State of Ohio, it
was provided that one-twentieth part of the net proceeds, arising from
the sale of lands in that State, should be laid out in roads to and from
it, and laid out under the direction of Congress. The State of Ohio
agreed to adopt the propositions if Congress would make an amendment,
(which he read.) He wished to call the attention of the committee to
the facts, and wished them to attend to the different propositions. He
should not have troubled the committee but from an apprehension that
when gentlemen had taken up an opinion, they were loth to abandon it.
One of the propositions of Congress was, that one-twentieth part of the
net proceeds arising from the sale of lands in the State of Ohio should
be laid out under the direction of Congress in the making of roads from
the Atlantic to that State. The State of Ohio agrees to the proposition
with this amendment, that not less than three per cent. should be laid
out exclusively in that State, under the direction of their Legislature.
He conceived that the last proposition was only a modification of the
former, and that the three per cent. was a part of the five, and not an
additional allowance; if the latter had been intended, why, he asked,
was it not so expressed? There were several other propositions and they
were stated to be amendments. He considered Congress never intended to
grant more than five per cent. and should therefore vote against the
resolutions.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD apprehended there could be no doubt as to the
construction which Congress gave to the law in question; there might
be some doubt whether that construction was a sound one; he, however,
thought it perfectly so. In the year 1801, Congress provided that
one-twentieth part of the net proceeds arising from the sale of lands
in the State of Ohio, should be applied to making roads to that State,
under the direction of Congress. The proposition was laid before the
State of Ohio. The Convention of Ohio agreed to it, provided Congress
would consent to a modification of it; they wished some part of the five
per cent. to be laid out exclusively in their own State and under the
direction of their own Legislature; they therefore proposed that three
per cent. should be laid out in the State, and under the direction of the
Legislature of Ohio. If the State of Ohio had intended that the three per
cent. was to be added to the five, they would have stated it (as in the
other propositions) to be in addition to it. The committee which were on
the subject last session, gave the law the same construction which he
did, and the House concurred in that construction. He thought they were
under no obligation to lay out more money than they had agreed to do,
and if the committee would attend to the subject, they could be under no
difficulty to determine the construction. We had an appropriation of two
per cent. to make, and perhaps it might be necessary to pass a law to
that effect; but he could not consent to give any more.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL would beg the indulgence of the committee while he
said a few words on the subject before them. As he should vote in favor
of the resolution on the table, he conceived that when they were about to
determine on the construction of a law, they were only to refer to the
face of it, and not to inquire what the framers of it meant. He begged
leave to read the law on the subject, and said that the law of Congress
concerning five per cent. was in force, unless repealed by another law;
and the subsequent law, which provided for the laying out of three per
cent. in roads, was either in addition to or a repeal of it; he believed
that it was an addition to it. It could not be the intention of the
Convention of Ohio to accept of three per cent. to be laid out in their
own State, and under the direction of their own Legislature, in lieu of
five per cent. to be laid out under the direction of Congress. He should,
considering the appropriations to be distinct ones, vote in favor of the
resolutions.

Mr. RODNEY deemed it necessary to make but few observations after the
able arguments of his friend from Virginia, (Mr. RANDOLPH,) and the
luminous observations of the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. GRISWOLD,)
against the resolutions. The question to be determined, was, whether
the five per cent. was to be given exclusive of the three? It had
been said that they ought not to consider the intention of those who
framed the law, but he conceived it to be proper, in order to give a
right construction. When they reverted to the propositions themselves,
they would find one of them was, that provided the State of Ohio would
not for a limited time tax the lands of the United States, that then
one-twentieth part of the net proceeds arising from the sale of lands
in that State should be laid out in making roads to the State of Ohio,
the same to be laid out under the direction of Congress. When this
proposition came before the Convention of Ohio, they said that three
per cent. ought to be laid out exclusively in their own State and under
the direction of their Legislature. This could only be intended as a
modification of the law. He did not think there was any difficulty in
determining the construction of the law, and should vote against the
resolution.

Mr. VARNUM conceived that the construction given to the law by the
gentlemen from Virginia, Connecticut, and Delaware, was perfectly
correct. He did not know whether it would be necessary to make an
appropriation of the remaining two per cent. during this session, but in
order to try the principle, he moved to strike out of the resolution the
words one-twentieth and insert one-fiftieth.

Mr. SANFORD had not intended to have troubled the committee on this
occasion, but being a representative from the West, it might be expected
that he might be in favor of the resolution. But he did not conceive
that more than five per cent. was ever intended to be given, and this
was not a question of expediency. He did not believe that the Convention
of Ohio intended that the three per cent. should be given in addition
to the five, nor had they any reason to expect it. This ought not to
be an Eastern and a Western question. If the five per cent. was now
given, Mr. S. asked whether it would not operate for the benefit of
the rest of the States as well as the State of Ohio? But, as they must
determine, not what Congress ought to give, but what they meant to give,
and he conceived that three per cent. was a part of the five, he should
therefore vote against the resolution.

Mr. LYON spoke in favor of the resolution at some length.

Mr. MACON did not think it necessary to say any thing on the construction
of the law, because he conceived the arguments of the two first gentlemen
who opposed the resolution (Messrs. J. RANDOLPH and R. GRISWOLD) to be
unanswerable; but as the question appeared to be made an Eastern and a
Western one, he would say a few words. He considered the whole United
States concerned in it, and not merely the State of Ohio. He believed
that the arguments of gentlemen, that they had not done justice to the
State of Ohio, were groundless. There was no State in the Union which
has been so much favored as that State. He was sorry gentlemen had used
threats on the occasion, that if they did not grant this, they might not
be attached to the Union; but he believed that the State of Ohio would
be the greatest loser by it. He was willing to leave it to the Western
people themselves to determine, whether Congress had not done them
justice, and he was certain they would answer in the affirmative.

Mr. BOYLE did not consider this a question of party or of expediency; nor
what Congress ought to give, but what they had given. If the construction
of the law was difficult to determine, it ought to be taken against the
United States and favorable to the State of Ohio, because Congress was
the grantor and that State the grantee. This was the manner in which
private contracts were always construed, and he thought it a sound one.
The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH) had said that the three
per cent. was not intended to be given in addition to the five, because
it was not so expressed; but Mr. B. said, the last law was not said to be
a modification, the construction was therefore doubtful and ought to be
taken favorable to the State of Ohio.

Mr. GODDARD did not think they were under any difficulty in determining
the true construction of the law in question. He considered it to admit
of but one construction; this appeared to him to be a negotiation
between Congress and the State of Ohio. It was proposed by the former,
that if the latter would not tax their lands for a limited time, the
one-twentieth part of the net proceeds should be laid out in making roads
for that state under the direction of Congress; the State of Ohio acceded
to it, provided three per cent. should be laid out exclusively in that
State, and Congress agreed to it; this appeared to him to be the true
state of the case.

Mr. MORROW would beg the indulgence of the committee while he made a
few observations on the subject. He was sorry this was made a party
question. He read the report of the committee of Congress and the
propositions of Congress to the State of Ohio; and observed that when the
propositions came before the convention, they were pleased with them, but
did not consider that the five per cent., which was to be laid out in
roads, was an equivalent for what they asked: which was, that the State
of Ohio should not for a limited time tax the lands of Congress. How,
said Mr. M., gentlemen would ask, was this known? He would answer, by an
estimate of the value of both; therefore they agreed to the propositions,
provided Congress would make an amendment, and allow them an additional
three per cent. to be laid out exclusively in their own State and under
the direction of their Legislature: to this Congress agreed. He conceived
the question for them to determine, whether the three was in addition to
or in lieu of the five; he believed it could not be the latter, because
it would go to defeat the original design, which was facilitating the
communication between the Eastern and Western States. He was in favor of
the resolution, believing that it was the intention of the Convention of
Ohio, at the time they agreed to the propositions, that the three per
cent. was to be given in addition to the five.

The question was taken on Mr. VARNUM’s motion to strike out one-twentieth
and insert one-fiftieth, and carried--yeas 75.

The question was then taken on the resolution as amended, and carried
without a division.


TUESDAY, November 29.

_Amy Dardin._

Mr. CLAIBORNE called for the order of the day on the bill for the relief
of Amy Dardin.

The motion of Mr. DAWSON being lost, there being only thirty-two ayes in
favor of it, Mr. CLAIBORNE’s motion was taken up.

Mr. SANFORD moved to postpone the order of the day on the bill for the
relief of Amy Dardin till to-morrow, in order to introduce a resolution
for the appointment of a committee to inquire into the expediency of
extending the time for adjusting the claims of individuals for supplies
furnished and services rendered during the Revolutionary war, with the
view of trying previously to the granting individual relief the general
principle, whether Congress would repeal the statutes of limitation.

After a debate of considerable length, the motion to postpone was lost.

The House then went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill, which
was so amended as to allow Amy Dardin two thousand five hundred dollars
for the horse Romulus, being the estimated value thereof, not including
interest.

The Committee reported the bill so amended.

The question was then taken on two thousand five hundred dollars, and
decided in the negative by the vote of the SPEAKER.

Mr. NICHOLSON moved to fill the blank with two thousand three hundred
and twenty dollars, being the amount of principal and interest on the
value of the horse.

Mr. SANFORD moved to fill it with one thousand dollars.

The House agreed to Mr. NICHOLSON’s motion--ayes 58, noes 43.

The yeas and nays were then taken on the engrossing of the bill for a
third reading--yeas 57, nays 49.

_Ordered_, That the said bill be read the third time to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, November 30.

The SPEAKER laid before the House sundry depositions and other papers,
transmitted from the counties of Greenbriar and Rockbridge, in the State
of Virginia, respecting the contested election of THOMAS LEWIS, one of
the members returned to serve in this House for the said State; which
were ordered to be referred to the Committee of Elections.

_Amy Dardin._

An engrossed bill for the relief of the legal representatives of David
Dardin, deceased, was read the third time; and on the question that the
said bill do pass, there appeared--yeas 58, nays 57. And Mr. SPEAKER
having declared himself with the nays, the said question was, in
conformity with the rules of the House, decided in the negative. And so
the said bill was rejected.


MONDAY, December 19.

A memorial of the House of Representatives of the Mississippi Territory
of the United States, signed by William Dunbar, their Speaker _pro
tempore_, and attested by Richard S. Wheatly, their Clerk, was presented
to the House and read, stating certain disadvantages to which the
inhabitants of the settlement on the Tombigbee and Alabama rivers have
been and are now subjected, in consequence of their remote situation from
the other inhabited parts of the said Territory; and praying that a line
of separation may be drawn between the settlements on the Mississippi
river, and those of Washington District, or that judges, learned in the
law, may be appointed to reside within the said district, for the benefit
and convenience of the inhabitants thereof.

_Ordered_, That the said memorial be referred to the committee appointed,
on the 25th ultimo, on the petition and memorial of sundry inhabitants of
the District of Washington, situate on the Mobile, Tombigbee, and Alabama
rivers, in the said Mississippi Territory; to examine and report their
opinion thereupon to the House.

_Mail Routes._

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the following report of
the Post Office Committee:

    The Committee on the subject of the Post Office and Post Roads,
    to whom was referred a resolution of the 2d ultimo, directing
    them to inquire by what means the mail may be conveyed with
    greater security and dispatch than at present, between the City
    of Washington and Natchez and New Orleans, report:

    That the late cession of Louisiana by France to the United
    States renders it an object of primary importance to have the
    nearest and most expeditious mode of communication established
    between the city of Washington and the city of New Orleans,
    the capital of that province; not only for the convenience of
    Government, but to accommodate the citizens of the several
    commercial towns in the Union.

    That at present the mail is conveyed on a circuitous route from
    this place to Knoxville and Nashville in Tennessee, and from
    thence through the wilderness by Natchez to New Orleans, a
    distance of more than 1500 miles.

    That, by establishing a post route as nigh on a direct line
    between those two cities, as the Blue Ridge and Alleghany
    Mountains will admit of, it will not only lessen the distance
    about 500 miles; but as this route will pass almost the whole
    way through a country inhabited either by citizens of the
    United States or friendly Indians, the mail will be more
    secure, and the persons employed in transporting it better
    furnished with the means of subsistence.

    The committee flatter themselves that the views of the
    General Government, in effecting this important object,
    will be seconded by the governments and citizens of those
    States through which this road will pass, by laying out,
    straightening, and improving the same, as soon as the most
    proper course shall be sufficiently ascertained; but as this
    has not heretofore been used for conveying the mail between
    those places, they presume that the best route will be better
    known after it has been used for this purpose, than it can be
    at present; and with this view of the subject, they deem it
    improper at this time to designate intermediate points; they
    are, therefore, of opinion--

    That a post road ought to be established from the city of
    Washington, on the most direct and convenient route to the
    Tombigbee settlement in the Mississippi Territory, and from
    thence to New Orleans.

    And further, that a post road ought also to be established from
    the said Tombigbee settlement to the Natchez. This road will
    not only afford the inhabitants of that place a direct mode of
    communication with the seat of the Territorial Government, who
    at present are destitute of any, but will shorten the distance
    between this city and Natchez nearly three hundred miles. And
    for the consideration of the House, the committee submit the
    following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That a post road ought to be established from
    the city of Washington, on the most direct and convenient
    route, to pass through or near the Tuckabachee settlement to
    the Tombigbee settlement in the Mississippi Territory, and
    from thence to New Orleans; and also from the said Tombigbee
    settlement to Natchez.

Mr. STANFORD moved the insertion of the following words:

    “And Carter’s Ferry on James river, Cole’s Ferry on Stanton,
    Dansville on Dan river, in Virginia; Salisbury, Beatty’s
    Ford, on Catawba, in North Carolina; Spartanburg, Greenville
    Courthouse, and Pendleton Courthouse, in South Carolina; and
    Jackson Courthouse in Georgia:”

His object being to designate the intermediate points of the route
between the seat of Government and New Orleans and Natchez.

This motion was supported by Messrs. STANFORD, J. RANDOLPH, EARLY, EARLE,
and MACON, on the principle that it was proper that Congress should
designate the route, and on the ground that the route contemplated by the
amendment would be the fittest.

On the other hand, the motion was opposed by Messrs. THOMAS, SMILIE,
HOLLAND, CLAIBORNE, S. L. MITCHILL, and G. W. CAMPBELL, on the ground
that a discretionary power should be reposed in the Postmaster General
to designate the route; and on the ground that, if Congress should
undertake to designate the route, the one fixed by the amendment was not
an eligible one.

Mr. DENNIS declared himself in favor of the House exercising the power of
designating the route, but was not sufficiently informed to vote on any
particular line.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD moved that the Committee of the Whole should rise and ask
leave to sit again, with the view that leave should be refused, and the
report recommitted to the Post Office Committee, in order to obtain from
them a detailed report, that would furnish the House with satisfactory
information.

This motion was supported by Mr. GREGG, and opposed by Mr. THOMAS, and
carried--yeas 70.

The House then refused leave to the Committee of the Whole to sit
again--yeas 19, and recommitted the report to the Post Office Committee.


FRIDAY, December 30.

Three other members, to wit: EBENEZER ELMER, JOHN SLOAN, and HENRY
SOUTHARD, from New Jersey, appeared, produced their credentials, were
qualified, and took their seats in the House.


TUESDAY, January 3, 1804.

_Light-House Duties._

Mr. MITCHILL observed, that there had been some conversation in the
House during the last session, concerning the sums of money paid by our
merchants on foreign voyages. He wished to renew that subject, as well
worthy of the attention of Government.

Foreign nations levy money upon our vessels, which frequent their ports,
for the purpose of supporting their light-houses. The sums paid by our
merchants in compliance with these exactions are very considerable.
The contribution which strangers are thus obliged to make, constitutes
a fund, that goes a great way towards defraying the expense of those
establishments, to the great relief of their own subjects.

The average amount of light-money paid by every vessel that enters a
British port, is about four pence sterling the ton, for every light she
may have passed inwards, or that she may be expected to pass outwards.
Calculating by this rule, an American ship of two hundred and eighty-four
tons, entering the port of London, is charged with duties for the
maintenance of the following lights, all along up the British channel, to
wit: Scilly, Longships, Lizard, Eddystone, Portland, Caskets, Needles,
Owers, Dungenness, Foreland, Goodwin, and the Nore. They amount to
thirty-four pounds sterling, and the stamped paper for the receipt four
pence more. Besides this, the duties of the Trinity House, for such a
ship, amount to nine pounds seven shillings and eight pence. In addition
to which there is demanded and paid by virtue of an act of George III.
for the maintenance and improvement of the harbor of Ramsgate, seven
pounds and two shillings. So that the amount of these impositions for
light-money and Ramsgate harbor money, on a ship under three hundred
tons, for a single voyage to London, amounts to fifty pounds and ten
shillings sterling, which is equal to two hundred and twenty-two dollars,
independent of her tonnage, duties on merchandise, pilotage and other
expenses.

An American vessel entering the harbor of Hull, the lights are charged
as before, viz: Scilly, Longships, Lizard, Eddystone, Portland, Caskets,
Needles, Owers, Dungenness, Foreland, and Goodwin; and to these are added
the lights on the Eastern coast of England, such as Sunk, Harwich, Gatt,
Lowestoft, Harbro, Winterton, Oxford, Shawl, Dudgeon, Faulness, and the
Spurn. The amount of these demands for light-money on an American ship of
two hundred and forty-five tons, is thirty-seven pounds and six shillings
sterling. At Hull, the collector enforces payment of Ramsgate harbor
duties to the amount of £6 2_s._ 6_d._, and of Dover harbor dues to the
amount of £3 1_s._ 3_d._ The demand for supporting lights, few of which
perhaps were seen on the passage, and for improving harbors which were
not entered by the ship, amounts to forty-six pounds nine shillings and
nine pence sterling on a burthen less than two hundred and fifty tons; an
amount of demand exceeding two hundred and four dollars.

An American ship goes to Liverpool, she is charged for the light up St.
George’s Channel. A ship of three hundred and fourteen tons is made to
pay for supporting the lights at Milford, that called the Smalls, and
another known by the name of Skerries. These several demands, with the
price of stamps, come to £15 14_s._ 2_d._ sterling on a vessel of that
burthen for one voyage, or more than sixty-three dollars for light-money
alone. For each of these three light-houses the charge is exactly four
pence sterling the ton.

Light-houses have been established by the Government of the United States
on many parts of our extensive coast. Many parts of it are admirably
illuminated. And the whole expense of these valuable establishments is
defrayed from the Treasury out of the ordinary income. Foreigners who
visit our ports participate the security and advantage of these guides
to mariners, as fully as our own citizens; but they pay nothing for this
privilege of directing themselves by our lights. Foreign nations have
acknowledged the principle that duties ought to be collected from their
commercial visiters, for supporting light-houses, and they compel our
merchants to pay them. It is a correct principle of distributive justice,
that we should cause our commercial visiters to pay something also for
the establishment and improvement of our light-houses. A duty of tonnage,
for this express purpose, could easily be laid and collected from foreign
vessels, and would add materially to our means of keeping them in good
repair and attendance. A sum, for example, of six or seven cents per ton
upon every foreign vessel for every light-house she shall have passed,
will make a valuable fund for the humane and excellent institution
of light-houses. To the intent that this interesting subject may be
investigated and that our Government may avail itself of its own proper
rights and resources, I move the following resolution:

    “That the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures be directed
    to inquire into the expediency of laying and collecting a
    tonnage duty on foreign ships and vessels, entering the ports
    and harbors of the United States, for an equivalent for the
    advantages which such ships and vessels derive from the
    light-houses they pass, inwards and outwards.”


WEDNESDAY, January 4.

_Addition to the Navy._

A debate of some length ensued on the motion of Mr. MACON to strike out
the second section.

Messrs. SMILIE and J. RANDOLPH supported the motion. They contended that
no necessity existed in the present situation of the United States for
an augmentation of the Navy; that it remained in the same state it had
been fixed in during March, 1801, with the addition of four small vessels
for the Mediterranean service; that it had heretofore proved fully
competent to the protection of commerce, even when the complexion of our
affairs was less pacific than at present; that the Mediterranean service
had evinced that large vessels produced in that quarter more decisive
effects than small ones, and that of the former description of vessels
we had a sufficient number unemployed; that one great occasion for small
vessels was removed by the permission of the State of South Carolina to
import slaves, which superseded the necessity of any additional force
to restrain their illegal admission into the United States; that this
addition to our marine force did not appear to be necessary, inasmuch
as the President, whose constitutional duty it was to give information
to Congress of the state of the Union, and who directed the armed force
of the nation, had not intimated his opinion of its necessity; and that
Congress might be sure, if he thought it necessary, he would not hesitate
to apprize them of it; that in adopting this provision of the bill the
House was acting altogether in the dark, as no estimates of the expense
had been furnished, and not even a committee appointed to examine either
the propriety or expense of the measure. It was alleged that it became
the Legislature, in the present posture of the national finances, to
be uncommonly circumspect. New and heavy pecuniary obligations had
been incurred, and time alone could show whether the present resources
would be more than commensurate to meet them. That the Secretary of the
Treasury, at the opening of the session, had spoken of the competency
of our resources with a caution which ought to impress the House with
the necessity of exercising strict economy, unless disposed to vote new
taxes. To this point this measure manifestly tended, and it became those
who were hostile to new taxes, to hesitate before they adopted a measure
that promised to lead to it.

The motion was, on the other hand, opposed by Messrs. NICHOLSON, EUSTIS,
R. GRISWOLD, and HUGER. They observed that the bill under consideration
had received the sanction of the Senate, and it might be rationally
presumed that they had previously to its passage received satisfactory
proof of its necessity; that the first section authorized the sale of the
frigate General Greene, in the lieu whereof it was contemplated to build
or purchase two small ships; that this measure therefore constituted no
increase of the Navy beyond its present strength; that so far as related
to expense, whatever the temporary cost, arising from the building or
purchase might be, the permanent expense of two small vessels would be
greatly inferior to that of one large one; that the annual expense of a
forty-four gun frigate was $104,000, while that of a vessel of sixteen
guns was only $36,000; that with regard to the argument of gentlemen
drawn from a want of estimates, it was idle, as estimates had been
furnished at the last session, as the basis of adding four small vessels
for the Mediterranean service, which amounted to $96,000, which sum
appeared to be sufficient. If, therefore, four vessels cost $96,000, two
would not cost more than $50,000; that with regard to the necessity of
these ships, Congress were the proper and constitutional judges; that it
was their special duty to provide and maintain a navy, and to provide for
the common defence and general welfare of the United States; and that
the absolute dependence placed by gentlemen on Executive mandates was
unprecedented, anti-republican, and unconstitutional; that it became the
Legislature to judge for themselves as to the propriety of the measure;
that from the knowledge they possessed of the state of the country, and
the extended sphere of commerce, abundant evidence was presented of its
necessity. It was a fact well ascertained that, for Barbary warfare,
these small ships were eminently useful, and that service required
relief; for in case of a disaster occurring to one of our present small
vessels, it was proper to be provided with others that might promptly
make good the deficiency. That the acquisition of Louisiana would
undoubtedly require some naval force to ensure the collection of the
revenue in that quarter; and that the state of the West Indies absolutely
demanded an addition of some small vessels to protect our trade from
the barges that were fitted out by the brigands for the purposes of
depredation; that it was a fact that if the Executive, at this moment,
possessed one of these ships, it would be immediately sent to the West
Indies; that there were other important purposes for which these vessels
were wanted. The Government had frequent occasion to send special Envoys,
on points of vast importance, to the two great powers in Europe. Was it
then safe, or becoming the dignity of the nation, to send such characters
in a private merchantman, subject to the search or capture of any armed
vessel of Europe?

Before a question was taken on the motion to strike out the section,
Mr. JACKSON moved that the committee should rise. If they rose he would
oppose their having leave to sit again, with the intention of referring
the bill to the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures.

The committee agreed to rise--ayes 63.

Leave having been refused to them to sit again, Mr. J. RANDOLPH moved
that a committee be appointed to inquire whether any, and what, further
additions may be necessary to the Naval Establishment of the United
States,

Mr. ALSTON moved to amend the motion by striking out “a committee be
appointed,” and inserting “the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures be
instructed.” Messrs. ALSTON, NICHOLSON, and EUSTIS supported, and Mr. J.
RANDOLPH opposed this amendment. Carried--yeas 51, nays 46.

The motion thus amended was supported by Messrs. HUGER and ELMER, and
opposed by Messrs. VARNUM and SMILIE. Carried--yeas 57, nays 44.

Mr. JACKSON then moved the reference of the bill to the Committee of
Commerce and Manufactures. Agreed to without a division.


THURSDAY, January 5.

_Official Conduct of Judge Chase._

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said, that no people were more fully impressed with the
importance of preserving unpolluted the fountain of justice than the
citizens of these States. With this view the Constitution of the United
States, and of many of the States also, had rendered the magistrates who
decided judicially between the State and its offending citizens, and
between man and man, more independent than those of any other country
in the world, in the hope that every inducement whether of intimidation
or seduction which could cause them to swerve from the duty assigned
to them might be removed. But such was the frailty of human nature
that there was no precaution by which our integrity and honor could be
preserved, in case we were deficient in that duty which we owed to
ourselves. In consequence, sir, of this unfortunate condition of man,
we have been obliged, but yesterday, to prefer an accusation against a
judge of the United States who has been found wanting in his duty to
himself and his country. At the last session of Congress a gentleman from
Pennsylvania did, in his place, (on the bill to amend the Judicial system
of the United States,) state certain facts in relation to the official
conduct of an eminent judicial character, which I then thought, and
still think, the House bound to notice. But the lateness of the session
(for we had, if I mistake not, scarce a fortnight remaining) precluding
all possibility of bringing the subject to any efficient result, I did
not then think proper to take any steps in the business. Finding my
attention, however, thus drawn to a consideration of the character of
the officer in question, I made it my business, considering it my duty,
as well to myself as to those whom I represent, to investigate the
charges then made, and the official character of the judge, in general.
The result having convinced me that there exists ground of impeachment
against this officer, I demand an inquiry into his conduct, and therefore
submit to the House the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire into the
    official conduct of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and to report
    their opinion whether the said Samuel Chase hath so acted in
    his judicial capacity as to require the interposition of the
    constitutional power of this House.

After the motion made by Mr. J. RANDOLPH had been read from the Chair,

Mr. MITCHILL said, before the question was taken, he should be glad,
from the novelty and serious nature of the proposed measure, to hear a
statement by his friend from Virginia of the reasons in detail on which
it was founded.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH observed, that when he was up before he had stated that
the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SMILIE) had, in his place, at the
last session of Congress, given a description of the official conduct
of the officer to whom the resolution referred, which he considered the
House bound to notice. It could not be conceived that the gentleman would
have laid before the House a statement, the facts of which were not
supported by his own knowledge, or by evidence on which he could place
the utmost reliance. He did not conceive this to be a time to decide
whether the information exhibited by the gentleman from Pennsylvania
was or was not correct. At present an inquiry alone was proposed. If
it should be made, it must result either that the conduct of the judge
would be found to be such as not to warrant any further proceedings on
the part of the House, or such as would require the interposition of that
authority, which, as the immediate representatives of the people, they
alone possessed. If on inquiry the committee shall be persuaded that
the judge has not exceeded his duty, they will so report; if, on the
contrary, they find it such as to require the interposition of the House,
they will recommend that course of proceeding to which the House alone is
competent. With respect to the facts which had come to his knowledge, Mr.
R. said that they were such as he did not wish to state. He preferred its
being done by witnesses, who were most competent to do it correctly.

Mr. ELLIOT said, I am as deeply convinced as the gentleman from Virginia
that the streams of justice should be preserved pure and unsullied. I
am also sensible that the Judicial Department ought to attach to itself
a degree of independence. I am of opinion that this House possesses no
censorial power over the Judicial Department generally, or over any judge
in particular. They have alone the power of impeaching them; and when
a judge shall be charged with flagrant misconduct, and when facts are
stated which shall induce them to believe those charges true, I shall
be at all times prepared to carry the provisions of the constitution
into effect, in virtue of which great transgressors are punishable for
their crimes. The basis of this resolution is, that a gentleman from
Pennsylvania, at the last session, stated that the judge named in it
had been guilty of improper conduct. Of these charges I am uninformed,
and every new member must be uninformed. It is astonishing to me that
we are called upon to vote for an inquiry into the character of a judge
without any facts being adduced to show that such an inquiry should be
made. If the resolution pass in its present form, it appears to me that
we shall thereby pass a vote of censure on this judge, which neither the
constitution nor laws authorize. If the judge be guilty, I should suppose
the first step proper to be taken would be for some person aggrieved,
or for members having personal knowledge, to exhibit facts on which the
House may act. I can never consent, because the gentleman from Virginia,
or any other gentleman, says that there are facts which have come to his
knowledge that induce him to think an inquiry ought to be instituted,
to vote for it, unless those facts are first stated. I can never agree
to any act which shall in this manner, without the exhibition of proof,
impose censure or suspicion on a judge. This course may be perfectly
Parliamentary; but it strikes me as altogether unprecedented. I shall,
therefore, until some facts are adduced, resist every attempt to impose a
censure upon the conduct of any public officer.

Mr. SMILIE.--If the gentleman from Vermont had commanded a little
patience, he would have perceived the remarks which he has just made to
have been altogether unnecessary. He would have perceived the necessity
imposed upon me by the observations of the gentleman from Virginia of
stating those facts to which that gentleman alluded. It must be seen that
these proceedings contemplate the possibility of an impeachment. It will
be recollected by gentlemen who were in Congress at the last session,
that I was then led to give a statement of facts respecting the conduct
of Judge Chase on a particular occasion. That statement was not made with
a view to impeachment. A bill had been introduced to change the districts
of the circuit courts of the United States; when I discovered that Mr.
Chase was assigned to the district of Pennsylvania, I felt interested
in having him transferred to another district, considering that his
previous conduct had rendered him obnoxious to the people of that State.
These circumstances I stated to the House, and was in consequence called
upon to assign my reasons why Judge Chase was obnoxious to the people of
Pennsylvania. This is the history of the business so far. I am now called
upon to state the facts which I mentioned on that occasion. This I shall
do briefly.

A man of the name of Fries was prosecuted for treason in the State of
Pennsylvania. Two of the first counsel at that bar, Mr. Lewis and Mr.
Dallas, without fee or reward, undertook his defence. I mention their
names to show that there could have been no party prejudices that
influenced them. When the trial came on, the judge behaved in such a
manner that Mr. Lewis declared that he would not so far degrade his
profession as to plead under the circumstances imposed upon him. Mr.
Dallas declared that the rights of the bar were as well established as
those of the bench; that he considered the conduct of the judge as a
violation of those rights, and refused to plead. The facts were these:
The judge told the jury and the counsel that the court had made up their
minds on what constituted treason; that they had committed their opinion
to writing, and that the counsel must therefore confine themselves to
the facts in the case before the court. The counsel replied that they
did not dispute the facts, but that they were able to show that they
did not constitute treason. The end of the affair was, that the counsel
retired from court, and the man was tried without counsel, convicted, and
sentenced to death.

After this the Attorney General wrote a letter to Messrs. Dallas and
Lewis, requesting them to furnish their notes and opinions for the use of
the President. They drew up an answer, in which they stated that the acts
charged against Fries did not amount to treason, but were only sedition;
and that they were so considered in the British courts. This letter
was read to me by Mr. Dallas. After receiving the letter the President
pardoned the man.

Mr. J. CLAY.--This debate appears to me to arise from causes the most
extraordinary, and such as we are not accustomed to hear assigned on
this floor. The gentleman from Virginia has made a motion justified by
his own knowledge as well as that of my colleague; and this motion is
opposed in a most extraordinary manner. I believe this is the first
instance in which a motion to appoint a committee of inquiry into the
official conduct of a public officer has been opposed. We are told by the
gentleman from Vermont that this House has no right to pass a censure on
a judge, and that judges should be highly independent. I am afraid that
unless great care be taken the doctrine of judicial independence will be
carried so far as to become dangerous to the liberties of the country.
This motion does not, however, affect the character of the judge. Let it
also be recollected, that if the reputation of the judge be at stake, the
reputation of this House also is implicated. I consider this House as
the constitutional guardians of the morality of the Judiciary. Whenever
even suspicion exists as to that morality, a committee of inquiry should
be appointed. For the pure administration of justice is surely more
important than the reputation of any particular judge. I am sorry my
colleague thought it necessary to make any statement of facts to the
House. I believe that more important facts than he has mentioned will be
stated by witnesses. I believe likewise the reputation of the judge will
be better preserved by the appointment of a committee than by assertions
made on this floor by particular members, not responsible elsewhere for
what they allege.

With regard to my opinions in this case, whatever my political
impressions may be, they are entirely unbiassed. I have heard facts
stated, but I cannot say that they have been satisfactorily proved to
my mind. There are other charges equally reprehensible. Under these
circumstances, I ask if the character of the judge is not more implicated
by a discussion of his official conduct on this floor than by appointing
a committee to obtain facts. If he is guilty of the facts alleged against
him, no gentleman will say that he is not impeachable. If he is only
suspected of them, there ought to be a committee, that if guilty he may
be impeached, and if innocent, be freed from the imputation thrown upon
him.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD.--Gentlemen will acknowledge that this is a subject of
great importance and delicacy. No one will doubt but that we ought to
execute our duty so as to preserve the fountains of justice pure, and
that we ought at the same time to treat the important character of a
judge, or of any other high officer, with respect. I do not know but that
this mode of procedure is warranted by precedent. But if it is, it is
unknown to me. As the resolution now stands, I do not think it perfectly
correct. The honorable gentleman from Virginia says he is acquainted with
facts that warrant the proposed inquiry. The question is whether the
House ought to be governed by the opinions of any one member. We know not
what those facts are; the gentleman declines stating them. I do think,
as the subject now strikes me, that the conviction of any one member of
the propriety of this measure cannot warrant the interposition of the
House. Instead of taking the individual opinion of a member, it ought to
be stated that certain facts exist, which, if proved, will justify an
impeachment. I do not know whether these ideas are not incorrect, having
never before contemplated, or had a suspicion that such a motion would be
made.

As to the remarks of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, I do not consider
them as entitled to much weight. If the facts stated by him were of
his personal knowledge, they would undoubtedly merit attention. But he
merely states that which he has received from others, and which amounts
to nothing more than that the judge refused liberty to the counsel to
argue a point of law after it was decided, and confined their argument
to facts. In so doing the judge may have erred, but it was an error
of judgment, for which he cannot be impeached. No lawyer will perhaps
say that it was not the province of the judge to decide the law, and
that he has not the right to prevent counsel from arguing it after his
mind is made up. But this information is not of the knowledge of the
gentleman. Are we then to institute an inquiry into the conduct of a
high officer of the Government merely on hearsay? This has never been
done under our Government. In the late case of Judge Pickering proof was
furnished by the affidavits of witnesses testifying certain facts. I do
not therefore consider it correct to proceed to inquire on the opinion
of any gentleman. The proper course is first to have proofs which will
justify ourselves to our own consciences in making the inquiry--for we
ought not to touch the character of a judge, unless we are satisfied from
facts that there is good reason for an investigation into his conduct.
Gentlemen will not say that making an inquiry into the official conduct
of a judge does not touch his character.

Gentlemen say if this committee find the conduct of the judge to have
been correct, they will make a report to that effect; but it does not
follow that the report will contain all the evidence adduced, and
suspicion may still rest on the character of the judge, and that some
facts may not be stated, which, if stated, would show his misconduct.
Whereas, if the business be brought generally before the House, on
the exhibition of certain facts, the public will be enabled to decide
whether they warrant impeachment or even suspicion. With this view of the
subject, I am of opinion that it will be best to delay acting in this
affair until facts shall be disclosed which will justify the step now
proposed to be taken. I have as high a respect for the opinion of the
gentleman from Virginia as for that of any other member on this floor;
but I doubt whether we can justify our votes on the opinion of any single
member; facts alone ought to govern our opinions. I, therefore, for the
purpose of considering the course most proper to be pursued, move a
postponement of the further consideration of the motion until to-morrow.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--Were I the personal enemy of the gentleman who is the
object of this resolution, I should take precisely that course which,
on this occasion, the gentleman from Connecticut seems more than half
inclined to take. That gentleman wishes the resolution to lay until
to-morrow, in order that he may have time to consider whether he can
bring himself to refuse the inquiry altogether. He says that he cannot,
or rather (for he speaks doubtingly) he thinks he cannot see the
propriety of instituting an inquiry without evidence. What evidence?
Nothing short of legal proof--testimony on oath. And what is the object
of the resolution? To acquire that very evidence. If we had the evidence,
to what purpose make inquiry? As, however, the evidence cannot be had
without inquiry, and the gentleman will not grant the inquiry but upon
the evidence, it is plain that if we take the course which he recommends,
we must go without both. Will gentlemen offer objections against inquiry
which are applicable only to impeachment? If an impeachment were moved,
they would have a right to call for evidence. But what is the object
of the present motion? Merely to inquire whether there exists evidence
which will justify an impeachment. But this inquiry we are told cannot be
instituted on mere hearsay, although we have the declaration of a member
in his place. What would be said of a grand jury, who being informed
by one of their body that A or B could testify to the fact of a murder
being committed within their jurisdiction, should refuse an application
to the court to have them summoned, and because they could not find a
bill of indictment unsupported by evidence, should reject that evidence
which might be within their reach? I profess not that tenderness of
conscience which has been displayed by the gentleman from Connecticut. My
conscience teaches me to accuse no man wrongfully, but to deny inquiry
into the official conduct of no one, however exalted his station; and
I had supposed, from his practice, that the gentleman held the same
opinion. For it will be recollected that on the eve of the close of the
last session he had himself instituted an inquiry which went to impeach
the conduct of some of the first officers of the Government. No one on
that occasion stepped in between the demand for an inquiry and those
officers implicated in it. No inquiry was made, and it precluded any
further proceeding on the part of the House, since the charges which had
been attempted to be brought forward would not bear examination. Mr. R.
concluded by calling for the yeas and nays.

Mr. GREGG said he should vote against the postponement, and in favor
of the resolution. The case was somewhat new, but he perceived no
impropriety in giving it the same direction with all the other business
originated in the House. What is this committee to be appointed for? To
investigate facts and report them to the House. Was it not most proper
that gentlemen whose characters were implicated should have, in the first
instance, facts stated privately before a committee, than that parts
of their character should be immediately brought into view before the
House? He recollected one fact not yet alluded to in debate. In 1792,
after the army under the command of General St. Clair was defeated,
great dissatisfaction arose, and the character of the commander was
implicated. The idea was that the expedition had not been conducted with
propriety. The business was brought before Congress. It was understood at
that time, whether justly or not, Mr. G. would not pretend to say, that
the commander-in-chief could not be tried by a court martial. Congress
therefore took up the business, and appointed a committee of inquiry, who
went through a lengthy examination of the subject. Mr. G. mentioned this
precedent that gentlemen might turn their attention to it.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD said--I had hoped that the language used by me, when
I was up before, would not have led gentlemen to suppose that I was
acting as the friend or the enemy of Judge Chase. I am acting in neither
capacity. I am acting only as a member of this House, who ought to be
anxious on an occasion of such importance to take that course which is
most consistent with propriety; that course which results from the duty
this House owes the nation, and that duty which they owe the character
of a judge. It did appear to me that it was not correct to call the
character of a public officer into question unless some necessity should
first appear. No facts are presented on this occasion. The gentleman from
Virginia has said that he is in possession of facts, or of something
which makes him believe that an inquiry is proper, but he does not choose
to communicate those facts. The gentleman from Pennsylvania has given us
his information. The question is, whether it is proper on these light
suggestions to institute a solemn inquiry into the character of this
judge. It appears to me that we ought not to throw any imputation on
the character of any officer without evidence that such an inquiry is
necessary. The case mentioned by the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
GREGG) does not apply. Dissatisfaction existed in the country and in this
House on the events of a campaign; an inquiry was instituted; but what
was its object? The committee were appointed to inquire into the general
causes of the failure of the expedition; they were not instructed to
inquire into the character of a particular officer.

The gentleman from Virginia has referred to another case, when he says
that we were ready enough to institute an inquiry, and has left it to be
inferred that the inquiry was made without any previous proofs of its
necessity. But certainly on that occasion inquiry was not made without
proof. I suppose the inquiry alluded to was that which related to the
conduct of the Commissioners of the Sinking Fund. It was instituted on
a report made by them, and which we thought was not satisfactory. The
resolution offered was adopted, and inquiry was made, the result of which
is well known to every gentleman. It follows, therefore, that there are
no precedents adduced which apply to the present case.

It is my wish that the proceedings of this House may on this occasion be
perfectly correct, and that we may not be precipitated into the adoption
of this resolution without due consideration. If it is correct to vote
an inquiry in all cases where a member rises on this floor and desires
it, it is correct to vote it in this case. In this case a gentleman
rises and says that he is satisfied an inquiry ought to take place. The
question is, whether it is proper to inquire on the suggestion of a
member? If it is proper, without facts being adduced, then it will be
always proper to inquire whenever any member requires it, and it will be
also proper whenever any individual citizen requires it. This course I
have never thought correct. On the contrary, I think some facts ought to
be previously presented to establish the necessity of an inquiry before
it is voted. In the case of Judge Pickering a very different course has
been pursued. The appointment of a committee of inquiry originated from a
Message of the President. We find in February, 1803, the House received
the following Message:

    “The enclosed letter and affidavits, exhibiting matter against
    John Pickering, District Judge of New Hampshire, which is now
    within Executive cognizance, I transmit them to the House of
    Representatives, to whom the constitution has confided a power
    of instituting proceedings of redress, if they shall be of
    opinion that the case calls for them.”

This Message was referred to a committee, with the accompanying papers,
furnishing evidence of the necessity of an inquiry. But the course
pursued to-day is very different. A gentleman gets up and moves an
inquiry into the conduct of Judge Chase, and says that he is of the
opinion that it ought to be made. The course, I think, is incorrect.
Some facts ought first to be adduced. I repeat it, I am on this occasion
neither the friend nor the enemy of Judge Chase. I am the friend of this
House; I wish its proceedings to be correct, and I hope they will not do
hastily what they may hereafter regret.

Mr. DENNIS.--The only question now before the House is, whether they
will postpone the consideration of the motion on the table. I cannot but
express my surprise that the gentleman from Virginia should oppose this
motion, when several have declared that they are not prepared to vote
on this resolution. Gentlemen ought to recollect that, according to our
rules, on all motions which require the concurrence of the two Houses,
one day’s delay is necessary. Although this resolution is not of this
kind, yet it surely is not of inferior importance.

I believe that the gentleman alluded to by the motion would rather court
than shrink from an investigation of his official conduct. I believe,
also, that it has become necessary, from the discussion of this day, that
an investigation should take place. I am not, therefore, prepared at this
time to say whether I shall not ultimately vote for an inquiry. But it
appears to me that the course proposed is inverting the natural order of
things, inasmuch as it institutes an inquiry not growing out of facts,
but for facts. I believe also that the facts stated, if authenticated,
will furnish no ground for an impeachment. Circumstances attending this
motion show that the gentleman from Virginia does not consider them as
a sufficient ground for an impeachment. The refusal to hear the point
of law discussed was the act of the court. Mr. Chase did not sit alone
on the bench. Another judge must have been associated with and have
concurred with him. If so, why does not the resolution allude to the
other judge? Why select one judge, when both are equally implicated in
the charges?

I believe the most parliamentary way would be for a gentleman to state,
in the form of a resolution, the grounds of impeachment, and then to
refer such a resolution to a select committee for investigation. In this
mode the House may correctly institute an inquiry, and send for persons
and papers. This is the only parliamentary mode of proceeding. In every
case where impeachments have been made, the facts have been stated in
a resolution, concluding with a motion for an impeachment. The House
possesses no censorial power over the judges, except as incidental to
the power of impeachment. If gentlemen are possessed of facts, why not
state them in the form of a resolution, and move an impeachment? Then, if
the facts appeared to me to warrant an impeachment, I would not object
to their going to a select committee, though I believe the most proper
course would be for the House to send for persons and papers, and to
examine for themselves. But it is extremely novel and unprecedented for
the House, without facts, to institute an inquiry into the character of a
high officer of the Government.

May they not, in the same way, extend their inquiry into the conduct of
every judge in the United States, without stating any facts on which the
inquiry is founded? For these reasons I shall vote for postponing the
further consideration of this resolution for one day, on account of the
importance and delicacy of the subject, and the serious deliberation it
is entitled to. I do not know whether, if sufficient time is allowed for
consideration, and I shall be convinced that this course is consistent
with parliamentary usage, I shall not be in favor of an investigation.

Mr. ELLIOT.--When the yeas and nays are called, I shall on every occasion
rise in favor of taking them. I wish the votes I give in this House
entered on the Journal, and known to every citizen of America. The more I
contemplate the course pursued on this occasion, the more extraordinary
and unprecedented it appears to me. The gentleman from Virginia rose,
and, after an elegant exordium, stating that the streams of justice
should be preserved pure, and other fine things, told us that he had
received information of facts that convinced his mind that an inquiry
ought to be made into the conduct of a judge. Suppose the gentleman, on
facts known to himself, had stated his opinion, that an inquiry ought
to be made into the conduct of the President of the United States; we
have the same right to impeach the President as a judge. If the inquiry
would be improper in the one instance, without facts being adduced,
it would be equally so in the other. For we possess no censorial or
inquisitorial powers over the conduct of the judges of the Supreme Court.
If Judge Chase has been guilty of misconduct, let it be stated. If that
misconduct be of a private nature, let the House assume the character
of a grand jury, hold private sittings, receive evidence, and determine
whether the judge shall be impeached or not. The gentleman asks whether
a grand jury in the case of a charge of murder can send for persons.
Undoubtedly they can. But did gentlemen ever hear of their appointing
a committee to inquire whether a man charged with a partial offence
ought to be indicted? We are called on as the grand inquisitors of the
nation, to appoint an inquisitorial committee to get evidence; for it is
granted that as yet we have none. I believe that no committee of this
nature ought to be constituted, without previously ascertaining facts
that will warrant the delegation of such great power. No accusation,
even, is before us; but we are called upon to appoint a committee to
look one up--a committee to be invested with power to send for persons
and papers--a committee to inquire in private. I will never consent to
the appointment of such a committee, until facts that will justify the
inquiry are stated.

The facts adduced by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, if proved, could
not induce me to believe that the judge is impeachable. I may suspect
that his conduct was erroneous and improper, but I cannot conceive it
proper to impeach a single judge for the act of the court. Believing,
therefore, this conduct unprecedented, unparliamentary, and replete with
improprieties; believing it novel; believing that, in an affair of so
much consequence, we ought not to proceed with precipitation; believing
that we are entitled to demand one day to reflect upon it--I am proud,
on this occasion, to record my vote in favor of the postponement until
to-morrow; and if it were for a week, I should with equal pride and
pleasure vote for it.

Mr. HOLLAND moved an adjournment.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said, that considering a motion to adjourn equivalent to
a postponement for a day, he moved the taking the yeas and nays upon it.

Mr. HOLLAND moved an adjournment, on which the question was taken--yeas
52, nays 62.

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, Simeon
    Baldwin, George W. Campbell, John Campbell, William Chamberlin,
    Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett, Manasseh Cutler, Samuel
    W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dennis, Thomas Dwight, James
    Elliot, Edwin Gray, Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, John A.
    Hanna, Seth Hastings, James Holland, David Hough, Benjamin
    Huger, Joseph Lewis, jun., Henry W. Livingston, Thomas Lowndes,
    Matthew Lyon, Nahum Mitchell, James Mott, Thomas Plater,
    Samuel D. Purviance, Erastus Root, Tompson J. Skinner, John
    Cotton Smith, John Smith of Virginia, Joseph Stanton, William
    Stedman, James Stephenson, Samuel Taggart, Samuel Tenney,
    Samuel Thatcher, David Thomas, George Tibbits, John Trigg,
    Philip Van Cortlandt, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Daniel C.
    Verplanck, Peleg Wadsworth, Matthew Walton, Lemuel Williams,
    Marmaduke Williams, Joseph Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--David Bard, George Michael Bedinger, William Blackledge,
    Adam Boyd, John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William
    Butler, Joseph Clay, John Clopton, Jacob Crowninshield, Richard
    Cutts, William Dickson, Peter Early, Ebenezer Elmer, John
    W. Eppes, William Findlay, James Gillespie, Andrew Gregg,
    Thomas Griffin, Samuel Hammond, Josiah Hasbrouck, William
    Hoge, David Holmes, John G. Jackson, Walter Jones, William
    Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, John B. C. Lucas,
    Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Samuel L. Mitchill, Nicholas
    R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas
    Newton, jun., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer,
    John Patterson, Oliver Phelps, John Randolph, jun., Thomas M.
    Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee,
    Jacob Richards, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer
    Seaver, James Sloan, John Smilie, John Smith of New York,
    Richard Stanford, John Stewart, Philip R. Thompson, Abram
    Trigg, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, John Whitehill, and
    Richard Wynn.

The question of postponement recurring,

Mr. HUGER considered the course contemplated by the resolution as
improper, unparliamentary, and unprecedented. To make up his mind on the
course proper to be pursued, he was in favor of the postponement.

Mr. HOLLAND observed that he had moved an adjournment to allow those
gentlemen time for reflection who had not yet made up their minds on
the propriety of the motion. He was himself of this number. Having been
allowed no time for reflection, he did not feel perfectly satisfied with
the appointment of a committee of inquiry before any facts had been
substantiated. Desiring further time to form his judgment, and seeing no
occasion for precipitation, he should vote in favor of a postponement.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL.--I will not, at this late hour, detain the House
with the expression of my ideas in detail. I am as desirous as any
member of this House that the streams of justice should flow pure and
unsullied, as on their purity depend the safety and liberties of the
people of the United States. But when we are about to enter into measures
for preserving them clear, we owe it to ourselves to preserve order in
our conduct, and to act in such a manner as we shall be able to justify
to our constituents. Every member of this House, on such an occasion,
ought to be as cautious in his proceeding as a judge in delivering his
opinions, lest, while we are condemning the conduct of the judge, we
ourselves go astray from our duty. For this reason, I am against the
adoption of a measure which may throw a censure on a character invested
by the United States with high authority, until I am convinced we have
sufficient grounds for doing so. The resolution on the table can have
but one object, to wit: the direction of an inquiry whether sufficient
evidence can be procured to authorize an impeachment. I conceive that
this House cannot proceed in any other way. I am therefore of opinion,
that, before the vote for an inquiry, there ought to be probable grounds
that facts exist that authorize an impeachment, and that evidence can
be procured of their existence. I am not prepared to say, from any
thing which has been adduced, that such evidence does exist. I conceive
that until probable grounds are shown, we ought not to authorize such a
procedure, inasmuch as it may establish a precedent that we may hereafter
regret--a precedent which will put it in the power of any member to move
and obtain an inquiry into the conduct of the President, a judge, or
any other officer under the Government. Under these circumstances, I am
not prepared to say this is the regular course of proceeding. I do not
profess to have much knowledge of parliamentary proceedings, and have
therefore waited, before I expressed my opinions, to hear such precedents
as gentlemen could adduce. Having heard none, I conclude none exist.

I conceive that the act of this House, in voting for a committee of
inquiry, is equivalent to the expression of the opinion that they have
evidence of the probable grounds of the guilt of the judge. The gentleman
from Virginia has told us that the powers of this House are, in some
degree, like those of a grand jury. I agree that they have all the
powers of a grand jury, and it is on this ground that I deny the power
now contended for. I say that a grand jury has no right to send for
testimony: they have only a right to receive testimony from any one of
their body, and to receive such witnesses as the court may send them. If,
then, there be evidence in the present case, let us act upon it, even
though it be _ex parte_, and although that might, perhaps, be going too
far.

I repeat it, I have heard no statement satisfactory to my mind that there
are probable grounds for proceeding in this business. It is true, the
gentleman from Pennsylvania has made a statement, but that statement
appears to me to depend not so much on facts as on opinions; and it
is not my wish to decide on the propriety of the conduct of the judge
until the facts are before us. It is certain that a judge has a right to
control counsel, and to say when his mind is made up, while it is also
his duty to hear the allegations that shall be made.

In addition to these reasons for a postponement, I am also in favor of
it, because, whenever a sincere desire exists to gain information, which
can only be done by allowing further time, I shall always be in favor of
it, when no material injury can result from the indulgence.

Mr. MOTT.--I am in favor of the postponement, because I wish time for
consideration, and because I am against the resolution itself. I think
it is improper to go into such an inquiry before specific charges are
laid before the House, when it will be proper for the House to consider
whether those charges are sufficient to sustain an impeachment; then it
will be proper to proceed, and not till then. No charges have yet been
laid before the House: we have only been told by one member that he is
satisfied sufficient grounds exist.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH was sorry to be obliged to trespass again on the patience
of the House, but the direct application made to him by the gentlemen
from Tennessee and South Carolina, imposed upon him the necessity of
stating his reasons for proceeding in what they were pleased to term so
precipitate a manner. They ask, why not have laid the resolution on the
table by way of notice to the House? Because, sir, I cannot in a matter
of extreme delicacy make the opinions of other gentlemen the standard of
my own actions. I should have conceived the character implicated in the
resolution as having just cause of complaint against me, had I not been
ready to decide in a moment on it, and did I not press its immediate
decision. I should have deemed it an act of cruel injustice to have
hung the inquiry over his head even for a day. I should have expected
the reproach of setting suspicions afloat whilst I avoided examination
into them; for I should have deserved it, had I pursued the course which
gentlemen wish to adopt. I can see no difference between hanging up this
motion for a day or a year but the mere difference of time. What is the
object to be obtained? Do we wait for evidence, or any information,
which will assist us in forming a correct opinion? Not at all. To-morrow
the question will recur upon us--“Is it proper, from what has already
appeared, to institute an inquiry into the conduct of this officer?” And
this we are as competent to decide at this moment as at any future day.
When, however, gentlemen consider a resolution to make inquiry the same
as an inquiry already had, I am not surprised at finding myself opposed
to them in opinion. I repeat that all their arguments are applicable
to a motion of impeachment only. But it seems that no precedents have
been adduced, and time is wanted to hunt them up. Gentlemen should
recollect that but two cases of impeachment have taken place under this
Government; one of a Senator from Tennessee, the other of a district
judge of New Hampshire. By what precedents were the proceedings in these
cases regulated? How is it possible in a Government hardly in its teens,
where new cases must daily occur, as its various functions are called
into exercise, to find precedents? It did so happen, in the case of the
Senator from Tennessee, that the information on which his impeachment
was grounded came from the Executive. But suppose that information had
not been communicated by the Executive? Would that have precluded all
inquiry? Suppose, too, in the case of Mr. Pickering, that no information
had been received from the Executive, and that a gentleman from New
Hampshire had risen and said, “However painful the task, I deem it my
duty to state that the conduct of the judge of the district in which I
reside, has been such as renders him unfit for the important station
which he holds, and I therefore move for an inquiry into his conduct.”
Would the House have denied the inquiry? Will they rely altogether on the
attorney of the district, whose interest it is to be well with the judge,
and whose patience must be worn out with his misconduct before he will
undertake to call the attention of Government to it? Are gentlemen aware
of the delicate situation in which those officers are placed? Suppose
information had been given to a member of the malfeasance of a judge by
a person who should say: “It is not pleasant to originate accusations;
those who come forward in these cases undertake an invidious task;
while therefore I wish my name not to be mentioned, I shall be ready,
when called upon by proper authority, to give my testimony.” This is a
hypothetical case, but one by no means improbable. Would it not be a
point of honor not to expose the name of the informant?

But, say gentlemen, the charge is of a general nature. While I do not
admit the force of this remark, supposing it to be correct, I deny
that it is a general charge. The inquiry is general, but it is founded
on a statement made by the gentleman from Pennsylvania. I made no
other statement. I have said that I believed there existed grounds of
impeachment. What they are I shall not state here. They may be those
exhibited by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, or they may be others. Will
gentlemen assert that the statement of facts made by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania will not, if true, warrant an impeachment? What does it
amount to? A person under a criminal prosecution, having a constitutional
right to the aid of counsel in his defence, has, by the arbitrary and
vexatious conduct of the court, been denied this right. Such is the
nature of the charge. Has it come to this, that an unrighteous judge may
condemn whom he pleases to an ignominious death, without a hearing, in
the teeth of the constitution and laws, and that such proceedings should
find advocates here? Shall we be told that judges have certain rights,
and, whatever the constitution or laws may declare to the contrary, we
must continue to travel in the go-cart of precedent, and the injured
remain unredressed? No, sir, let us throw aside these leading-strings and
crutches of precedent, and march with a firm step to the object before us.

As to the motion of postponement, Mr. R. said it was of little
consequence to him whether it prevailed or not. On a charge of specific
malfeasance, he thought it impossible to refuse an inquiry. Whatever
should be the result, he should rest satisfied with having discharged
his duty to the House and to the nation. Believing the circumstances to
demand inquiry, he had made it. Without circulating whispers of reproach,
he had given the person implicated that opportunity of vindicating
his character which he himself should require if he stood in the same
unfortunate situation.

The committee rose, and the House adjourned.


FRIDAY, January 6.

_Importation of Slaves._

Mr. BARD.--For many reasons this House must have been justly surprised
by a recent measure of one of the Southern States. The impressions,
however, which that measure gave my mind, were deep and painful. Had I
been informed that some formidable foreign power had invaded our country,
I would not, I ought not, to be more alarmed than on hearing that South
Carolina had repealed her law prohibiting the importation of slaves.

In the one case we would know what to do. The emergency itself would
inspire exertion, and suggest suitable means of repelling the attack.
But here we are nonplussed, and find ourselves without resource. Our
hands are tied, and we are obliged to stand confounded, while we see the
flood-gate opened, and pouring incalculable miseries into our country. By
the repeal of that law, fresh activity is given to the horrid traffic,
which has been long since seriously regretted by the wise and humane,
but none have been able to devise an adequate remedy to its dreadful
consequences.

Congress has but little power, or rather they have no power to prevent
the growth of the evil. To impose a tax on imported slaves is the
extent of their power; but every one must see that it is infinitely
disproportionate to what the morality, the interest, the peace, and
safety, of individuals, and of the public, at this moment, demand.
And though in regard to their present case the power of the General
Government may be insufficient to check the mischief, yet I hope they
are disposed to discourage it, as far as they are authorized by the
constitution. Therefore I beg leave to offer the House the following
resolution:

    “_Resolved_, That a tax of ten dollars be imposed upon every
    slave imported into the United States.”

Ordered to lie on the table.

_Official conduct of Judge Chase._

The House resumed the consideration of the motion of the fifth instant,
“for the appointment of a committee to inquire into the official conduct
of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of
the United States,” and the said motion, as originally proposed, being
again read, in the words following, to wit:

    “_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire into the
    official conduct of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and to report their
    opinion whether the said Samuel Chase hath so acted in his
    judicial capacity, as to require the interposition of the
    constitutional power of this House:”

A motion was made and seconded to amend the same, by inserting, after
the words “one of the Associate Justices of the United States,” the
following words, “and of Richard Peters, District Judge of the district
of Pennsylvania.”

Mr. SMILIE.--When the motion now under consideration was made yesterday,
I should have felt surprised at the course which the debate took, had
I not often witnessed such things in former times. It seems to be
considered as improper that a gentleman should bring forward a motion
for an inquiry into the official conduct of a public officer, and expect
the House to comply with his request, unless he should at the same time
produce such evidence as shall prove the facts charged. If this course of
proceeding be correct, I have ever been in error. What does the gentleman
from Virginia ask? Suppose he has taken exception to the conduct of the
judge from some facts which have come to his own knowledge. Under such
circumstances it will be allowed that it is the duty of the House to make
the inquiry. When the question shall be whether an impeachment shall be
preferred, it will be proper that evidence should be produced. But now
only a committee is asked to receive evidence, and to determine whether
it be such as in their opinion will afford grounds for an impeachment.
It is impossible for me to conceive any way that can be pursued which
will be more favorable to the person whose character is implicated, than
that which is proposed. It is merely to inquire whether such facts can
be sustained as will afford grounds for an impeachment. Certainly in
this stage of the business it is not necessary to produce evidence to
the House, as the House are not competent to receive testimony, which
a committee is. It is a rule of this House that so much respect is due
to a member, that if he states that he possesses information proper to
be communicated to the House, but which in his opinion ought not to be
done but with closed doors, that, in such case, the doors shall be shut
without any vote of the House.

Surely, then, on the request of a member for a committee of inquiry, that
measure ought to be adopted. This, in my opinion, is the best course
that can be pursued for the person implicated. There is, it is true,
thereby expressed an opinion of some one member that this judge has done
wrong. So far his character is implicated; this is the only possible
way in which it is implicated. The committee are to inquire whether
there are grounds for an impeachment or not. If they report that there
are not grounds, the accusation will be dismissed; and if the report is
that there are grounds, the House will at once perceive the necessity of
taking this step to ascertain their existence.

Another ground of resistance is taken. It is said there are precedents
for this proceeding. I believe that all precedents must have an origin;
and that one person has as good a right to establish them as another.
Our Government is young, and only two cases of impeachment have occurred
under it. Most of our precedents respecting parliamentary proceedings are
borrowed from England, and, if precedents are necessary in this affair,
we must resort to that country for them. My opinion is that they are not
necessary, and that common sense and the reason of the thing are all
that are necessary to guide our decision in this case. There is, however,
in the British annals, no deficiency of precedents. The first I shall
mention is to be found in the case of the Earl of Strafford. I may be
told that this precedent was established in turbulent times: I may also
be told of the improper mode of proceeding. I do not pretend to vindicate
the whole course of procedure. I think it was wrong. But with regard to
the first stages of the business, I believe them to have been correct. It
will be seen that, in that instance, a more direct mode was pursued than
is proposed in the present case.

The precedent I allude to will be found in Hume’s History, vol. 2,
page 249. That historian says,--“A concerted attack was made upon the
Earl of Strafford in the House of Commons. It was led by Pym, who,
after expatiating on a long list of popular grievances, added, ‘we must
inquire from what fountain these waters of bitterness flow; and though,
doubtless, many evil councillors will be found to have contributed their
endeavors, yet is there one who challenges the infamous pre-eminence,
and who, by his courage, enterprise, and capacity, is entitled to the
first place among these betrayers of their country. He is the Earl of
Strafford, the Lieutenant of Ireland, and President of the Council of
York, who, in both places, and in all other provinces where he has been
intrusted with authority, has raised ample monuments of tyranny, and
will appear, from a survey of his actions, to be the chief promoter of
every arbitrary council.’ Many others entered into the same topics, and
it was moved that Strafford should be impeached. Lord Falkland alone,
though the known enemy of Strafford, entreated the House not to act with
precipitation. But Pym replied that delay would blast all their hopes;
without further debate the impeachment was voted, and Pym was chosen to
carry it up to the Lords.”

In this case it does not appear that any evidence was called for; a
member of the House of Commons got up and declared his opinion of that
officer, and the same session an impeachment was voted. This course of
proceeding is very different from that now proposed. I will now refer to
a more modern precedent which at the time does not appear to have been
objected to. It occurred in the reign of George I., and will be found
stated in Russel’s “Modern Europe,” vol. 4, page 398.

“A new Parliament was called in which the interest of the Whigs
predominated, and a secret committee, chosen by ballot, was appointed to
examine all the papers, and inquire into all the negotiations relative
to the late peace, as well as the cessation of arms by which it was
preceded. The Committee of Secrecy prosecuted their inquiry with the
greatest eagerness, and, in consequence of their report, the Commons
resolved to impeach Lord Bolingbroke, the Earl of Oxford, and the Duke of
Ormond, of high treason.”

One circumstance is worthy of attention. A cause of dissatisfaction
at the conduct of the judge has undoubtedly prevailed. Whether he is
wrongfully accused I will not say; but the dissatisfaction is manifest;
for the representatives of two respectable States lately came forward and
opposed his being assigned to circuits which embraced their States. This
single fact ought to make an impression on the House.

It is alleged that there is no proof before the House; but one thing is
notorious--is universally known. It is this, that this man (Fries) was
tried before that judge for his life, and was tried without being heard.
This fact cannot be disputed. When we consider the importance of the
life of a citizen, and know that such an event has taken place, is it
not the duty of the only body competent to inquire into the fact? With
other gentlemen, I believe that the fountains of justice ought to be kept
pure; I believe also that the judges are like other men, and that like
them they are subject to the common frailties of human nature; and I do
believe that when the frailties of human nature produce such effects, the
House cannot be justified to themselves or their country without making
an inquiry. Our duty to our country calls for it; our duty to the man
who is implicated also calls for it. If innocent, a proper regard to his
character claims it; and his friend from Maryland informs us that he will
rejoice at this opportunity of coming forward and vindicating himself.
If, then, the inquiry be equally necessary for placing the character
of the man upon its proper footing, and for preserving the purity of
justice, how can the House resist it?

Mr. DENNIS said he had only expressed an opinion that such an
investigation would be rather solicited than avoided by Judge Chase.

Mr. LEIB.--I am by no means an enemy to inquiry, but I am not a friend to
the partiality of this resolution. We are told that it is grounded on the
misconduct of the Circuit Court in Philadelphia on the trial of Fries.
If one judge of that court was guilty of misconduct, the other attending
judge must have been equally guilty. The conduct complained of was the
act of the court, and not of an individual judge. This resolution ought
therefore to embrace both the attending judges. My opinion is that both
are criminal, and ought to be brought to the bar of justice. I therefore
move an amendment of the resolution by introducing the name of Richard
Peters, so as to embrace an inquiry into the conduct of both judges, and
call for the yeas and nays on the amendment.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--I wish to state for the information of those gentlemen
who were not in the last Congress, that the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
whose statement, thus made, is the groundwork of the present inquiry,
did not offer any matter which tended to impeach the conduct of Mr.
Peters, while there was a specific charge of misconduct brought against
the other judge. In consequence of this charge I conceived it my duty to
make an inquiry into the official conduct of Judge Chase. I mention this
circumstance to show that however the charge of partiality may apply to
the resolution, it cannot apply to the mover.

Mr. LEIB.--I do not charge the mover with partiality, but the resolution
with embracing one judge instead of two. Judge Peters was on the bench
at the time. This outrage upon justice was the act of the court. How the
conduct, therefore, of one judge shall claim investigation, while that
of the other is passed over in silence, to me is mysterious. I think
impartial justice calls for an investigation into the conduct of both.

Mr. SMILIE said there could be no doubt that if the court was agreed,
Judge Peters had been equally guilty of misconduct. On the trial of
Fries, Mr. Chase presided, and Mr. Peters attended. If Judge Peters
concurred in the decision, he was equally culpable.

Mr. NICHOLSON.--This resolution is grounded upon a statement made
during the last session, by a member from Pennsylvania, implicating the
character of one of the justices of the Supreme Court. Upon information
thus given, my friend from Virginia has thought himself bound to bring
the business before the House, that an inquiry may be made into his
conduct. For myself I will never hesitate, I care not who the person
implicated may be, and however exalted his station, to give my vote for
inquiring into his official conduct, when a member of this House rises
in his place, and states that, in his opinion, he has been guilty of
misconduct. For this reason I shall vote for the amendment; it having
been stated by a member that Judge Peters was on the bench and did concur
with Judge Chase.

And on the question that the House do agree on the said amendment, it was
resolved in the affirmative--yeas 79, nays 37, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, Phanuel
    Bishop, William Blackledge, John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph
    Bryan, William Butler, John Campbell, Joseph Clay, John
    Clopton, Jacob Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, John Dennis,
    William Dickson, Peter Early, James Elliot, Ebenezer Elmer,
    John W. Eppes, William Eustis, William Findlay, James
    Gillespie, Edwin Gray, Andrew Gregg, Thomas Griffin, John A.
    Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Seth Hastings, William Hoge, James
    Holland, David Holmes, Benjamin Huger, John G. Jackson, Walter
    Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, Joseph
    Lewis, jun., Thomas Lowndes, John B. C. Lucas, Andrew McCord,
    David Meriwether, Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah
    Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph H. Nicholson,
    Gideon Olin, John Patterson, Oliver Phelps, John Randolph,
    jun., Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea
    of Tennessee, Jacob Richards, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons,
    Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver, Tompson J. Skinner, James
    Sloan, John Smilie, John Smith of Virginia, Richard Stanford,
    Joseph Stanton, James Stevenson, John Stewart, David Thomas,
    Philip R. Thompson, John Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Isaac
    Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Daniel C. Verplanck, Marmaduke
    Williams, Richard Wynn, Joseph Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Simeon Baldwin, David Bard, George Michael Bedinger,
    Silas Betton, Adam Boyd, William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden,
    Clifton Claggett, Manasseh Cutler, Samuel W. Dana, John
    Davenport, Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, David Hough,
    Samuel Hunt, Thomas Lewis, Henry W. Livingston, William
    McCreery, Nahum Mitchell, Samuel L. Mitchill, James Mott,
    Beriah Palmer, Thomas Plater, Samuel D. Purviance, Joshua
    Sands, John Cotton Smith, John Smith of New York, Henry
    Southard, Samuel Taggart, Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher,
    George Tibbits, Abram Trigg, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Peleg
    Wadsworth, John Whitehill, and Lemuel Williams.

Mr. LOWNDES.--Were I to be governed by considerations other than those
resulting from a sense of duty, I should vote for this resolution, as
I believe it would afford the character implicated the readiest mode
of vindication. But I do not feel so high a respect for the opinion of
any one member as to give up my opinion to his, as to the course most
proper to be pursued on this occasion. The gentleman who has offered this
resolution says, that the facts on which it is founded are within his own
knowledge. Let the gentleman then lay them before the House. Otherwise we
shall legislate, not on the facts before us, but merely on the opinion
of a single member, on facts only known to himself. We are told that
this motion is founded on the statement of an honorable gentleman from
Pennsylvania. What is that statement? That one of the counsel in the
trial of Fries informed him that the judge declared the counsel had no
right to argue a point of law after the mind of the court was made up. I
ask if any gentleman is prepared to say that the judge was wrong? I am
not prepared to say so. While, too, I am unwilling to detract from the
respect due to the statement of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, I am
equally unwilling to subscribe to his opinions. He may have misconceived
the information communicated to him. It is said that it is necessary to
preserve pure the streams of justice. I agree in this remark, and I say
that the resolution on the table goes to destroy the independence of the
judges, and of consequence to pollute the streams of justice; to make the
judges the flexible tools of this House. It is impossible that under such
circumstances men of talents and integrity will take seats on the bench,
when their character shall be liable to be scrutinized without any facts
being previously adduced.

I think it absolutely necessary that this resolution should not pass. For
if it passes, it will establish a precedent that any member may procure
an investigating committee to inquire into the conduct of any executive
or judicial officer merely upon his opinion, unsupported by facts, that
such an inquiry is necessary. Suppose parties to be nearly equally
divided; a member has only to propose an inquiry into the conduct of any
officer to whom he may feel inimical, and thereby throw a cloud upon his
character, and render him the object of suspicion. Thus do I fear that
this precedent will furnish the instrument of vengeance of one party
against another. The price we pay for our liberties is the existence
of parties among us; but it becomes us rather to restrain than to
invigorate their passions. If we establish this precedent we shall render
impeachment so easy, as greatly to facilitate the means of oppression.

Mr. LOWNDES concluded by saying, that in this affair he threw party
considerations entirely out of view. He was personally unacquainted with
Judge Chase, and if there was a single affidavit of his misconduct, the
appointment of the committee of inquiry should have his vote; but that,
under the circumstances attending it, he considered the measure improper
in every point of view in which he could consider it.

Mr. FINDLAY observed, that though the abstract right of the members
to move for an inquiry into the conduct of public officers, in order
to find whether presumptions against their character afforded ground
for impeachment, was not expressly denied, yet the manner in which the
opposition to the present resolution was conducted was equal to denying
the right. He trusted, however, that the House would support this right,
as it was one of the most important of any with which they were vested.
It grew out of the power of impeachment, and it was necessary for the
exercise of that power, and was justified by precedents. By the rules of
the House any member has a right to have the doors shut, in order to move
such a resolution as he thinks proper. This has been usual in cases of
impeachment in Britain, from which we derive the forms of impeachment.
There it has been common to shut the doors, and for a member to move for
an impeachment of a public officer, and to procure the officer impeached
to be taken into custody before there was time or opportunity to take
any other testimony than the information stated by the member who moved
the resolution, probably supported by public fame. Taking the party into
custody was necessary to the circumstances of that country and the extent
of punishment, which might not only affect the liberty and property, but
even the life of the party found guilty. It was necessary, because of the
influence of the powerful nobility, who might have it in their power to
stand in their defence; but, as all the penalties in the power of this
Government to inflict by impeachment only affect the official trust and
character, taking into custody is unnecessary.

He observed, that the arguments in opposition to the resolution turned
chiefly on the ground of expediency and of precedent.

In his opinion, it appeared not only expedient but necessary, from the
notoriety of facts on which the resolution was founded; that they were
publicly known and had impaired confidence in these judges, could not
be denied. That it was known to Congress during the last session was
acknowledged. It was not only known, but Congress acted on it. A bill was
in progress before this House, appointing the attendance of judges to
particular districts--the members of two respectable States, in which,
by the bill, Judge Chase was appointed to attend, objected unanimously
to that appointment, because they had not confidence in him; and the
facts on which the resolution is founded were stated on the floor, upon
which the House altered the bill and appointed another judge to that
district. This was a strong testimony that Congress believed that this
open expression of want of confidence in that gentleman was justified by
the facts that had been stated. He said, that though he had not at that
time a seat in the House, he had expected an inquiry to be made into the
causes of this want of confidence at that time. Perhaps it was prevented
by the shortness of the session.

It is expedient for the character of the gentlemen and for the public
good; for the gentlemen themselves, if they are innocent or have acted
on justifiable ground; it is necessary that their characters may be
vindicated, and confidence in their public conduct restored. It is
expedient for the public good, because if the judges are guilty in the
manner stated--if they have justly lost the confidence of the people and
of Congress, as it appears, by the transaction of last session, one of
them has done, the case ought to be examined and the citizens protected;
for if he was unfit to preside on the bench for one district, he is unfit
to preside in another. It is expedient, in order to secure the confidence
of the citizens in the Government itself.

But precedents are called for by the gentlemen opposed to the resolution,
and several of them contend that such special facts should be stated as
would be unexceptionable ground of impeachment, before the inquiry is
gone into. A gentleman from Vermont, (Mr. ELLIOT,) who argued yesterday
in favor of postponement for further information on the subject, in the
same argument said that he never would agree to the appointment of a
committee of inquiry, until the charges were first stated and proved to
his satisfaction. Mr. F. said he was astonished at this inconsistency.
If the facts were first stated and established, appointing a committee
of inquiry would be an absurdity. What would they inquire after but what
they already knew? That gentleman and others, in order to defeat the
resolution, gave the object of it an odious designation: they called it
an inquisition, and spoke of it in such terms as if it was the well-known
Spanish law of that name. The character of that court was too well known
to the members of this House to require definition; it was sufficient
to say that in it witnesses were examined without the knowledge of the
party accused; that it compelled the accused to give testimony against
themselves, and had authority to pass sentence of the most dreadful
kind, without appeal. The gentlemen knew that no such thing was intended
by the resolution. The character of the judges had been impeached in
public opinion by numerous citizens of all descriptions. Congress on
that account gave a decisive testimony of want of confidence in one of
them. The object of the resolution was to inquire whether there was a
real foundation for this want of confidence and ill fame. If Congress
did not make inquiry in such cases, who was to do it? It did not by
the constitution belong to any other authority; every other method of
proceeding would be as ingeniously objected to as the one proposed, by
those who wished to prevent further proceedings in the case; denying the
means of bringing forward impeachment, had the same effect as if the
power of impeachment was renounced.

The power of this House has been asserted to be similar to that of a
grand jury; this seems to be conceded on both sides, but though it bears
a resemblance, it was not strictly so--it was more extensive. Grand
juries were authorized to present such indictments or such complaint or
information as were submitted to them by the Attorney General, or which
they knew of their own knowledge. The attorney also inquires if there
is probable ground for the complaint, and brings the witnesses before
the jury, who examine them to establish the facts alleged; but this
House has no officers authorized to make inquiry and bring forward the
business in due form; therefore the House possess both the power of the
Attorney General and the grand jury, with relation to impeachment; for
where a power of decision is given, all the powers necessary to carry
that decision into effect are implied. The making inquiry, procuring
witnesses, or other testimony, and preparing the case in due form, is the
object of the resolution; and if the House does not do it in this or some
other such method, there is no other agent authorized to do it.

With respect to precedent and parliamentary usage, Mr. F. said he had
formerly examined many, but was not prepared to state them at this
time, and did not think them necessary on this occasion. In all the
examples of impeachment by the British Parliament, from the reign of
Henry VIII., when parliamentary power was reduced to a mere shadow, till
the present time, when the parliamentary power has been amply enlarged
and established, and their proceedings become more uniform, there will
be shades of difference found in all of them, arising from various
circumstances; we have few precedents of our own, and of these few none
of them apply to the present case. It is the constitutional duty of this
House to impeach, when impeachment is necessary, and of the Senate to
decide on impeachments; but with respect to the manner in which each
House should proceed, they are not trammelled by forms nor entangled in
precedents.

There are, however, examples of proceedings both with the British
Parliament and with us, as similar to the method now proposed as the
various cases would admit. With ourselves, the case of the unfortunate
Western expedition mentioned by my colleague (Mr. GREGG) yesterday,
was much more to the purpose than the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr.
GRISWOLD) was willing to admit. Mr. F. said he had the honor to be one
of the committee of inquiry which sat on that subject a great proportion
of two sessions. The expedition was too late in setting out to the Indian
country; they were said to have been illy provided with necessaries,
and long detained for want of them; a large proportion of the army were
killed or taken by the savages, and all the stores with the army left.
The citizens were discontented, and numerous complaints were heard, but
none knew with certainty whom to blame; a committee was appointed to
examine witnesses and report the testimony to the House, in order to
discover the party who had been to blame. Some had charged it on the
commanding General, others on the Secretary of War, and others on the
Commissary of Military Stores, and these last endeavored to wrest the
blame from themselves and fix it on the General. It was certain that a
great misfortune had happened, but it was not certain that any officer
was to blame; no charge had been made to Congress against any officer,
yet Congress thought proper to make an inquiry, and it was not opposed on
account of want of form, or want of precedents, by any of the friends of
the parties. Towards the close of the first session, the committee made a
concise report, referring to a great amount of testimonies. Some of the
parties implicated by the report thought themselves injured by it, and
it was alleged that other witnesses ought to be examined. Consequently,
at the next session, the business was recommitted to the same committee,
and as it was near the close of the last session of that Congress, before
all the witnesses were procured and examined, and the parties heard by
the committee, each of the parties wrote and delivered to the committee
a large book of explanations and defence. The committee reported a large
wooden box full of testimony, of original letters and instructions,
and the three books of explanations and defence accompanied with some
observations. It was not possible for that Congress to enter on the
business, and the cause being of a transient nature, and the parties who
applied for the second inquiry not wishing a disclosure of the testimony,
the business was not afterwards entered on; but the mass of testimony,
&c., is yet in possession of Congress. This, it is presumed, applies well
in favor of the present resolution.

Gentlemen object to the resolution because of the indelicacy of
implicating the character of a judge. They seem to believe the character
of a judge to be sacred and immaculate. But are not judges men? Are they
not men subject to like passions and like feelings as other men? Judges
and other official characters voluntarily surrender a part of the rights
they enjoyed in common with other citizens, in return for the honors and
emoluments of office; others have a right to the privilege of trial by
jury, in the decision of all charges against them; but public officers,
by accepting of office, subject themselves under this Government, to
trial by impeachment. Subjecting judges to impeachment, indicates,
unequivocally, a constitutional opinion that judges would be even more
liable to transgress than other citizens, and might transgress in a more
aggravated manner than mere citizens. This mode of trial, however, in
this country, is become almost a harmless thing; it is deprived of more
than half its terrors. It does not reach life or property, but only the
official character.

Mr. F. said he was a friend to the independence of judges, but that
all independence in all Governments had its limits and restraints. It
was not provided for the aggrandizement of the judges, but for the
protection of the citizens. So far as it is applicable to this purpose,
it is necessary, but any further, it is injurious and subjected to
restraint. Under no Government with which we are acquainted are the
judges rendered so independent as that of the United States. In Britain,
from which we have derived the mode of our judiciary, the judges were
appointed during pleasure; till, little more than a century ago,
they were rendered independent by the Revolution Parliament for the
security of the people against the encroachments of the Monarch, and
the overbearing influence of a very powerful nobility; and for this
purpose it was not only salutary, but absolutely necessary. But even with
that boasted independence, that Judiciary is subjected to restraints
and modes of correction not provided in the Federal Constitution. The
judges are liable to be removed from office by the vote of both Houses
of Parliament, without trial. They are liable to be removed, or their
standing changed by act of Parliament. That Parliament, on whose act
their independence depends, can repeal the act; the two Houses of
Parliament can make and unmake their Kings. They are also liable, by an
act of attainder, not only to lose their office, but their estate, the
honor of their families, and even their lives.

The Judiciaries in all the States of the Union are rendered less or more
independent; some are appointed for shorter and some for longer periods.
In New Jersey, they are appointed for seven years; they were so in
Pennsylvania formerly; since the revision of the constitution they are
appointed during good behavior; they are, however, subjected not only
to removal by impeachment, but also by the vote of two-thirds of each
House, for any cause which the House do not think a sufficient cause of
impeachment; but in the Federal Government there is no method provided
for removing them for the most scandalous indiscretions or incapacity,
as even when they may unfortunately be under mental derangement, except
by impeachment, which is inapplicable to official crimes, and conducted
with tedious forms. The power of impeaching being the only shield
provided by the Government for the protection of the citizens from
judicial oppression, and this House being the only constitutional organ
for obtaining information of official excesses, and bringing forward
articles of impeachment, ought not to bind up their own hands from doing
their duty, and this they will do if they reject the resolution now on
the table.

But while the gentlemen consider the character of these judges so sacred
that their conduct cannot be inquired into, notwithstanding such proofs
of want of confidence in them, and that as a gentleman near me from South
Carolina (Mr. LOWNDES) has said that he is afraid of impeachment, and
grounds his fears on the incapacity or the unfitness of the members of
this House, or because the members of this House may abuse the power;
Mr. F. asked, were not the members of this House selected and qualified
for the discharge of this necessary duty? Were they not appointed by a
respectable authority as the judges? Were they not under a solemn oath
of office for the faithful discharge of this as well as every part of
their high trust? And were they not protected by special privileges and
protection during the discharge of their trust equally with the judges,
and their stations as respectable as the judges’? They are not only
protected from civil actions, but are not subjected to impeachment for
misbehavior in office as the judges are. They are, in their official
capacity, subjected only to the censure of public opinion. If this is
true, it is improper, it is impolitic, for the members of this House to
degrade their own character: it amounts to saying they are not capable
of discharging the trust they are solemnly bound to discharge, and
ought not to have been invested with. He knew, however, that this was
only introduced as an excuse for unwillingness. But the same gentleman
adds, as a reason for opposing the resolution, that he is not acquainted
with the history of the business. That is probably the case with him
and others, especially such as had not a seat in the last session of
Congress, or who resided at a great distance from the scene alluded to in
the resolution. Admitting this to be true, the best and the only regular
way to become acquainted with the history of the case, is to carry the
resolution into effect--to have a committee appointed with such power as
would enable them to procure such information as that gentleman and every
other member could depend on. The gentleman’s objection, in fact, is one
of the strongest arguments in favor of the resolution. The gentleman
from South Carolina has, however, offered one other objection to the
resolution, which merits some notice. He has said that if a committee is
appointed for the object proposed by the resolution, men of character and
talents will not accept of appointments in the Judiciary. The solidity
of this objection will be best examined by the test of observation and
experience. It has been already mentioned that several States have
appointed their supreme judges for short periods, and that others have
vested the Legislature with the power of removing judges from office
without impeachment, merely on their own opinion. Can the gentleman
from South Carolina say--can any member on this floor, where all the
States are represented, say--that these States are deficient in judges
of respectability and talents? They cannot say so--there is no such
complaint. The Judiciary of New Jersey, where the judges are chosen but
for seven years, is as respectable, and the application of her laws as
well brought home to the security and happiness of her citizens as they
are in the States where judges are appointed for life. The same may be
asserted with confidence of the State of Pennsylvania before the revision
of her constitution, as they are since. There is this difference,
however: where they have been appointed for limited periods there have
been no impeachments or removals, and generally, if not always, the
judges were reappointed, and justice was well administered; but since
they have been appointed for good behavior, there have, at least in
Pennsylvania, been both, and more complaints of inattention, expense, and
delays, in the administration of justice than had been formerly. Many
of the judges, however, are very respectable, and enjoy a high degree
of confidence, but not more confidence than they did before the change
of the constitution. There has been no attempt to remove or impeach the
judges of the Supreme Court of that State.

To inquire into the conduct of the judges when confidence is evidently
wanting, is the only true way to secure the respectability of the
Judiciary. If that necessary confidence is withdrawn without cause,
an official inquiry will restore confidence and the usefulness of the
judges. This observation is supported by precedent and parliamentary
usage. In that country from which precedents are so frequently sought,
one precedent offers itself to recollection. In the year 1730, a
committee of the British House of Commons was appointed to examine the
jails. In the course of examination, the committee discovered that
Sir Robert Eyres, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, a judge of very
respectable character, was suspected, not of tyranny on the bench, or
of putting any man’s life in jeopardy, but of having held an improper
correspondence with a person confined for crime or misdemeanor, and this
suspicion chiefly supported by anonymous letters. A committee of the
House of Commons were appointed to make inquiry, and it was found, to the
satisfaction of the committee and of the people, that the allegations on
which the suspicion was founded were false, and the judge’s character was
vindicated and restored.

Mr. F. said this precedent applied well to the present case. If the
judges mentioned in the resolution had done their duty, their characters
would be vindicated by the inquiry, and the public confidence in their
integrity restored; if they were guilty, and not entitled to confidence,
they ought to be removed from office, and neither the one nor the other
could be done unless the inquiry proposed was authorized.

He said that the inquiry was necessary to secure the purity, honor,
and usefulness of the Judiciary Department. If that House refused
or neglected to exert the powers vested therein for securing public
confidence in the Judiciary, unprincipled men would find means of
recommending themselves to appointments, and would vitiate the streams
where justice is expected to flow, and the citizens would be oppressed
without the means or hopes of redress, and would feel the effects of
tyrannical power in the administration of a government which, in its
other departments, was the greatest and best of any in the world. Let
proper inquiries be made where they are necessary; let the character of
judges unjustly charged be vindicated, and the vicious and unworthy be
removed, and improper characters will cease to intrude themselves; their
friends will not dare to recommend, and Congress will have confidence
that the laws which they pass will be applied agreeably to their genuine
principles, to the protection and ease of the citizens; if we do not
provide for this, we had better cease to make laws.

If virtuous men are appointed and the vicious discouraged, Congress
may, from particular circumstances, be called on to make inquiries,
but very rarely indeed to be employed in impeachments, (no men of
real virtue and talents would refuse a seat on the bench for fear of
inquiry or impeachment.) He said that the judges of the Supreme Court
in the State he had the honor of representing, though they differed in
political opinions, administered justice with such purity and diligence,
that though some of them had been long in office, they enjoyed the
confidence of the citizens, were in no danger of impeachment or removal
by vote, and he believed would not shrink from inquiry if necessary.
The more extensive the confidence of the citizens that was reposed in
the Judiciary, the easier it would be to supply vacancies with men of
character and talents. He said that among several other observations
which occurred to his mind, with offering which he would not now detain
the House, he had once thought of stating other charges against the
official conduct of these judges, of which he had been well informed, but
on due reflection he declined mentioning them, and thought it most for
the public good to insist on the appointment demanded by a member on the
responsibility of his own official character, and as a matter of right,
and would do nothing that would impair the weight of the precedent that
he hoped would be set by agreeing to the resolution as it stood.

Mr. F. said that having so long engaged the attention of the House he
would conclude by observing, that as the case now stood it is proper for
all the members to vote for the resolution; those that believed as he
did, that there was a want of necessary confidence in those judges, and
that this want of confidence was occasioned by their unauthorized and
oppressive conduct, were obliged in conscience to vote for the inquiry;
and every member who believed the judges to have done their duty, and
that the public confidence is withdrawn from them without cause, are
bound in duty to vote for the resolution, in order that the judges may
have an opportunity to vindicate their character, that confidence in them
being restored they may become useful to the public; therefore, in every
light he could view it, he was convinced it was his duty to vote for the
resolution, and would act accordingly.

Mr. JACKSON.--As, Mr. Speaker, this subject is novel in its nature,
and may be important in its consequences, I presume there exists a
disposition to hear the reasoning which any gentleman may be disposed to
offer upon it. It is with this view that I rise to express my opinion
in favor of creating a committee of inquiry. I consider this House as
the grand inquest of the nation, whose duty it is to inquire, on a
proper representation, into the conduct of every official character
under the Government. Like a grand jury, we ought, in my opinion, at the
instance of any member, to send for all persons possessed of information
calculated to throw light upon the conduct of any individual inculpated.
A contrary doctrine would lead to the most unfortunate consequences.
It would lead to this, that a minority would never be able to inquire
into the conduct of a State offender, unless such inquiry were favored
by the majority. As it is now contended that the inquiry is not a
matter of right which any member may demand, but a matter of favor, to
be granted according to the pleasure of the majority, it may be said
that, if a majority favor an individual, he will always escape without
an impeachment. But I believe otherwise; and that the Senate, like a
virtuous judge, will not suffer an atom of prejudice or partiality to
fall into the scales of justice.

But, say gentlemen, though it may be the duty of the House to impeach
an officer, it is necessary that facts, warranting such an impeachment,
should be first presented. This is not the course pursued in cases where
a grand jury is called upon to act. If a murder is committed, it is their
duty to inquire, and diligently inquire, who is guilty of the act, and to
send for all persons capable of giving information respecting it. Such is
the practice. If it shall be required to furnish facts, as is urged by
gentlemen, the consequence will be that offences of the highest nature
will be committed with impunity. It has been observed that it is odious
to undertake the task of a public informer. But what the constitution
and laws make our duty, so far from being odious, is honorable; because
we thereby discharge a duty imposed upon us by our oaths, and because we
show ourselves unawed by the vicious conduct of bad men. If the character
of a public informer be odious, are we to expect that private individuals
will come forward with affidavits? In such a case, to say the least of
it, the duty would be of an unpleasant nature.

We have, in the course of this debate, been frequently called upon
for precedents, and been told, that, when found, they ought to
be adhered to. In a country from which we are accustomed to draw
precedents--England--common report has been considered as a sufficient
authority for similar inquiries. We do not, however, ask for an inquiry
in this case on common report, but on the declaration of a member of
this House, made in his place. Suppose there was no such declaration,
has not a common report, from Maine to Georgia, condemned the conduct
of the judge in the case of Fries and others, at Philadelphia, in the
case of a grand jury in Delaware, whom he directed to inquire for
seditious practices, and in the case of Callender, in Virginia? Has
not the general sentiment of the country charged him with having, in
these cases, abused his powers as a judge by tyrannizing over those who
were brought before him? If we possess the right to inquire, on common
report, surely we ought to institute this inquiry on the prevalence of
so general a sentiment. To such an inquiry I would unhesitatingly agree,
if the character of the President were implicated, the opinion of the
gentleman from Vermont to the contrary notwithstanding. I would likewise
agree to make the same inquiry in any other case; because the inquiry
would redound to the honor of the individual implicated, if innocent; and
because, if guilty, he ought to be punished.

I am sorry my friend from Pennsylvania stated any facts, as I do not
consider it necessary that the House should be acquainted with any facts
to make this inquiry; and because I think the facts, stated as grounds
of impeachment, are not such as will warrant an impeachment. I have
always understood that it was the right of a judge to expound the law,
and I have known frequent instances where the court have refused the
counsel the liberty of discussing the law on points on which they have
made up their minds. While I am free to declare that the conduct of the
court in the trial of Fries is not, in my opinion, such as to require
an impeachment, yet I am in favor of instituting the inquiry. But, say
gentlemen, by the passage of this resolution, we shall censure the judge.
I believe not. If I believed so, I would first require testimony; for I
hold it a good principle, that no man ought to be condemned until he has
been heard. In my opinion, this resolution will have no such tendency;
as, if the judge has not been guilty of misconduct, the inquiry will
redound to his honor, and as it is the duty of a virtuous man to demand
an inquiry whenever charged with an offence.

Gentlemen, in opposition to this measure, say they wish to guard against
suspicion. But suspicion has long since gone forth; has been heard and
re-echoed from every part of the Union; and the only way of defeating it,
if ill-founded, is to institute an inquiry, and if the character of the
judge be innocent, to pronounce it so. I am surprised to find gentlemen,
who profess a friendship for the character of one of the persons
implicated, opposed to this inquiry, when they believe him innocent.
I should suppose it their peculiar duty to call for the inquiry, that
the accused might have an opportunity of proving to the world that his
character has been assailed without cause.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD.--After what has passed on this floor, there can be
no doubt that the gentlemen whose characters are implicated by this
resolution will ardently desire an investigation of their conduct; and
if, on this floor, we were merely to consult our own wishes, we should
unanimously agree on an investigation. But this is not our duty; our duty
is to take on this, as well as on all other occasions, a correct course;
to take those steps only which are warranted. It is because I doubt,
after considerable deliberation, whether this course is warranted, that
I am opposed to it. What, I ask, is the nature of the resolution on the
table? It contains no charges against the judges implicated; it only
proposes to raise a committee to inquire whether their official conduct
has been such as to justify the interposition of the constitutional
power of this House. If a committee of inquiry is raised, what will be
their powers? One thing will certainly follow. They will be clothed with
a power to send for persons, and probably for papers. Is it consistent
with principle to appoint a committee, which, from its nature, must be
secret, with power to ransack the country in the first instance for
accusations against the judges, and then for proofs to support them? Is
this correct? Are gentlemen prepared to say so? to seek for accusations,
and then for proofs to support those accusations, against high officers
of the Government? For one, I believe that this course is not correct. I
believe it to be dangerous. I agree with the gentleman from Vermont, that
it operates in the nature of an inquisition. A committee will be raised
to act in secret, first to find an accusation, and next to prove it. If
there is now any accusation against the judges, let it be made; let it be
made on this floor; and, as the gentleman from New Jersey has observed,
let us ascertain, if true, whether it will be a sufficient ground for
an impeachment. This will be a correct course, and it will be the only
safe course. If, on the contrary, we proceed in the manner proposed, it
will be attended with this consequence: at the commencement of every
session we shall raise a secret committee, to compose an inquisition, to
ascertain whether there are not charges against some public officer, and
to search for proofs to justify them. Is the Government of this country
founded on this principle? I know that this secret course of procedure
is practised by the Spanish Government, and by some others, but I never
thought that it would be the practice of this Government. When a charge
is made against a public officer, it ought to be boldly made. It ought to
be made here, and should be committed to writing. Instead of this being
done, there is no charge made. The resolution contains none. It is merely
calculated to raise a secret committee. Why? Because the gentleman
from Virginia is of opinion that it is proper. Is his opinion, or the
opinion of any other gentleman, to govern this House? Are we brought to
this? I trust this is not the case. I trust that gentlemen will think it
necessary not only to consider his opinion, but to form their own. What
can gentlemen say, if they agree to this resolution? That they voted
to investigate the conduct of two judges. Why? Because the gentleman
from Virginia says it is necessary to investigate. Why investigate?
Because the gentleman demands it. This is the language of that gentleman
yesterday. Because a gentleman of this House gives his opinion of the
course proper to be pursued on this occasion, it does not follow that we
are to be governed by it. We may respect it; but we must respect our own
opinions still more, if we faithfully discharge our duty. I am sensible
that some facts have been mentioned by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
or rather, that that gentleman has heard a story; but it is mere hearsay.

I ask, also, how this formidable charge has rested to this day? When
and where did the transaction, on which it is founded, happen? In
Philadelphia, and in the winter of the year 1800, when Congress were in
session within twenty rods of the place where the court was held. The
gentleman from Virginia, as well as other members on this floor, were
then in the House. The case being, I believe, the only one in which there
was a charge of treason, excited, in a considerable degree, the attention
of members, many of whom attended the trial. How comes it, then, that
this charge was not then made? If it shall be said the House did not
interfere at that time because the criminal was lying under sentence
of death, it will be recollected that, in 1801, Fries was pardoned.
Why was not the inquiry then made? If it shall be said that it would
have been imprudent to make it on account of the party then in power,
why was it not made in the seventh Congress, when a change of men took
place? How can gentlemen reconcile this great delay with the high regard
they profess for the purity of the streams of justice, and for justice
itself? For such is the respect they entertain for justice, that they
have determined to bring to conviction this unjust and criminal judge.
Gentlemen ought to account for this culpable neglect. It is impossible
that they should have been ignorant of the trial of this man. It was not
a sudden or a hidden thing, done in a corner; it was done in public, in
the face of the Legislature, and yet it has slept to the present day.
Under such circumstances, I submit it to the House, whether much respect
ought to be paid to the hearsay of the gentleman from Pennsylvania. The
very delay, and other circumstances attending this transaction, show
that it is not of the serious nature contended. I therefore think that,
if properly brought before the House, and suffered to rest upon proof,
it would constitute no ground for impeachment. As to the proposed
form of proceeding, if we examine precedents, we shall find that it
is not warranted by them. None mentioned compare with the case under
consideration. The precedent in the case of Lord Bolingbroke does not
compare with that. In that case the House of Commons raised a secret
committee to examine the negotiations made for a peace. The committee
was not raised to impeach Lord Bolingbroke, but to investigate the
negotiations of the Ministry; and on the disclosure of facts, which took
place on that occasion, the impeachment was grounded. Such, also, was
the case in the instance of the Western expedition. The House appointed
a committee vested with general powers to inquire into the causes of its
failure, without particular reference to the conduct of any person.

If we turn our attention to British precedents, we shall find that
a committee has never failed to investigate the official conduct of
any person contemplated to be impeached. In the case of Hastings, Mr.
Burke came forward and moved an impeachment directly. In all cases this
course has been pursued in the British House of Commons. So far as we
have precedents in this country, a similar course has been pursued. In
the instance of Governor Blount, the Executive transmitted documents
to this House, which contained, as it was supposed, evidence of his
guilt; they were referred to a committee to examine them, and also to
determine whether it was proper to print them. The committee reported
that, in their opinion, they contained evidence of his guilt, and he
was impeached. In the case of Judge Pickering, the same course has
been pursued. The Executive transmitted documents to the House which
contained, as it was supposed, proofs of misconduct, and the House
proceeded to an impeachment. These precedents confirm the principle of
those drawn from the practice of the British House of Commons. What
course is now proposed? Without any charge against the judges, without
any man saying they are guilty of any misconduct, we are about to appoint
a secret committee, to determine whether any charges can be made, and
whether any proofs to support them can be found. Although I am willing
that the conduct of these gentlemen shall be investigated, for I am sure
they must desire it, and although I have no objection to impeach them,
if gentlemen wish it, and exhibit proper proofs on which to ground it,
yet I cannot consent to pursue a course so improper as that now proposed.
For this reason I am against the resolution, not because I am hostile to
an investigation, but because I cannot consent to the appointment of a
secret committee to search, in the first instance, for an accusation, and
to look for proofs to justify it.

Mr. FINDLAY rose to explain. He said it was not the object of the House,
in their investigation of the causes of the failure of the Western
expedition, to make new arrangements, but to inquire into the conduct of
certain officers who had directed it, viz: the Secretary of War, the
Commander-in-chief, and the Commissary.

Mr. NICHOLSON said, he happened not to be in the House yesterday at the
moment when the resolution under consideration was introduced; and when
he entered he found the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. R. GRISWOLD) on
the floor, who concluded his remarks by moving a postponement. Mr. N. did
not think it then correct to offer remarks upon the main question, but as
the resolution itself was now under consideration, and the subject of no
common nature, he could not think of passing a silent vote upon it.

When he rose to-day, for a few moments, on the motion to amend, by
inserting the name of Judge Peters, he had then declared, and he now
begged leave to repeat it, that whenever any member of the House should
rise in his place and state that any officer of the Government had been
guilty of official misconduct, he had no hesitation in saying, that he
would consent to an inquiry. He cared not how exalted his station, or how
far he was raised above the rest of the community; the very circumstance
of his superior elevation would prove an additional incitement. Such, he
said, was the nature of the Government, and so important the duty in this
respect devolved upon the House of Representatives, that the conduct of
the Chief Magistrate himself, as far as his vote could effect it, should
be subjected to an inquiry whenever it was demanded by a member. The
greater responsibility, the more easy and more simple should be the means
of investigation. Were he, indeed, the friend, personal or political, of
the officer charged, and he believed that impeachment would be the result
of inquiry, it was possible that his feelings as a man might induce
him to forget his duty as a Representative, and urge him to resist the
inquiry; but, were he convinced of his innocence, he would do all in his
power to promote it, in order that he might stand justified to the nation
and to the world.

Upon the present occasion, he begged that he might not be understood to
say that the offence with which these judges were charged, was such as
would warrant an impeachment. But, while he meant not to commit himself
on a question of such high moment, he could not avoid expressing his
astonishment that the conduct stated should not only be defended upon
the floor of the House, but entirely approved; that gentlemen should
venture to declare that the court acted strictly in the line of their
duty, in refusing to hear counsel on a point of law which involved the
guilt or the innocence of the prisoner. A man was charged with the
highest offence against the Government, and, if guilty, was subject to
the severest and most ignominious punishment recognized by our laws. High
treason was the crime, and death the penalty. The constitution declared
that treason against the United States should consist only in levying
war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and
comfort. The framers of the constitution intended to be as precise as
possible in their definition of treason; they were anxious that no room
should be left for doubt afterwards. They had seen to what an infinite
variety of objects the crime of treason had been extended in England,
and wisely confined it here to the only two offences which could be said
to strike at the existence of the Government. The laws of the United
States had declared that resistance to the execution of a law should only
be considered as sedition, and had provided the punishment of fine and
imprisonment. Fries was charged with resisting the execution of a law,
and this offence the court determined to be treason, without hearing his
counsel, and refused to permit them to address the jury on the subject,
although the jury were the judges as well of the law as the fact. A
resistance to the execution of a law, they construed to be treason, in
the face of the act of Congress, which declared it to be a misdemeanor
only, punishable with fine and imprisonment. These constructive treasons,
he said, had been reprobated by the wise and good in all ages, and at a
very early period in the history of English jurisprudence had received
the pointed disapprobation of the Parliament. He adverted to what he
called a wise and humane provision in the statute of Edward III., by
which the judges were prohibited from declaring any thing to be treason
not so expressly defined by the letter of the statute. That the court had
given such an opinion, was not now, however, the point of charge against
them; that they extended the doctrine of treason beyond both the letter
and spirit of the constitution, was not now the foundation of the present
motion. The accusation was that, in a case involving the life or death of
a freeman, the party was condemned without a hearing; that he was denied
the assistance of counsel, which was secured to him by the constitution
of his country; that the right of the jury to decide both the law and the
fact was refused; for it amounted to a refusal when the court would not
permit the jury to be assisted by the arguments of counsel. He asked if
gentlemen would consider it correct in a court, upon an indictment for
murder, to prohibit the prisoner’s counsel from contending before the
jury, that the offence charged amounted to manslaughter only? Surely not.
The question, in the case of Fries was, whether the act of which he had
been guilty amounted to treason, or to a misdemeanor? and this the court
refused to suffer the jury to have an argument upon. He declared that,
in all criminal prosecutions, the jury had a clear, undoubted right to
decide, as well the law as the fact; they were not bound by the direction
of the court; and that, in capital cases, it was a right which they ought
always to exercise. But, in Fries’s case, the law was not permitted to
be brought into the view of the jury by his counsel; the court denied
to the prisoner the assistance of counsel, which was secured to him by
the constitution, and he was condemned to an ignominious death, which he
must have suffered but for the subsequent interference of the Executive.
Mr. N. said, he had thought proper to make these remarks in answer to
those gentlemen who had undertaken to pronounce the conduct of the court
to be strictly correct. Although he did not mean to commit himself by
declaring that this afforded sufficient ground for impeachment, yet he
could not avoid saying, that the refusal to hear counsel in defence of
the prisoner, did not meet his approbation.

The gentleman from Connecticut had doubted whether the present proceeding
was conformable to principle. He thought that we ought to have the proof
before we take any steps to procure it. Mr. N. begged leave to ask
how proof was to be procured before inquiry was made? In what manner
information was to be obtained before it was sought for? If a member
had stated upon oath that a judge had been guilty of improper conduct,
which would warrant an impeachment, the motion would not be, in the first
instance, to inquire, but to impeach. If information was necessary, how
was it to be procured? By sitting here, and writing for depositions to be
sent in? Surely not. If a person was in the lobby, acquainted with all
the facts, how were they to be communicated to the House? Was he to come
to the bar, and offer a voluntary affidavit, or would it be correct to
introduce him without any previous proceeding? In that case, would it not
be necessary to declare, by a prior resolution, that we would commence an
inquiry before testimony could be offered at the bar? If a member should
state that a witness was at hand who could prove official misconduct
in a judge, the correct course would be to introduce a resolution,
declaring that the House would inquire, and it could not be resisted.
What, he asked, was the proposed course? Instead of making the inquiry
in the House, it was requested that it might be made by a committee.
Instead of using our power to bring witnesses before us, it is proposed
to authorize a committee to examine them. This would be more convenient
and more proper. To bring them before the House would be attended with
inconvenience, and unnecessary delay. He could not tell what the mode of
proceeding before the House of Representatives would be, but, generally,
he believed, it was the practice for a member to propound the question to
the Speaker; the Speaker then to propound it to the witness; the answer
to be made to the Speaker, and by him reverberated back again to the
House. He asked, if the House would consent to this? If they would agree
to a course of proceedings so tedious, so procrastinating, so evidently
embarrassing? And yet this must be the course, unless that proposed was
adopted.

It was said by a gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. R. GRISWOLD,) that
we were about to appoint a committee to ransack the country for an
accusation, and afterwards to search for proof to support it. He
complains that no accusation is made. Mr. N. averred that an accusation
was made; it was made during the last session, and again repeated during
the present. He asked, if it was no charge to declare that a judge had
condemned a man to the most ignominious death, without a hearing; without
allowing him those benefits which he claimed under the constitution? Was
it a trivial circumstance for a member of this House to declare that a
freeman had been indicted for a high capital offence; that he appeared
at the bar and pleaded not guilty; that his counsel were ready to prove
the truth of the plea, but that the presiding judge had refused to hear
them? If this was not a charge, and a charge, too, of a most solemn
nature, he did not understand the meaning of the words. It was brought
forward as boldly as the gentleman from Connecticut could wish, and the
only question now was, in what manner shall we inquire into the truth of
it? Shall we appoint a committee to make the inquiry by calling witnesses
before them, or shall we dismiss it without investigation? Shall we give
it the go-by, and suffer the character of the judges to rest under an
imputation so heavy? Shall we proclaim our own dishonor, by publishing
abroad that a heavy charge had been made, in the face of this House,
against one of the highest judicial officers of the Government, and that
we were too pusillanimous to notice it?

What the gentleman meant by comparing the proposed committee to the
Spanish Inquisition, Mr. N. did not really understand. Did the gentleman
wish to make a false impression upon the public mind? Was he anxious
to cast an odium upon the proceeding by calling it an inquisitorial
committee, and affecting to believe that it was to be clothed with the
powers of the Holy Inquisition? The Inquisition had the power to seize
the person of the party, to deny him all access to his friends, to
confine him in a cell, and refuse him all assistance whatever; to stretch
him on the wheel, and rack and torture him into confession. Does the
gentleman wish to induce a belief that this committee is to be clothed
with the same powers? All committees appointed to inquire, might, to be
sure, be called Inquisitorial, because they were to make inquiry, but the
epithet of Spanish Inquisition was intended to convey an idea totally
incorrect.

The gentleman had asked why this charge had been suffered to rest so
long? The facts upon which it was made were said to have taken place in
1800. Mr. N. thought it would be fair to reply to the gentleman that,
possibly, he himself had, in some measure, accounted for the delay; the
proper time had not before arrived. But if the act upon which the charge
was grounded was criminal at that day, was it less so now? If Justice had
slept so long, did it follow that she was dead? He hoped and trusted not.
Though she had lain dormant till she was almost trampled to death, she
was again roused to her accustomed vigilance, would pursue her victims,
and drag them to punishment. The day of retribution, he hoped, was at
hand.

The gentleman from Connecticut had declared that the proposed course
was not warranted by precedent. He had noticed, but had not explained
away, the precedents introduced by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
(Mr. FINDLAY.) His own precedent, derived from the impeachment of Mr.
Hastings, instead of being in his favor, was directly against him.

In that case it was not pretended that the proof was before the House
of Commons. Mr. Burke had derived his information from certain papers
relative to Indian affairs, which some years before had been produced and
referred to a select committee. In the year 1786, Mr. Burke rose in his
place, not as a member of that committee, and charged Warren Hastings
with high crimes and misdemeanors. About the same time he presented a
written paper containing a specification of these charges. But this was
not the impeachment. The written paper stated that as Governor General
of Bengal he had disobeyed the instructions of the court of directors;
that he had acknowledged himself perfectly acquainted with their wishes,
but instead of obeying, had used his utmost endeavors to defeat them; and
much more of an important nature. This he moved might be referred to a
Committee of the whole House, in order that an inquiry might be made; and
there was not a single dissenting voice. He did not adduce the proofs in
the first instance, but stated his opinions that Mr. Hastings’s conduct
had been criminal, and demanded an inquiry. The Commons of England did
not hesitate--they instantly resolved to inquire. No one was heard to
declare that there was no charge, because there was no proof. Witnesses
were brought to the bar and there examined by a Committee of the Whole,
in support of the charges; nor was there a motion to impeach until the
testimony was gone through. On the contrary, the facts proved were
reported by the Committee of the Whole, who likewise expressed an opinion
that Warren Hastings had been guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors,
and ought to be impeached. The impeachment therefore was not upon the
motion of Mr. Burke, but upon the report of a committee, who under the
instruction of the House had made an inquiry.

What then, Mr. N. asked, was the course now proposed? His friend from
Virginia had called the attention of the House to certain alleged
misconduct of a judge, which had been stated by a member in his place
during the last session. That statement had again been repeated in the
House yesterday, not in writing, indeed, but in language so clear and
in terms so unequivocal that none were so stupid as not to understand
it. Like Mr. Burke, he asked that a committee should be appointed to
inquire into the truth of the charge. The House of Commons had referred
the subject before them to a Committee of the Whole, and the House of
Representatives were moved to refer the subject before them to a select
committee. A select committee was proposed, because it would be more
convenient and more expeditious. If the subject might with propriety be
referred to a Committee of the Whole, with equal propriety might it be
referred to a select committee.

He had noticed this precedent, not because he thought it necessary
to cross the Atlantic for authorities, but because the gentleman had
introduced it as favoring his own doctrines. If there was already no
precedent, in his opinion the House ought to make one; but he believed
their own journals would furnish them with one. At the first session
of the seventh Congress, in a very few days after the House met, Mr.
N. said he had risen in his place, and stated that he had seen in the
public prints, during the preceding summer, charges of a serious nature
against an individual who had filled one of the highest stations under
the Government, that he had misapplied considerable sums of public money,
and was a defaulter to a very large amount. Upon this vague rumor, he had
moved that the accounts of the former Secretary of State should be laid
before the House. No gentleman then declared that it was necessary to
have proof before an inquiry took place. No one dreamt that information
as to facts was to be had, before it was sought for. Some indeed had
asked how far the motion was to extend; whether it was to embrace all the
other Secretaries of State? Others desired that the accounts from all the
departments should be called for, and finally it was determined to let
the resolution lie for a short time. In a few days after, on the 14th of
December, he modified the resolution, in conformity with the wishes of
several gentlemen, and it passed directing that “a committee should be
appointed to inquire and report, whether moneys drawn from the Treasury
had been faithfully applied to the objects for which they had been
appropriated, and whether they had been regularly accounted for,” &c. A
precedent more in point he thought could not be desired. The inquiry was
produced, not upon proof, not even upon the suggestion of a member, but
because a report as to the misapplication of public money had circulated
through the public prints of the day. He might be told perhaps that this
was an inquiry of a general nature. But general as it might be, it was
directed at the conduct of individuals, and under other circumstances
might have furnished materials for an impeachment. The gentleman from
Connecticut was a member of that committee, and Mr. N. asked him if he
would pretend to say that it was a secret committee, as he had called
that now asked for? Or was this only another attempt to impose upon the
public?

Another precedent, he thought, might be furnished from the Journal, but
he was unwilling to refer to it.

It had been said, too, that impeachments would be cheap if they were to
be made upon the suggestion of a member. It appeared to him that the
motion to inquire had been constantly mistaken for a motion to impeach.
Did gentlemen suppose that an impeachment must necessarily follow an
inquiry? It would seem as if they entertained a poor opinion of those
whose conduct was the subject of discussion. But they ought to recollect
that the impeachment could not be the act of any individual, nor of the
committee, but of the House; and this, too, after all the facts were
collected and presented, with the evidence to support them. If this
mode was not to be adopted, he did not know any other manner in which
an impeachment could be instituted, unless where the President thought
the peace of the country or the revenue were endangered, and gave
the information himself, as in the case of Governor Blount and Judge
Pickering. Nor did he think this could affect the independency of judges,
unless they were to be made independent of the laws, the constitution,
and the people.

Had it not been for the debate which had taken place on this subject, he
should have imagined that the friends to the judge would have been the
first to promote the inquiry after it was moved for. If he was innocent,
the inquiry ought to be wished for: after passing through the ordeal,
he would come out like pure gold from the crucible. If guilty, no man
ought to feel a disposition to screen him from punishment. Mr. N. could
not avoid on this occasion alluding to the recent conduct of a judge in
a neighboring State, upon whose character an imputation of the blackest
nature had been thrown by a miscreant. That judge, conscious of his own
rectitude, and disdaining to shelter himself from inquiry, demanded
an investigation of the charge, and the consequence was an entire and
honorable acquittal.

Mr. ELLIOT.--When, in the course of a late debate in this House, it was
observed that a member had advanced an anti-republican sentiment, the
supposed imputation was repelled by the remark, that the gentleman to
whom allusion had been made, had passed a political ordeal which few
had experienced, and which ought to place his character as a republican
above the reach of suspicion. I have myself suffered an ordeal of that
description, under circumstances of gloom and depression which have
fallen to the lot of but few young men of this country; and I am far
from being confident that one ordeal only will fill up the measure of
my humble fortune. A more anti-republican resolution than the one upon
your table, sir, I think I never saw. Reflection has confirmed me in
the opinion which I expressed yesterday, that it is unprecedented,
unparliamentary, and tends to the assumption, on the part of this House,
of a censorial and inquisitorial power over the Judiciary, unwarranted
by the constitution. The intention and object of the mover, however,
must have been extremely different; the motive is pure and the object
meritorious; but that honorable gentleman, with all his talents and
discernment, has, in my opinion, fallen into an error. I believe it a
sound principle, that no official measures should be taken to censure or
criminate the conduct of a public officer, until facts shall be stated
which amount to a specific and definite charge of misconduct. In the
present instance we have no written allegations, and what is the amount
of the verbal information with which we are furnished? A gentleman from
Pennsylvania has stated in his place that _he has heard_ that some one of
the judges, whose name appears in the resolution, was guilty of improper
and oppressive conduct, in the exercise of his judicial functions, on a
trial for treason some years since. And a gentleman from Virginia has
stated that he has received information which induces him to believe that
the inquiry he demands will lead to an impeachment. Is it our duty to
act upon the vague rumors of common fame, or the opinions of individual
members?

The resolution under consideration has been materially altered this
morning, and I gave my vote for the alteration, because I believed that
the misconduct of a court ought not to be attributed to a single judge.

I feel it my duty, Mr. Speaker, to remark, that the information which
is possessed by the members of this House, respecting the conduct of
those judges, is extremely contradictory. No gentleman has told us that
he possesses personal knowledge of the misconduct imputed to those
officers; and I possess information on the subject, derived soon after
the transaction, from a source which I considered as authentic, and which
produced so deep an impression upon my mind, that I should scarcely
abandon my belief of its authenticity, even from the general recollection
of persons who were present at the scene. I understand that the judges
did nothing more or less than decide a legal question in a legal manner.
They did not interdict the counsel for the prisoner from examining
a question of law, but they restricted them to what they considered
as their legal and constitutional limits. They told them that the
constitution of our country had clearly and explicitly defined the crime
of treason, and confined them to the plain field of the constitution,
inhibiting them from a resort to British authorities to prove that to be
treason which the constitution of our country had not made treason, or to
prove that what our constitution had made treason, was not recognized as
such by foreign precedents. This statement may be incorrect, and, if it
be correct, the conduct of the judges may have been improper and severe,
but it cannot justify an impeachment. And if the court went farther,
interrupted the counsel for the prisoner, informed them that it was the
province of the court to determine points of law, declared that their
opinion was fixed upon those points, and even forbade the counsel to
prolong their arguments upon them, it might still be questionable whether
the conduct of the court rendered its members liable to impeachment. A
venerable gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. FINDLAY,) who has long been
in the service of his country, has been incorrect in stating that I had
observed that I would never go into the inquiry without evidence; that
incorrectness must have been unintentional; if I used an expression of
that description, it was a _lapsus linguæ_: but I am confident that I
said, and I am certain that I intended to say, that I thought it improper
to institute the inquiry until some fact or facts should be stated as a
ground of accusation. A gentleman from Virginia (Mr. JACKSON) has told us
that common fame is sufficient ground for impeachment in Great Britain.
That gentleman has not adduced his authorities for this proposition, and,
had he adduced them, I am confident they would not have answered his
purpose, when contemplated in all their bearings, when examined with all
their qualifications. The same gentleman also observed, if I understood
him correctly, that were he satisfied that the conduct of the judges, in
the case alluded to, was legal and correct, he would still vote for the
inquiry. To me this declaration appears extraordinary. Why vote for an
inquiry when satisfied that no criminality existed?

A gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. SMILIE,) who contends that there is
no necessity for precedent in the present instance, as we are competent
to form precedents for ourselves, has yet thought proper to explore
the books for precedents, and has presented us with the result of his
labors. To guide our conduct on the present occasion, we are referred
to the case of the Earl of Strafford, over whose tomb genius and virtue
love to mourn, and will mourn in future ages! It cannot be possible
that that gentleman wishes to recommend for our imitation that flagrant
perversion of every principle of law and justice, that cruel catastrophe!
A gloomy and terrible precedent, one of the most dark and disgraceful
in the British annals, and utterly unsusceptible of application to
the principles of a Republican form of Government. The gentleman from
Maryland, (Mr. NICHOLSON,) to whom I listened with peculiar pleasure, and
who has certainly displayed ingenuity, has been equally unfortunate in
his selection of precedents, and in his application of them to the case
under consideration. He has cited cases, which, by his own statement,
militate against the principles he assumes. We are first presented
with the celebrated case of Warren Hastings. In that case, a member
rose in his place, and, after accusing Hastings of high crimes and
misdemeanors, exhibited specific charges of malconduct, in consequence
of which an inquiry was instituted. Here is a solid basis, and the very
basis which is wanting on the present occasion, upon which to erect
the superstructure of impeachment. That gentleman has also mentioned
a resolution introduced by himself in a former Congress, which was
expressed in general terms, and directed to general objects, and of
course was perfectly dissimilar to the present one.

Allusions have repeatedly been made to a remark of mine in the debate
of yesterday, that this House is the grand inquest of the nation. It
has been asked, if a grand jury were informed that a murder has been
committed, would they not send for evidence to ascertain the fact? We
are the grand inquest of the nation, and our practice ought, in many
respects, to be analogous to that of grand juries; but in becoming
that inquest, we do not entirely lose our deliberative and legislative
character. I believe it would be descending from the dignity of our
station, to listen to the murmurs of general rumor, and seek for guilt.
I have heard that one of the judges whom we are called upon to censure,
when in the exercise of his judicial functions, inquired of a jury, “Is
there no sedition here? Are there no seditious newspapers within your
jurisdiction?” I am ignorant whether this report be or be not founded on
fact. But if it be true, let me ask, shall we not pursue a similar course
by adopting the present resolution? Shall we not authorize a committee
to inquire, Is there no judicial guilt abroad in our land? Is there no
latent inquiry in some unexplored corner of our country? A grand jury
is sworn diligently to inquire, and true presentment make, of all such
offences against the laws of the land, as shall come to their knowledge.
Have we taken such an oath? Are we under such obligations? And are we not
about to attach to ourselves that character which gentlemen tell us is so
odious, the character of common informers? I am under no fears that the
stream of justice, which ought to be so pure, will become turbid, from
a want of accusers, when our judges shall be guilty of crimes. When our
courts shall become corrupt and despotic, patriotic motives will induce
our citizens to bring forward accusations. I am also sensible of the
propriety and force of the observation of the gentleman from Connecticut,
(Mr. R. GRISWOLD,) that the trial in question was a transaction of great
publicity, and all its circumstances must have been known to thousands of
our citizens. This induces me to believe that the conduct of the court
was not so oppressive and despotic as is now represented. Why has this
awful charge slumbered so long?

One or two remarks upon the allusions that have been made to my
observation, that we are about to assume censorial and inquisitorial
powers, and I will dismiss the subject. What is the language of the
resolution? Without the allegation of a single fact, it constitutes
a committee to inquire whether the judges have not so acted in their
official capacity as to render necessary the interposition of the
constitutional powers of this House. The expression is unequivocal;
the allusion to the power of impeachment is perfectly obvious. This is
what is called a _petitio principii_; it takes for granted, at least
in some degree, what remains to be proved, that the conduct of the
judges has been improper and illegal. Else why adopt a language which
implies suspicion and censure? But gentlemen are alarmed at the epithet
inquisitorial, and imagination teems with the horrors of the Spanish
Inquisition. If the creation of this committee be an unauthorized act, if
in creating it we transcend those limits which we ought, by a reasonable
construction of the constitution, to set to our own powers, it instantly
becomes inquisitorial in its nature and in its operation. We must
delegate to it more than general powers. We must authorize it to send for
persons, and probably for papers and records. The proposition is hostile
to republican principles, and, as a republican, I cannot give my vote in
its favor.

Mr. HOLLAND.--When I before addressed the House on this subject, I had no
doubt of the charge being sufficiently explicit to found an inquiry into
the conduct of the judges. My only doubt was whether it was proper to
proceed without affidavit. Since yesterday I have reflected on the course
pursued in similar cases; and I will state to the House the proceedings
adopted in two or three cases in the Legislature of which I was a member.
In the year 1796, a charge was preferred against certain judges of the
State of North Carolina for illegally extending their power. A committee
was appointed to inquire into their conduct, and the result was, that the
judges had exiled certain persons from the State. The proceedings did not
go so far as an impeachment; for the judges wrote an explanatory letter,
which gave satisfaction, and they were acquitted with honor. The other
charge, to which I have alluded, was against the board of army accounts;
that also was referred to a committee. The last case is the most recent.
A suspicion existed that the Secretary of State had been guilty of
misconduct. A letter had been received by the Governor from some citizens
to that effect; in consequence of which, and of other corroborating
circumstances, the Legislature appointed a committee of inquiry, of which
I had the honor to be a member. That committee was empowered to send for
persons and papers. There was no specific charge, but an impeachment was
contemplated, if the officer should appear to be guilty. The Secretary
was brought before the committee, who examined him on oath, and reported
the existence of frauds much more extensive than had been imagined; in
consequence of which the land office was shut up, and the Secretary
notified that articles of impeachment would be exhibited against him.
But the late period of the session not then admitting of a trial, it was
postponed to the next General Assembly. At the succeeding Assembly the
officer resigned, and superseded the necessity of an impeachment. He
was afterwards indicted at common law. These precedents, drawn from the
proceedings of the Legislature of the State which I have the honor to
represent, induce me to think that the course proposed is proper; and I
shall, accordingly, vote for the appointment of a committee of inquiry.

Mr. DENNIS said, he did not rise for the purpose of entering into an
investigation of the merits of the question, but principally for the
purpose of stating, in a few words, what appeared to be the difference
between the friends and the opponents of the resolution. He had never
experienced, on any occasion, a stronger conflict between inclination
and duty than in the present instance. On the one hand, he was confident
that, after the official conduct of the judges had been thus publicly
implicated, it must be desirable to them that an investigation of the
facts charged against them should take place, and it seemed to be a
duty due to those gentlemen, that they should have an opportunity of
being confronted with their accusers. On the other hand, we owe to the
laws and constitution, as well as to those considerations which must
always govern in the establishment of important precedents, a paramount
duty, which appeared in this case irreconcilable with the indulgence of
individual considerations. The true difference between the advocates and
the opponents of the resolution appeared to be this: That the one thought
it a proper procedure to raise an inquisitorial committee, without any
definite or assignable object, and without stating in the resolution any
specific charge. The other did not demand, as it had been supposed, the
production of all the evidence in the outset of the proceeding, which
might be necessary in the ulterior stages of the transaction, nor that
precise and technical specification of the charges which might be proper
in articles of impeachment, but only required that some fact should be
stated, or charge alleged, as the basis on which to erect a committee. He
believed, to create a committee by resolution, with general inquisitorial
powers, without specifying any charge, or stating any reason in the
resolution for the proceeding, was without precedent, and might become an
engine of oppression. In order to satisfy the friends of the resolution
on that, he did not wish to avoid that investigation which might be
founded on proper principles, and which he believed, after what has been
said, is rather courted than avoided by the judges in question. He would
beg leave to read, in his place, the form of a resolution, such as he
supposed ought to be the groundwork of a procedure like this:

    “Whereas information hath been given to the House, by one of
    its members, that in a certain prosecution for treason, on
    the part of the United States, against a certain John Fries,
    pending in the circuit court of the United States, in the State
    of Pennsylvania, Samuel Chase, one of the associate justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and Richard Peters,
    district judge for the district of Pennsylvania, by whom the
    said circuit court was then holden, did inform the counsel
    for the prisoner that, as the court had formed their opinion
    upon the point of law, and would direct the jury thereupon,
    the counsel for the prisoner must confine themselves to the
    question of the fact only. And whereas, it is represented that,
    in consequence of such determination of the court, the counsel
    did refuse to address the jury on the question of fact, and
    the said John Fries was found guilty of treason, and sentenced
    by the court to the punishment in such case, by the laws of the
    United States, provided, and was pardoned by the President of
    the United States.”

He said he read this by way of argument, to show that the present
resolution ought to be rejected, and though he would not offer it
himself, in case the resolution before them should be rejected, yet
he would pledge himself to vote for such a one, if the gentleman from
Virginia or any other member would offer it. The resolution which
has been read, embraces all the facts stated by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, which contains the only charge that has been exhibited. But
if any gentleman possesses a knowledge of any other facts or charges, let
him specify them, and he would be willing to vote for an extension of the
powers of the committee to them also; for he did not wish to confine the
inquiry to the specific charge stated by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
if other gentlemen had charges to exhibit, and would state them in the
resolution. If they would specify a charge or charges of a serious
nature, and give us any reason to believe them true, although originating
from hearsay evidence, he would vote for the inquiry proposed; and he
begged that he should be understood as objecting rather on the ground
that no charge had been specified, than on the ground of incompetent
evidence. The vague charges verbally communicated by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, and none of which are reduced to writing, give no grounds
of procedure; not only because, if true, they constitute no cause for
impeachment, but because they are not specified in the resolution.

The motion was then further amended to read as follows:

    _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire into the
    official conduct of Samuel Chase, one of the associate justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and of Richard
    Peters, district judge of the district of Pennsylvania, and to
    report their opinion whether the said Samuel Chase and Richard
    Peters, or either of them, have so acted, in their judicial
    capacity, as to require the interposition of the constitutional
    power of this House.

Mr. SPEAKER stated the question, that the House do agree to the
said motion, as so amended, when an adjournment was called for and
carried--yeas 61, nays 43.


SATURDAY, January 7.

Mr. NICHOLSON, from the committee appointed on the memorial of Alexander
Moultrie, agent for the South Carolina Yazoo Company, and of William
Cowan, agent of the Virginia Yazoo Company, made a report, going
considerably into detail, and concluding with a resolution adverse to the
prayer of the memorialist. Referred to a Committee of the Whole on Monday.


_Official Conduct of Judge Chase._

The House resumed the consideration of the question depending yesterday,
at the time of adjournment, “that the House do agree to the motion of
the fifth instant, as amended by the House, for the appointment of a
committee to inquire into the official conduct of Samuel Chase, one of
the associate justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, and of
Richard Peters, district judge of the district of Pennsylvania.”

Mr. J. RANDOLPH expressed his regret that the attempt which he had
made yesterday to reply to the very personal allusions of a gentleman
from Connecticut, (Mr. GRISWOLD,) whom he was sorry not to see in his
place, had, by the adjournment, proved abortive. Such was his regard
for the opinions of the House, that he should always, when called upon
from a respectable quarter, justify any conduct which he deemed it
proper to pursue in its deliberations. He felt it due to the respect in
which he held the Chair and those around it, to reply to the remarks
of the gentleman from Connecticut, and this consideration alone could
have induced him to offer any thing in addition to what he had already
advanced in favor of the motion. He should otherwise have left the
resolution to its fate. In that fate he did not feel himself personally
implicated. If it should be rejected, he would be satisfied in having
done his duty, and the House, he supposed, would feel equally satisfied
in having discharged theirs. It was asked, where was the mover of this
resolution at the time when the alleged misconduct took place? Did it
not, said the gentleman, pass under their own eyes? Were not their
deliberations held on the very spot? and why had the motion slept until
this day? He hoped he should be permitted to say that it did not pass
under his eyes; although he knew, at the time of the condemnation in
question, he did not become acquainted with the circumstances under
which it took place until long after their occurrence. It was true that
the deliberations of Congress were then held in Philadelphia, the scene
of this alleged iniquity, but, with other members he was employed in
discharging his duties to his constituents, not in witnessing, in any
court, the triumph of his principles. He could not have been so employed.
It would be recollected, that the information given by the gentleman
from Pennsylvania formed the groundwork of his proceedings, and he asked
whether it was more the duty of the mover of the resolution to have
brought it forward than every other member of the House who was a witness
of the statement made by that gentleman? This information, of an official
nature, given by a member in his place, of a transaction in open court,
and which it was the duty of them all to have noticed, had been called
a story related on hearsay; a rumor of an affair which had happened in
a corner; and the House was asked if they would take such evidence as
ground of proceeding, on the _dictum_ of any one member, however great
their confidence in him might be? If he really felt that respect for
the House which the gentleman from Connecticut had professed, he would
not have insulted their understandings by such language. He would not
have stood up, as _amicus curiæ_, to prevent their being precipitated
into absurdity and injustice by an influential member of their body.
That, however, was the station which the gentleman had assumed, and
he hoped the duties of it would be discharged with the fidelity which
they required. After clothing himself with this character, Mr. R. said
he expected to have seen him at his post--he regretted that he did
not see him there, and that his duty did not permit him to withhold
the observations which he was compelled to make. Whilst, however, the
gentleman was engaged in discharging the new and important function
with which he stood self-invested, he seemed cautious of replying to
the masterly statement of his venerable friend from Pennsylvania, and
which he believed had remained unanswered because it was unanswerable.
It must, said Mr. R., be a subject of high gratification to us all,
and I congratulate this House upon it, that age has not yet dimmed the
lustre of those talents which have so long presided in the councils
of this country. And if the time shall come when we are to resign our
understandings, and place ourselves under the direction of an individual,
I hope to be permitted to range myself under the banners of that tried
patriot, and not under those of the gentleman from Connecticut. In the
same spirit with which he challenged the confidence of the House, as a
friend unwilling to see them led into error and absurdity, that gentleman
had endeavored to alarm their pride by representing the motion as a
demand made upon them. It was so. It was (if he might so express it)
a writ of right, not of favor--and as such he demanded it, as such he
urged it. But an objection was taken that no act of misconduct had been
alleged. With his friend from Maryland he would say, that a fact of the
first importance had been adduced, on which he was sorry his friend had
not dwelled longer. It could not receive too much attention. On a trial
for life and death, the jury, who were the constitutional judges both
of the law and fact, were deprived of the right of a discussion of the
point of law, “what constitutes treason?” The rights of the jury and
of the accused were equally invaded. It was conduct not dissimilar to
this, in a case of libel, which drew forth from the English Parliament
the famous declaratory bill of Mr. Fox. Lord Mansfield had laid down the
doctrine that the jury had a right to decide only upon the bare facts
of printing and publishing, and not upon the question of guilt, which
was compounded of the law and the fact. This produced the declaratory
act which passed a strong censure on the practices of courts--since
it did not amend or alter the law, but declared what the law was--and
established the point resisted by the court, that the jury was the judge
both of the fact and of the law. If, then, on a question of criminal
law, where the punishment was only fine and imprisonment, the conduct of
a judge was deemed highly reprehensible in encroaching upon the rights
of the jury, what shall we say of him who usurps those rights in a case
of life and death, in a case of treason? This denial to the prisoner and
the jury of the right of having the point of law discussed, seemed to be
the first step towards assuming those powers in cases of treason, the
exercise of which, in cases of libel, had drawn down upon the English
courts the censure of their Parliament. Would the gentleman say this was
nothing? Would he affirm that if a man were under trial for murder, the
court would be justified in saying to his counsel, You may, if you can,
disprove the fact with which the prisoner stands charged, but you shall
not endeavor to show that it does not amount to the crime with which he
stands charged? If you admit the killing, you shall not argue the point
that such killing does not constitute murder. Would the gentleman contend
that treason is better defined than murder? What is murder? Killing with
malice aforethought; can any definition be clearer? What is burglary?
Breaking in during the night. What is treason? The constitution defines
it as levying war against the United States; adhering to their enemies;
giving them aid and comfort. But what had definitions to do with the
case? Because murder was defined, had counsel ever been stopped in an
attempt to show that the killing with which their client stood charged
was not a killing with prepensive malice, a killing which constituted
murder? What was more common than to see the facts admitted, and the
crime not only denied, but disproved to the satisfaction of the jury;
and upon what principle shall counsel be arrested in the attempt to show
that the facts charged in an indictment for treason do not amount to
such a levying of war, or an adherence or aid to such enemies as would
constitute treason? Mr. R. said that the fact mentioned by the gentleman
from Pennsylvania was of a remarkable nature. He had never heard of a
similar proceeding, and he rejoiced that another instance of so black a
nature could not probably be furnished by any tribunal in this country.

The gentleman from Maryland, (Mr. DENNIS,) however, had entirely
abandoned the ground taken by his friend. He agrees that there is a
charge of an important nature exhibited, and if it was incorporated into
the resolution, and the inquiry confined to that subject only, he would
vote for it. The object of the one gentleman was only to confine the
inquiry, whilst that of his friend was to deny it altogether. He could
not thank the gentleman for his liberality. He would have what he asked
or nothing. He would never consent to confine the inquiry; if it could
not be full and free, let it be denied.

The gentleman from Maryland had, with very little dexterity, endeavored
to confound the resolution of inquiry with the articles of impeachment
which may follow from it, and said that if the House would consent to
confine the inquiry to any particular charge he would vote for it. It
was true that after articles of impeachment should have been exhibited
against the accused, the House would not be permitted to prefer any
new accusation, or to adduce testimony to prove any guilt other than
that which was charged in those articles. In the same manner as when
a criminal was indicted, evidence would not be suffered to be brought
forward to prove any act of criminality not contained in some one of the
counts of the indictment. But would gentlemen persist in confounding
things so entirely different, as to confine an incipient inquiry by the
same rigid rules which would govern a criminal trial? It was trifling
with the judgment of the House. The gentleman was eager for inquiring,
but the charge must be incorporated into the resolution, and the inquiry
confined to a specific point, before he could be brought to consent
to it. Whatever other misdemeanors might come to the knowledge of the
committee in the course of the investigation, he would not agree to have
them reported to the House. And at the same time he told them of the
struggle between his inclination and his sense of duty--his inclination
as a friend of the accused to grant the inquiry, his duty as a member of
the House and a friend of justice to refuse it. Mr. R. was sorry to find
the gentleman in this awkward predicament; he regretted that it was out
of his power to gratify him by narrowing the inquiry. This his duty would
not suffer him to do. He hoped, however, the strength of the gentleman’s
constitution would carry him through the arduous struggle in which he was
involved, by his wishes on the one hand, and his principles on the other.

Whilst so much was said on the subject of precedent, he hoped he might
offer a few cases to their consideration. He did not come to the House
armed with precedents. Neither his health nor leisure permitted him to
search for them. Gentlemen of greater industry, and who attached more
importance to them than himself, had furnished him with them. For his
part he thought precedents had nothing to do with the case, but for the
sake of those who thought differently, he would show the course which he
advocated was not destitute even of their support. Here Mr. R. referred
to Mr. Hatsell’s precedents. “On the 21st of April, 1626, Mr. Glanvylee,
from the select committee appointed to consider of the charges against
the Duke of Buckingham, reports that they desire the House will resolve
whether common fame is a ground for this House to proceed upon?” It is
resolved to consider this the next day. After a long debate the House
resolve that, “common fame is good ground of proceeding of this House,
either to inquire of here, or to transmit the complaint, if the House
find cause, to the King or Lords.”

Mr. R. begged to call the attention of the House to the opinion of a
gentleman, delivered during the debate, to which he must be permitted to
attach more importance than to that of the gentleman from Connecticut.
When he mentioned the name of Selden, he believed he should stand
justified in the opinion of the gentleman himself, and in that of his
warmest admirers. “These cases (said Mr. Selden) are to be ruled by the
law of Parliament and not by the common or civil law.” Mr. Littleton
says, “this is not a House for definitive judgment, but for information,
denunciation, or presentment, for which common fame is sufficient.”
Mr. Noy says, “There are two questions--first, Whether a common fame?
Second, Whether this fame be true? We will not transmit without the first
inquiry: but without the second we may; for peradventure we cannot come
by the witnesses; as if the witnesses be in the Lords’ House.”

Again, on the 16th October, 1667, the House being informed “that there
have been some innovations of late in the trials of men for their lives
and deaths, and in some particular cases restraints have been put upon
juries, the matter is referred to a committee.” This case (Mr. R. said)
was precisely in point. “On the 18th of November, this committee are
empowered ‘to receive information against the Lord Chief Justice Keeling,
for any other misdemeanors besides those concerning juries.’” Thus on a
particular fact, innovation in trials for life and death, a committee was
raised, and yet they were not confined to the examination of that single
charge, but empowered to inquire generally into the misconduct of the
judge. A stronger or more pointed precedent could not be conceived.

By the constitution, Mr. Randolph said, that House was vested with the
sole power of impeachment. How this power was to be exercised must
depend on their discretion, and on no other law or principle whatever:
for “these cases are not to be ruled by the common or civil law, but by
the law of Parliament.” That law of Parliament it remained with them
to establish. It could not be matter of surprise that he, one of the
leading principles of whose politics it was to support the weight of that
branch of the Government, and to be jealous of executive influence--it
could not surprise any one, that he should exert himself in behalf of
the constitutional rights of that House. When he saw the importance
which was attached to precedent, he was more than ever solicitous for
that which they were then about to establish. He trusted that they
would not consent to abridge the power with which the constitution had
invested them--to reduce it below the standard which the English House
of Commons had fixed as the measure of their own power in similar cases.
A time might come when a wicked President and his flagitious ministers
might so conduct themselves in office, as to make every man regret the
proceedings of that day, in case they should suffer their power to sleep.
The refusing to exercise it, then, would hereafter be adduced as a denial
of its existence. Such might be the circumstances of the times, that no
private man would dare to step forward with a specific charge against the
Executive. If they should deny an inquiry without a specific charge, they
would do all in their power to screen such a President and such ministers
at a future day. It had been remarked that, in this government, an
officer found guilty, on an impeachment, could not be punished capitally.
The sentence could only remove him from office, and disqualify him, for
ever after, from holding one under the United States. If, in a country
where the accused may be brought to the block, free, unfettered inquiry
is warranted against any rank however exalted--would it be denied here,
where the punishment was comparatively light? Should they hold the other
departments of the Government more inviolable than they were considered
even in England? Would they afford to a criminal, Executive or Judiciary,
a shelter denied by the law of that government? He hoped they would not.
He trusted that they would give an example of their readiness to bring
every offender to justice, however great might be his station.

Mr. GRIFFIN.--I had hoped that no subject would have been agitated during
this session which should have interrupted the tranquillity or disturbed
the harmony of this House, so necessary to the faithful and correct
discharge of our public duties; but, sir, I perceive, from the turn which
the debate upon the resolution now before the House has taken, that
sensations have been excited which I fear it will be difficult to allay.

The proposition now before the House, nursed with so much secrecy, and
forced on us so suddenly and unexpectedly, comes in such a questionable
shape, that I must beg the attention of the House for a few moments while
“I speak to it.”

What, sir, does the resolution demand of us? That a committee be
appointed to inquire into the official conduct of Samuel Chase and
Richard Peters, &c. But how is this inquiry to be conducted? Are there
any data by which the committee are to be guided? Is there any specific
charge to which their attention or inquiries are to be directed? None.
And who, sir, before this enlightened day ever heard of a committee of
inquiry being raised, without possession of a single subject to direct or
guide the inquiry? What, sir, erect an inquiring committee vested with
all the rights of a Star Chamber, and yet assign them no specific objects
of their duty! But, sir, the official conduct of these judges has given
offence--and are we now, sir, to probe and search the whole judicial
lives of these gentlemen, for causes of complaint and censure? Are the
records of the States of Maryland and Pennsylvania now to be ransacked,
for evidences of their guilt and cause of impeachment? I never have and
never shall deny the right of this House to inquire into the conduct of
public officers--but, sir, if the honorable mover of the resolution is
serious----

[Here Mr. RANDOLPH interrupted, and desired the gentleman to explain his
meaning by the word serious.]

Mr. GRIFFIN continued. I will answer the gentleman: my meaning is, that
if the gentleman believes there are just grounds for impeachment--if
he is in possession of information or facts, let him declare them,
and if they appear to my mind to be sufficient whereon to ground an
impeachment, let him demand it and I will join with him. Let him specify
the instances of malfeasance of which these judges have been guilty, and
I will unite with him--let him declare the malconduct of these public
functionaries, and I will cordially co-operate with him. If these judges
have travelled beyond the line of their duty, if they have wantonly
exceeded the limits of their power, I will aid in the infliction of such
punishment as they may merit; but, sir, I cannot, I will not, in this
indirect manner, wound the feelings or censure the characters of men,
holding high responsible offices under your Government. Could I induce
myself to believe that the course now proposed to be pursued is correct,
I will gladly give it my assent; but for reasons very different from
those the advocates of this measure adduce: could I deem it correct, I
would support the resolution because I believe the characters implicated
therein will safely pass the ordeal preparing for them, and that the
inquiry will redound to their honor. I would cheerfully support the
resolution, because, by the impeachment which I predict will follow,
an opportunity will be offered to remove the load of unmerited calumny
under which the Federal Judiciary of the United States have too long
labored, and with which our public prints have been long filled. But the
course is incorrect--the measure in its present shape appears to me to
be fraught with incalculable mischief to our country, and I never will
assist in the establishment of a precedent which may at some future day
be made an engine of persecution, as “wicked as intolerant.” Mr. Speaker,
let me ask of you, sir, to remember the consequences which may flow from
the adoption of this resolution--let me conjure this House to reflect
upon the dreadful effects which must arise to us, if, upon the bare
assertion of a single gentleman, unsupported by any direct allegation,
a committee of this nature shall be raised, a precedent of this kind
established, what public character will be safe? nay, sir, how soon may
not we ourselves feel its baneful influence? Far be it from me, sir, to
impute to the honorable mover of the resolution any impurity of motives.
I believe his conduct has proceeded from a consciousness of duty, and
from a similar consciousness of duty I must oppose the measure. I cannot
deny the power of this House to adopt the resolution upon your table, but
I beg of you to pause ere you take the fatal step, and do not, because
“dressed with a little brief authority, play such fantastic tricks before
high heaven as make e’en angels weep.”

Sir, I have endeavored to discharge what I conceived to be my duty upon
this occasion, and when experience shall fatally convince us of the
dreadful effects of the precedent we are now about to establish, I shall
derive consolation from the reflection, that I lent my feeble aid to
check the overwhelming torrent.

Mr. EUSTIS said, he did not view this subject in the same light with the
gentleman last up; he did not see those awful consequences which he had
pointed out. He hoped the time would never come, when an inquiry into the
conduct of an officer of the Government should be deemed a subject of
alarm in that House. It was the first principle of the constitution, that
every man was amenable to the constitution and laws of his country; and
however elevated any one might be, that he could not be raised above the
reach of inquiry. The observations of the gentleman who had last spoken,
and of others who had preceded him, were predicated on a principle that
was not correct. If the resolution on the table was to impeach the judge,
those observations would be relevant, but they were incorrect on the
preliminary motion to inquire.

In making up, said Mr. E., my judgment on this subject, I have endeavored
altogether to avoid the inquiry, whether the officer implicated in this
resolution, has so conducted himself as to require impeachment by this
House. I have not accepted the opinion of the mover of the resolution,
and I have excluded all the other information adduced in the debate;
because I consider it as alone applicable to the question of impeachment,
which is not now before the House. The question before the House is a
very different one, and, in my opinion, it is plain and simple. What
is it? It is that a committee be raised to inquire into the official
conduct of a certain public officer. When a member of this House, under
the obligations of honor, and the additional obligations of an oath,
rises and takes upon himself the responsibility of moving an inquiry into
the official conduct of a public officer, which can only be effected in
virtue of the impeaching power of this House, which power it exclusively
possesses, I view the request for an inquiry in the nature of an
information laid before the House as the grand inquest of the nation.

When this proposition was made, the mind of every gentleman was naturally
cast about for the situation of the officers in question. If it shall be
the opinion of the House that their conduct is such as to afford grounds
for an impeachment, it will be granted that it is an indispensable duty
to make the inquiry. If, on the other hand, the House are of opinion that
no testimony can be produced which will lead to an impeachment, then it
is due to the officers to institute an inquiry. The object of an inquiry
is two-fold--arising from the duty to the people, and that due to the
officer whose conduct is impeached. If gentlemen are of opinion that, in
this case, there are no grounds for impeachment, then it is clear that
the conduct and character of the officer ought to be vindicated, and
the inquiry instituted to afford him the means. If they are of opinion
that there are grounds for an impeachment, then the duty they owe to the
people urges them to the inquiry. In the constitution I find no excuse,
no justification, on which to ground a refusal to institute an inquiry
into the conduct of any public officer charged with misbehavior.

To such an inquiry, what is objected? That the power may be abused.
Indeed, the objection is, that it is abused in this instance. How abused?
To argue from abuse of the power against the use of it, is no argument at
all. If the House believe either alternative I have mentioned, and one
or the other you must believe, it is their duty to make the inquiry. But
it is said that the committee are to be clothed with power to send for
persons and papers. Granted. That power is indispensably necessary. It is
said their powers are to be inquisitorial. This is not true. Will not the
committee be accessible by every member of the House, and what are their
ulterior powers but to collect facts, and to express an opinion whether
they afford grounds for an impeachment? That opinion they will eventually
submit to the House, and, without its approbation, it will be settled.

It is further said that no specific charge is adduced, and if there
were, gentlemen say they would vote for the inquiry. But if a specific
charge were made, I ask if any member would be enabled to give a more
enlightened vote than on the present resolution? I consider the general
power to inquire as most important, and that it is the duty of the House,
on such occasions as the present, to enlarge rather than to narrow the
field of inquiry.

It is further said that this course of proceeding will discourage
respectable men from accepting the offices of Government. But certainly
every officer, from the President to the most menial, knows that he holds
his office subject to inquiry, to impeachment, and to punishment, in case
of criminality.

If the House do not pursue the present course, from what quarter are
they to expect the origination of an inquiry? Is it to be supposed that
it will come from the citizen, when his life and fortune are probably
at the disposal of particular officers charged with misconduct. This
line of inquiry ought, in my opinion, to be courted and encouraged; more
especially in this instance, after the course which the debate has taken,
and after specific charges have been adduced. The debate has given an
importance to the inquiry, which its original merits may not, perhaps,
have entitled it to.

When this subject was first introduced, it appeared to me novel, and
that there were no precedents in point under the Federal Government. It
is time that this precedent should be established. It is time that every
officer should know that this House is ready at any time to inquire
into his official conduct, if charged with misbehavior; and instead of
declining the inquiry, in this instance, from a false delicacy to the
officer, it becomes the House to embrace the resolution and make the
inquiry. If evidence shall be collected, and it appears that there are
no grounds for impeachment, the officer will be restored to the public
confidence, and will be acquitted. If, on the other hand, it appears
that he has been guilty of malfeasance in office, a duty will be imposed
upon the House, from which they cannot recede, to bring him to trial.

Mr. THATCHER.--As gentlemen seem to consider the decision of the court
in the trial of Fries as unprecedented, I beg leave to refer them to
the cases of the United States _versus_ Vigol, and the same _versus_
Mitchell, 2 Dallas’s Reports, 346 to 357. They will find that the
decision of the court, in the case of Fries, was exactly conformable to
cases adjudged in 1795. Without troubling the House with the whole of
those cases, I beg leave to read the decision of the court in the last
case. “The charge of the court, says the reporter, was delivered to the
jury in substance as follows. Patterson justice. ‘The first question
to be considered is, what was the general object of the insurrection?
If its object was to suppress the excise offices, and to prevent the
execution of an act of Congress, by force and intimidation, the offence,
in legal estimation, is high treason: it is a usurpation of the authority
of Government; it is high treason by levying of war.’” The decision,
sir, is also conformable to the English authorities. The charge then
against Judge Chase and Judge Peters, after divesting it of the coloring
which imagination has given it, amounts to this--that, in the trial of
Fries for treason, the court prevented the counsel from arguing to the
jury against a point of law long settled by that and other courts of
the United States. I have attended closely to the statement made by the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. SMILIE,) and I believe I am correct.

The very point which the counsel of Fries would have argued to the jury,
was that which had long before been settled by the courts of the United
States. I contend, sir, that this court did no more than they had a right
to do--no more than is practised by every well regulated court. They
prevented counsel from arguing law in the face of the authorities, and of
the opinion of the court. That this is usual, I appeal to gentlemen of
the law who are present. This, sir, is the only fact stated to the House
upon which the motion is founded.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH) has said, that he has been
informed of facts, which convince him that an inquiry ought to be made.
But that gentleman has not stated to the House what those facts are.

It has been contended, that where a member of this House shall state
that he is convinced that an inquiry ought to be made, the House ought
to institute such an inquiry. Precedents have been adduced to prove
that this has been done in the British Parliament. There certainly has
been no case cited where an inquiry has been commenced upon the motion
without stating his facts or his evidence. But whatever may have been the
practice in England I can never consent to vote upon any impressions or
convictions but my own.

If the official conduct of the judges upon the trial of Fries was such
as to require the interposition of this House why, (as the gentleman
from Connecticut, Mr. GRISWOLD, has asked,) why was not this inquiry
sooner announced? This trial, I am told, was in February, 1800. It took
place within the hearing of Congress. It was the subject of universal
attention. Why has it slept four years? Upon what ground shall we invest
a committee with power to ransack the country for charges against our
judges? Shall we, upon the motion of a member--shall we, upon the
statement of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. SMILIE,) commence
an inquiry, troublesome and expensive--an inquiry, which must attach
suspicion to the official conduct of the judges? Sir, I respect the
conduct of the gentlemen who attempt to remove obstructions from the
stream of justice, but I must be convinced that obstructions now exist,
before I can vote for this resolution.

Mr. EARLY.--Like other gentlemen who have gone before me in this
discussion, I do not consider myself at liberty to vote against the
resolution on the table. Like them, I deem myself bound to vote for an
inquiry into the conduct of any public officer, when that inquiry is
demanded by a member of this House. After the view taken of the merits
of this measure by the gentlemen from Pennsylvania and Virginia, I did
expect that all further opposition to it would have ceased. In this
expectation I have been disappointed.

I feel constrained to vote in favor of this resolution, because I
believe that the inquiry it contemplates is an act of justice due to
the people of the United States on one hand, and to the characters of
the individuals charged, on the other. A charge of high crimes and
misdemeanors has been made on this floor against two individuals, and
two members of this House have demanded an inquiry into their official
conduct. To this demand may be added the weight of public opinion. I am
apprized of the delicacy of this ground, and when I resort to it, it is
my wish to be understood as meaning that when charges of a high nature
are instituted and reiterated from one end of the Union to the other,
so as to create a general belief, so as to destroy confidence in the
principle and integrity of those who administer justice, and to beget
a suspicion that justice cannot be obtained equally by all men; under
such circumstances the public voice demands an inquiry into the truth of
the charges. Is this a fact, or is it not, in relation to the officers
implicated in this resolution? I presume that it is the fact to a great
extent will not be denied. Every gentleman on this floor, in the habit
of reading the public prints, must have had so forcible an impression
made on his mind on this subject, as not to have lost a recollection of
the conduct charged upon one of the judges named in this resolution, in
the case of Fries, Cooper, and Callender. I cannot, therefore, refuse my
assent to the inquiry, because I believe it due to the public, as well
as to the individuals charged with the improper conduct, and who, if
they were on the spot, would undoubtedly memorialize us for an inquiry.
Indeed one of the officers referred to in the resolution, if conscious
of his innocence, ought, in my opinion, long since, to have demanded
an inquiry into his official conduct, when he witnessed the strong and
numerous charges against him in the public prints from one end of the
continent to the other.

It is objected to this resolution that no proof has been adduced to
the House of the truth of the allegations preferred. In my mind there
is all the difference that can be imagined between an inquiry and
an impeachment; and almost all the arguments urged on this occasion
apply exclusively to an impeachment. A strong proof of this has been
given by the gentleman who has just sat down. That gentleman (Mr. R.
GRISWOLD) has taken this remarkable ground, that this House ought not to
inquire without proof. I suppose he meant, by proof, the depositions of
witnesses; this is, in other words, saying that we, whose constitutional
duty it is to inquire, may omit to do it, because they whose duty it is
not to inquire, have not done it.

The present resolution is nothing more than this: A certain officer of
the Government is charged, in the face of the nation, with malfeasance
in office, and a committee appointed to inquire into the truth of the
charge. Gentlemen allege that the committee is to be appointed to inquire
what accusations can be found, and then for testimony to sustain them.
But this is not so. The accusations have been long since made, and they
are not of a day, but of a year’s standing.

The analogy between the functions of this House and a grand jury, is
correct and forcible. Before a grand jury, it is the right of any
individual to apply for and demand an inquiry into the conduct of any
person within their cognizance; and it is more especially the right of
any member of the jury to make such a demand; and it is their bounden
duty, according to their oaths, to make the inquiry when so demanded.

The official conduct of the judges I view as more delicate and
important than that of any other description of officers; for, on their
impartiality the whole people of the United States depend for obtaining
justice in ordinary cases, and individuals depend, in the last resort,
for the preservation of their lives. Their official conduct should,
therefore, not only be correct, but likewise free from suspicion. Simply
to be charged ought to produce an inquiry; and I must confess that a
recent case, in which the integrity of a judicial officer was impeached,
excited my warmest approbation. I mean the case of a judge (Judge Tucker)
in a neighboring State, who, on a suggestion believed by no man, deemed
it a duty to himself and his country to demand an inquiry into his
conduct.

Another view, by no means unimportant, which may be taken, is, that the
reputation of the Government, of which the judges are a component part,
demands the inquiry in question. Will any gentleman pretend to say that
reputation is not at stake,--that it is not affected at home or abroad
by the charges which have been so long and so loudly made? I presume not.
Whether those charges are true or not, is not the question; for, whether
true or not, so long as they are generally believed, the reputation of
the Government is affected; its reputation for impartial justice is
affected, and deeply too. To refuse this inquiry would be to give weight
to this impression abroad--to add to the suspicion, at home and abroad,
that impartial justice is not done to all men. Let us, then, make the
inquiry, and restore the reputation of the Government, by inflicting a
proper punishment upon these officers, if guilty, and, if innocent, by
proving the charges against them calumnies.

Mr. EPPES.--If, in adopting the resolution before us, we were to attach
odium to the characters in question, I should feel no surprise at
the course pursued by the gentlemen who oppose this inquiry. In this
country the official conduct of every man is, and ought to be, subject
to examination. It is not the examination, but the result of that
examination, which attaches merit or demerit to a public character. In
a Government like ours no principle ought to be cherished with greater
care than a free inquiry into the conduct of public officers. So friendly
am I to this principle in its fullest extent, so necessary do I believe
it to be to the preservation of that purity in public officers essential
to a republic, that it will always be sufficient for me to vote an
inquiry, for a member to declare he considers an inquiry necessary. A
proper regard to his own reputation will always, I am certain, prevent
any member of this House from calling on us to exercise this important
duty on light or trivial grounds. As to the extensive field of inquiry to
which this doctrine may lead, I care not; and whenever a member of this
House shall rise in his place and declare that he considers an inquiry
into the conduct of a public officer or officers necessary, I shall be
ready to pass the whole circle in review, to begin with the first and end
with the last, to vote an inquiry into the conduct of each, and even to
go further, to vote an impeachment if necessary. I shall on every such
occasion consider it a duty I owe to the individual accused, and to the
community in whose behalf the accusation is made, to vote an inquiry.

Thus much for the general principle which would induce me to vote for
this resolution, if no specific charge had been made. In the present
case, however, a specific charge of a serious kind has been made by a
member from Pennsylvania; and, however gentlemen may have attempted to
weaken the force of this charge, it does substantially amount to this:
that, by the opinion of a judge, a citizen of the United States was
deprived of his constitutional right to counsel, when arraigned for his
life. I will not, however, dwell on this charge. It has been placed by a
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. NICHOLSON) in a point of view satisfactory
to myself, and, I believe, to the House. I consider it, however, my duty
on this occasion to mention a trial which took place in the Commonwealth
of Virginia, which affords another specific charge against Judge Chase. I
was not present at this trial, and am not personally acquainted with the
circumstances. I believe, however, that in the Commonwealth of Virginia
but one sentiment prevails as to the conduct of Judge Chase on this
occasion, viz: that it was indecent and tyrannical. In the course of
the trial he refused to allow a witness on the part of the prisoner to
be examined, because the witness could prove the truth of a part only,
and not the whole of the words laid in the indictment. By a system of
conduct peculiar to himself, he deprived the prisoner of the aid of Mr.
George Hay, as counsel, a man, who, although not as generally known as
some others in our State, is inferior to none in his profession. I do not
mention these circumstances as hearsay evidence, but as facts, which I
am induced to believe can be established by legal testimony. If, on this
statement, there is any gentleman who can refuse an inquiry, I am willing
to leave him in the enjoyment of his opinion. For my own part, I shall be
always ready, on the demand of any member of this House, to exercise my
constitutional right of inquiry, and, without partiality or prejudice,
pursue the course pointed out by my duty, whether it shall lead to
impeachment or an honorable acquittal.

Mr. NICHOLSON rose for the purpose of calling the attention of the
House to precedents. When he yesterday addressed them he had thought it
unnecessary to introduce authorities from foreign nations; but as they
had been insisted on by the opponents to the resolution, he would refer
to two or three; and he was more solicitous to do so at the present
moment, as he saw a gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. DANA) about to rise,
and he wished to call the gentleman’s attention to them, in order that
he might remark on them, and show, if it was to be done, that they did
not apply to the case under consideration. If gentlemen would refer
to the powers exercised by the Commons of England, for time almost
immemorial, and to those exercised by the several State Legislatures,
he believed that precedents innumerable would be furnished. The Commons
of England were the grand inquest of the nation. As such it was their
duty to inquire into the official conduct of all those intrusted with
the powers of Government. Every officer in the realm was liable to
impeachment by them. The same principle would be found to run through the
constitutions of most of the States, and it was wisely introduced into
the Constitution of the United States. The power to impeach is admitted
to be in the House of Representatives, and the only question is, as to
the manner in which this power shall be exercised. The proposed method
is called a loose one, and we are asked to show some precedent for it.
The House of Commons at the commencement of every session appoint what
is there called a committee of grievances and courts of justice. Many
of the State Legislatures appoint a similar committee annually, and,
in the State from which he came, the House of Delegates always appoint
a committee of grievances and courts of justice. It was one of their
standing committees, and the appointment was as regular and as usual as
the appointment of a committee of claims in this House. What then he
inquired was the duty, what the authority of this committee? In England,
in Maryland, and in every other State where it exists, it is their duty
to inquire into the conduct of every officer of the Government, to call
witnesses before them to prove official misconduct, to report offences to
the House from which their powers are derived, and recommend the proper
measures to be adopted.

This House, like the Commons of England, and the most numerous branch
in the State Legislatures, is the grand inquest of the nation; they are
to inquire into crimes and bring offenders to justice. It had not, he
said, heretofore been customary for this House to appoint a committee of
grievances and courts of justice, but he believed no man would deny the
power, and when appointed they would not only have the authority proposed
to be in this committee, but one infinitely more extensive. They would
have the right to inquire into the conduct of all civil officers, and to
report such facts as might come to their knowledge. If, then, we could
with propriety, and agreeably to precedent, authorize an inquiry into
the conduct of several hundred officers, could it be denied that the
same precedent would warrant an inquiry into the conduct of two only? In
5th _Comyn’s Digest_, page 204, it would be found that a committee of
grievances and justice was one of their standing committees, and in page
205 it was declared that they might “summon any judges and examine them
in person upon complaint of any misdemeanor in office.” He presumed it
had not been thought necessary heretofore to appoint a general committee
of this kind, but at present the necessity was apparent, as a complaint
had been made to the House of the official misconduct of two judges.
Again, in the same book, page 209, it is said, “The Commons are the
general inquisitors of the realm, and therefore if a Lord, spiritual or
temporal, commit oppression, bribery, extortion, &c., the Commons shall
inquire of it, and if, by the vote of the House, the crime appears to
have been committed, they transmit it, with the evidence, to the Lords.”
This, he said, would clearly show, what indeed he thought common sense
would teach every man, that the inquiry should be made before proof was
exhibited upon which an impeachment was to be grounded. In the same page
it would be seen that “common fame is a sufficient ground of a proceeding
in the House of Commons by inquiry, or by a complaint, if need be, to
the King or Lords.” And _Rushworth’s Historical Collection_, page 217,
is cited, it is said, by some of the ablest lawyers of that day that “if
common fame were not to be admitted as public accusers, great men would
be the only safe ones, as no private man would venture to complain of
them.” Mr. N. referred to these authorities at that particular stage of
the discussion, as he was desirous of giving gentlemen an opportunity of
commenting upon them. As he had no wish to prolong the debate, he would
not multiply observations upon that point, but could not sit down without
noticing what had fallen from a gentleman from Massachusetts, in which he
had again attempted to vindicate the conduct of the judges upon the trial
of Fries.

The gentleman had referred to a case in _Dallas’s Reports_, respecting
the Western Insurrection, in which he says the point of law determined
upon the trial of Fries, had been previously settled by one of the
federal courts, and from thence infers that Mr. Chase and Mr. Peters were
justified in preventing counsel from arguing it a second time. That such
conduct might be perhaps excusable in a civil cause he was not prepared
to deny; but, in a case of criminal jurisdiction, involving the guilt or
innocence of a man whose life was to be the forfeit, he held it totally
unjustifiable.

All men, he said, were acquainted with the circumstances of what was
generally called the Western Insurrection. Some of the Western counties
of Pennsylvania were opposed to the excise law. A considerable majority
of the people had resolved to oppose its execution, and took strong
measures to prevent individuals from accepting offices under it, and
compelled some of them to resign the places to which they had been
appointed. While they professed an attachment to the Government of the
Union they resolved to resist the execution of one of its laws. Among
these was a man by the name of Mitchell, and he was charged with high
treason before the circuit of Pennsylvania in which Judge Paterson then
presided. A doubt existed whether the resistance to the execution of a
law, even by force of arms, was such a levying of war within the meaning
of the constitution, as amounted to treason. What was the conduct of the
judge on that occasion? He had no disposition to preclude inquiry. He
had no wish to keep the jury in ignorance by forbidding fair and open
argument. On the contrary, it appeared from a note on page 348 that
he called the attention of the prisoner’s counsel to the point, and
requested that they would notice it in their observations. This was done
before the defence was opened, and he said he should beg leave to read a
part of the argument made in favor of the prisoner.

    “The counsel for the prisoner (E. Tilghman and Thomas) premised
    that they did not conceive it to be their duty to show that the
    prisoner was guiltless of any description of crime against the
    United States, or the State of Pennsylvania, but they contended
    that he had not committed the crime of high treason, and
    ought, therefore, to be acquitted on the present indictment.
    The adjudications in England upon the various descriptions of
    treason, had been worked incautiously, into a system, by the
    destruction of which the Government itself would be seriously
    affected; but even there, the best judges and the ablest
    commentators, while they acquiesce in the decisions that have
    already taken place, furnish a strong caution against the too
    easy admission of future cases, which seem to have a parity
    of reason. Constructive and interpretive treasons must be the
    dread and scourge of any nation that allows them--_1 Hale, P.
    C._, 132, 259--_4 Black. Com._, 85. Take, then, the distinction
    of treason by levying war, as laid down by the attorney of
    the district, and it is a constructive or interpretive weapon
    which is calculated to annul all distinctions heretofore
    wisely established in the grades and punishments of crimes,
    and by whose magic power a mob may be easily converted into a
    conspiracy, and a riot aggravated into high treason.”

Such, he said, was the opinion of two gentlemen ranking high in their
profession, and who would not be charged with having any feeling toward
the offence or the offender inconsistent with the rights or interests
of the Government. The whole argument was too lengthy to be read to the
House, but he considered it well worth the perusal of every American.
Able as it was, however, it had not the wished for weight with the court.
Judge Paterson gave the following charge to the jury: “The first question
is, what was the general object of the insurrection? If its object was to
suppress the excise offices, and to prevent the execution of an act of
Congress, by force and intimidation, the offence, in legal estimation,
is high treason; it is a usurpation of the authority of Government;
it is high treason by levying of war.” Sir, said Mr. N., this opinion
of the court may have been honest; I mean not to impeach the purity
of motive which dictated it, but I mean to show that the offence with
which Mitchell was charged, the resistance to the execution of a law,
was not considered as treason by the highest existing authority of this
country. Mitchell was pardoned by the President of the United States, and
Congress, not long after, expressed their opinion on the subject in the
most ample manner.

The trial of Mitchell which I have just quoted took place in 1795, and
in 1798 the subject was taken up by Congress, who, by the act of the
14th of July, 1798, provided that the resistance to the execution of a
law should be considered a high misdemeanor only, punishable by fine and
imprisonment. The act is in these words: “If any persons shall unlawfully
combine or conspire together, with intent to oppose any measure or
measures of the Government of the United States which are, or may be
directed by proper authority, or to impede the operation of any law of
the United States, or to intimidate or prevent any person holding a
place or office in or under the Government of the United States, from
undertaking, performing, or executing his trust or duty, he or they
shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor, and on conviction before
any court of the United States having jurisdiction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $5,000 and by imprisonment during a
term not less than six months nor exceeding five years.” Here, sir, the
resistance to the execution of a law is declared to be a high misdemeanor
only, punishable by fine and imprisonment. Fries was tried in 1800,
two years after the passage of this law. The offence of which he had
been guilty was rescuing prisoners from the marshal by force, thereby,
in the language of the act, “preventing an officer of the United States
from performing and executing his duty,” and it was to show that he was
punishable under this act by fine and imprisonment only, that his counsel
were desirous of bringing the law before the jury. This, however, the
court refused; the man was convicted of high treason, and was sentenced
to a most ignominious death. Let such conduct be vindicated where and by
whom it may, I must declare that it can never meet my approbation.

Mr. DANA.--It is to be regretted, Mr. Speaker, that a resolution so
novel and of so much importance as that on the table was not postponed,
at least for one day after it was presented to the House. Had this been
done, gentlemen might have had some opportunity deliberately to examine
the subject, before they were required to make a decision. But as the
resolution was moved without giving any previous notice, and has been
pressed upon us immediately after it was moved, I do not feel myself
prepared, as I could have wished to be on such a question, before
attempting to deliver my sentiments in this House. Unprepared, however,
as I am, I request your indulgence while I offer a few remarks.

I will first attend to some precedents mentioned by the gentleman
from Maryland, (Mr. NICHOLSON.) He has stated that it has been usual
in the English House of Commons to appoint a committee for courts of
justice, with power to inquire into the proceedings of courts, and for
this purpose to call persons before them for examination. But, sir,
is not such a committee appointed for general purposes, not directed
against any individual, and therefore not affecting the character of any
magistrate? Their powers relate to the judicial system generally, and
do not implicate any one of the judicial officers. Does the resolution
on the table propose a committee of this kind? On the contrary, it is
explicitly directed against two of the judges. If gentlemen would justify
their proceedings by the practice of the British House of Commons, let
the resolution be made to have a general reference to all the courts,
instead of being pointed, as it now is, against particular persons.
In its present form it departs essentially from the principle of the
case mentioned by the gentleman from Maryland, and therefore cannot be
warranted by that precedent.

The gentleman has also stated that a committee was appointed by
the last Congress to investigate the accounts of the officers of
Government, merely upon common report. But it should be remembered
that those officers were officers of the Executive Departments. It is
the acknowledged duty of such officers--it is made their duty by law
to give information to Congress, whenever required, upon any of their
public transactions. And it is the peculiar right of the House of
Representatives, as guardians of the Treasury, at any time, to inquire
into the expenditures of public money. But are the judges of the United
States placed in the same situation with the Executive officers? Are
they to be under the same control, and equally dependent? You may indeed
impeach the judges, if guilty of impeachable offence. But what other
power over them is given you by the constitution? It should further
be remembered, that the resolution for appointing the investigating
committee did not criminate any particular officer. At first it was
proposed to examine only the accounts of the former Secretary of
State. But upon its being suggested by a gentleman from Massachusetts,
(Mr. EUSTIS,) who has been so strenuous an advocate for the present
resolution, that it would be improper in that manner to attack the
character of a particular officer, the resolution was made general, and
extended to the accounts of all the Executive Departments.

Upon the like principle, the resolution now on the table is improper. My
objection to it is, that it points out two particular officers as objects
of suspicion, and proposes a committee for inquiring into their conduct
without assigning any cause, and without specifying any subject of
inquiry. Gentlemen have expressed a dissatisfaction that such a committee
should be compared to the Star Chamber or the Inquisition. If they do not
perfectly resemble the Star Chamber, formerly known in England, or the
Inquisition of Spain, the proposed powers of the committee are certainly
indefinite and inquisitorial. Perhaps, if a comparison was necessary,
they might more properly be compared to the State inquisitors of Venice,
who are well known to have formed one of the most detestable tyrannies
ever tolerated in a country pretending to freedom.

If charges were specified in the resolution, a member of this House on
moving it might then have a right to demand an inquiry. But are the House
bound to investigate the conduct of a particular officer, without any
charge against him? Gentlemen have said much about the general right of
this House to inquire into the conduct of public officers, as if this
were the point in dispute. But who has denied the right of inquiry as
incident to the power of impeachment? When any officer is charged with
an impeachable offence, it is admitted to be, and from the nature of the
thing it might be, the right of the House to inquire into the truth of
such charge. I trust no gentleman in opposition to the present resolution
can be found so ignorant of the true principle on which it is opposed,
as to deny the responsibility of the public officers, or the right of
the House to inquire into their conduct. But, the right being admitted,
the question is made as to the exercise of that right in the manner now
proposed. When this House is called upon to direct the whole force of its
influence against a particular judge, is it not reasonable, is it not
just, that some charge should first be stated against him? This is but a
decent respect to judicial character. It is but a decent respect to the
character which becomes the assembled Representatives of a nation. The
person implicated might then be enabled to meet the inquiry and obviate
unfounded suspicion. Our power with respect to the judges is the power of
impeachment; but we are not, therefore, justified in wantonly assailing
their characters and sporting with their sensibility to reputation. The
right of inquiry relates to impeachable offences. Shall we, then, inquire
where no offence is stated? So far is the resolution from stating what
would warrant an impeachment, that it does not mention any offence, or
refer to any transaction.

The gentleman from Virginia, who moved the resolution, (Mr. J. RANDOLPH,)
has, indeed, declared his own conviction, that the judicial officer
in question had done wrong. Might not other gentlemen also have their
opinions and exercise their own judgments in forming them? They ask for
the reasons of his conviction before they vote for his resolution. His
information, he says, was received in such a manner that he does not
choose to disclose it. If any person has communicated any thing to him
confidentially, he is not desired to name his informant. The gentleman
shall not be desired by me to make any disclosure which would offend
against the most delicate sense of honor. But can it be improper for
him to state the general nature of the offence which he believes to
have been committed? Will this violate any honorary confidence? He is
desired to make such a statement that other members of the House may
have an opportunity of judging whether the believed offence will warrant
a vote of impeachment. In cases of this kind, is any member to be
deemed infallible? When a gentleman, in his place, states a fact as of
his own knowledge, his veracity is regarded as unquestionable; but his
infallibility is not supposed to extend to matters of mere opinion. Upon
the principle of its being possible for the gentleman from Virginia to
err in opinion, and its being equally the right of the other members to
judge what conduct amounts to an impeachable offence, it might have been
reasonably thought that he would at least state to the House the nature
of the facts on which he relies as the basis of his resolution. If he, or
any other member, declaring his conviction that a judge has misdemeaned
himself in office, will exhibit to the House a statement of any fact,
or series of facts, which would warrant an impeachment, I will be ready
instantly to vote for an inquiry. But nothing of this kind is exhibited,
and therefore the resolution on the table is now opposed. Before you
agree to oppress a judge with all that weight of suspicion which may be
imposed by a vote of this House, let him be permitted to know what part
of his conduct is supposed to be exceptionable, that opportunity may be
had in the progress of any inquiry to vindicate himself against unmerited
reproaches! Instead of a course of proceeding so fair and obviously
just, the resolution on the table marks two of the judges for public
suspicion, without specifying any supposed misconduct. It marks them as
public objects of suspicion throughout the whole of their judicial life,
and, without naming any thing, invites private enemies to accuse them of
every thing.

To support such a resolution, common fame has been mentioned in the
course of debate, as a sufficient ground of proceeding; and this idea is
supposed to be authorized by English precedent. Whatever may have been
done formerly, and in a period of rudeness or violence, the more improved
system of modern jurisprudence should discard such a doctrine if it ever
prevailed. But even that doctrine, if admitted, would not justify you in
adopting the present resolution. You cannot thence infer the propriety of
proceeding against a person who is not accused of any thing punishable.
Will it be pretended that the common fame, which is to be a ground of
proceeding, does not refer to any offence or to any transaction? Common
fame, if admitted for proof, must be supposed to apply to some subject of
complaint. On the principle even of this very questionable doctrine, a
statement of some charge is requisite. What, then, in the present case,
is the accusation which could be supported by common fame? If there be
any such, let it be stated.

The gentlemen who advocate the resolution in its present form fail in
their efforts to support it, notwithstanding all the aid which they have
sought from “the leading-strings and crutches of precedents,” (to use
the language of the gentleman from Virginia.) On general principles, on
the broad basis of universal right, the resolution is condemned; and no
precedent is adduced which can justify it. I do not wish to shield any
public officers, whether judges or others, who may merit impeachment,
but I wish the House, when acting as public accusers, to proceed in
such a manner as not to do injury to any individual. Justice is due to
the individual as well as to the public. No public duty can require
this House to adopt a resolution of general reproach, yet stating no
public offence. And it but illy accords with the principles of justice
to subject the judicial officers of the Union to all the inconvenience,
vexation, and expense, of being obliged to vindicate themselves against
secret accusations, which it may be more difficult to discover than to
overthrow.

You will observe, sir, that I do not enter into any particular
examination of the case referred to by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
(Mr. SMILIE,) whether there was a controversy as to prerogative
and privilege between the court and the bar, in which the pride of
professional rank appeared in opposition to judicial authority. Whether
the judge very properly refused to yield to the counsel, or whether the
court committed an error in pronouncing the law, these are topics which
I think it needless to examine in considering the resolution now on the
table; for the resolution itself states nothing, and there is no case
before us for examination.

On so grave a subject as the present, when we are called upon to aid in
the administration of justice, it was to be desired that the advocates of
the resolution should so far regard their own exhortations as to refrain
from attempting to enkindle the animosity of party. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania (Mr. SMILIE) seems to have thought himself at liberty to
pursue a different course. But, considering the nature of the question
on which our votes are to be given, I hope to be excused if I deem it
not proper in this debate to reply to him on the various topics of party
discussion which he has chosen to mention, although the task might be
easy indeed to repel his charges against the former Administration. A
single observation, however, may be proper on a law to which he has
alluded in the language of censure. There was at least one prominent
feature which might recommend it to the friends of truth. It expressly
declared that the truth might be given in evidence.

Mr. DENNIS observed that in the course of the remarks which he had the
honor of making yesterday, he had declared himself in favor of the
proposed investigation, provided it were made on proper principles;
and, in order the more clearly to illustrate his ideas and evince his
sincerity, he had read in his place a resolution embracing all the
facts which had been suggested to the House as the foundation of this
proceeding. He had then said he would not pledge himself to offer a
resolution such as he then read, but would vote for it if offered by
others. As the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH) had not accepted
his overtures, and in the course of his observations had done him the
honor of noticing some of his ideas expressed in yesterday’s debate, he
rose principally for the purpose of offering an amendment, and partly
for the purpose of replying to one or two of the gentleman’s remarks.
He was not a little surprised at the animated strain in which that
gentleman had addressed the House in the course of this morning, nor
did any thing appear to have fallen from any gentleman, in the course
of the discussion, which appeared to him calculated to produce so much
excitement as he had manifested. But as he did not claim to set up his
own feelings or his own conduct as the standard by which the feelings
or actions of others ought to be guided, and as the gentleman had
applied his observations without implicating motives, he had not at all
interrupted the equanimity of his disposition. He had exercised a right
which he should always be disposed to accord to that gentleman, and every
other member--the right of placing the observations of his opponents in
the most ludicrous point of view of which they were susceptible. In this
right he would also indulge himself whenever the subject required it.

The gentleman from Virginia, in replying to some of his observations,
had said that he had conceived the charge exhibited was of a very serious
nature, but did not appear to comprehend in what respect he considered
it so, and therefore he wished to explain in what manner he considered
it as such. He considered it as serious, inasmuch as it was calculated
to excite suspicion and asperse the official conduct of the gentlemen in
question; but did not mean to insinuate, but on the contrary repelled
the idea of its being serious as regarded its sufficiency, if true, as
a foundation of impeachment. In order to show that the conduct of the
judges had not been so highly censurable even as the statement of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. SMILIE,) or his colleague and the
gentleman from Virginia, seemed to suppose, he begged leave to state
his ideas as to the rectitude of their conduct. Here he might use the
observation of the gentleman from Virginia, applied to one of his own
remarks, and say that gentleman had with no great dexterity confounded
two principles as distant from each other as the northern and the
southern pole. He seemed to assimilate the case in which the court have
arbitrarily withdrawn the question of law entirely from the jury, to
the conduct of the court in this case, which only went to restrict the
counsel from arguing before the jury a case already settled in the minds
of the court, by a train of judicial determinations in similar cases, and
in which they left both law and fact to the determination of the jury;
directing them as to the law upon the subject. He was warranted in his
opinion, because the gentleman from Virginia, in illustrating some of his
positions, had cited the case of libel as decided by Lord Mansfield, and
Mr. Fox’s celebrated declaratory bill, which grew out of that decision.
What analogy has that case to the case in question? Lord Mansfield
decided that in the case of a libel, all the jury had to do was to find
the fact of publication or not, and that whether when published it were
criminal or not, they had no right to determine, and thus withdrew
the question of law altogether from their decision. This was justly
regarded as a gross violation of that principle of the criminal law of
that country, which invests the jury with the right to decide as well
on the law as on the fact. This principle I fully acknowledge, and if
the court in the case of Fries had deprived the jury of that right, and
withdrawn the question of law from them, there might be some foundation
for this resolution. But, according to the statement of the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, the question of law and fact were both submitted to
the jury, with the instructions of the court on the legal question. He
had always been taught to believe that the court were the proper organ
through which the law was to be communicated to the jury, though he
did not deny but the jury had the right which they should cautiously
exercise, but which they would always exercise, when they discover an
inclination in the court to oppress the citizen or exculpate the guilty,
to reject the direction of the court and decide for themselves.

But the complaint is, that the court denied to the counsel the privilege
of arguing the law before the jury. Mr. DENNIS said he believed the court
possessed a power of this nature, to be regulated by a sound discretion.
If the court should believe that a question had been put at rest by a
long train of judicial decisions, such as was the case in this instance,
they not only have the right, but it becomes their duty to prevent a
useless consumption of time, and to prohibit the counsel from agitating
the question. Indeed it is indelicate in the counsel to impress on the
jury an opinion of law contrary to the known opinion of the court; nor
is there any court who will not take on themselves the right of checking
counsel, in an attempt to mislead the jury on a question of law. Such was
the practice of the courts in Maryland, and in that country from which we
derive all our notions of jurisprudence.

But though he did not conceive that there was any ground for impeachment
in the statement of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, yet he knew that
this discussion would produce a vague and undefined censure, which
he believed the judges in question ought to have an opportunity of
repelling. He therefore moved the following amendment, by way of preamble
to the resolution:

    Whereas information has been given to the House by one of
    its members, that, in a certain prosecution for treason on
    the part of the United States against a certain John Fries,
    pending in the circuit court of the United States in the State
    of Pennsylvania, Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and Richard Peters,
    district judge for the district of Pennsylvania, by whom the
    said circuit court was then holden, did inform the counsel for
    the prisoner, that as the court had formed their opinion upon
    the point of law, and would direct the jury thereupon, the
    counsel for the prisoner must confine their argument before
    the jury to the question of the fact only; and whereas it is
    represented, that, in consequence of such determination of
    the court, the counsel did refuse to address the jury on the
    question of fact, and the said John Fries was found guilty
    of treason, and sentenced by the court to the punishment in
    such case by the laws of the United States provided, and was
    pardoned by the President of the United States:

    _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to investigate the
    truth of the said allegations, and to report a statement of
    facts in the case aforesaid, with their opinion thereupon,
    whether the said Samuel Chase and Richard Peters, or either of
    them, have so conducted themselves on the trial aforesaid as to
    render necessary the interposition of the constitutional powers
    of this House.

This amendment embraces all the facts stated by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, points out a specific charge as the foundation of the
proceeding, and yet, when attached to the resolution, gives to the
committee the power of general inquiry.

We are told that the facts have been stated by a member on the floor,
and there is no reason for stating them in the resolution. Will the
statement of the gentleman from Pennsylvania appear on your journals,
and how will it hereafter be known that any fact was stated as the
foundation on which to erect a committee with general inquisitorial
powers? Posterity will only see the resolution, and to them it will be a
precedent which will justify the creation of a committee of inquiry into
the official conduct of any officer, without the allegation of a single
fact, whenever a member may choose to be of opinion that a vexatious and
expensive proceeding shall be instituted. It was therefore that he wished
to resist the principle, and for that purpose moved the amendment.

Mr. HUGER said he had before stated, and he now repeated, that he was not
averse to an investigation; but he did not consider himself bound to vote
for a resolution so general and vague. If the amendment of the gentleman
from Maryland were adopted, he should vote for the resolution.

Mr. NICHOLSON moved to amend the amendment, by striking out the whole of
it after the word “Whereas,” and by inserting--

    “Members of this House have stated in their places that they
    have heard certain acts of official misconduct alleged against
    Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme
    Court of the United States, and Richard Peters, judge of the
    district court of the district of Pennsylvania.”

Mr. HUGER had no objection to the insertion of the last amendment, but he
had to striking out the first. He therefore called for the yeas and nays
upon striking out.

The question was then taken by yeas and nays upon striking out, and
carried--yeas 79, nays 41, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, David Bard,
    Geo. Michael Bedinger, Phanuel Bishop, William Blackledge,
    Adam Boyd, John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William
    Butler, George W. Campbell, Levi Casey, Joseph Clay, John
    Clopton, Jacob Crowninshield, William Dickson, John B. Earle,
    Peter Early, Ebenezer Elmer, John W. Eppes, Wm. Eustis,
    William Findlay, John Fowler, James Gillespie, Edwin Gray,
    Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, William Hoge,
    James Holland, David Holmes, Walter Jones, William Kennedy,
    Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, John B. C. Lucas, Matthew Lyon,
    Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Samuel L. Mitchill, Nicholas
    R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas
    Newton, jun., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer,
    John Patterson, Oliver Phelps, John Randolph, jun., Thomas M.
    Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee,
    Jacob Richards, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford,
    Ebenezer Seaver, Tompson J. Skinner, James Sloan, John Smilie,
    John Smith of Virginia, Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John
    Stewart, David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, John
    Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum,
    Matthew Walton, John Whitehill, Richard Wynn, Joseph Winston,
    and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton, John Campbell, William
    Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett, Manasseh
    Cutler, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dennis, Thomas
    Dwight, James Elliot, Thomas Griffin, Gaylord Griswold, Roger
    Griswold, Seth Hastings, David Hough, Benjamin Huger, Samuel
    Hunt, Joseph Lewis, jun., Thomas Lewis, Henry W. Livingston,
    Thomas Lowndes, Nahum Mitchell, James Mott, Thomas Plater,
    Samuel D. Purviance, Joshua Sands, John Cotton Smith, John
    Smith of New York, William Stedman, James Stephenson, Samuel
    Taggart, Samuel Taney, Samuel Thatcher, George Tibbits, Killian
    K. Van Rensselaer, Daniel C. Verplanck, Peleg Wadsworth, Lemuel
    Williams, and Marmaduke Williams.

The question was now taken on inserting the amendment of Mr. NICHOLSON,
and carried.

The question was then put upon agreeing to the amendment thus amended.

Mr. PURVIANCE said he could not vote for it because it did not state the
fact. It declared that members of the House had stated that they had
heard of official acts of misconduct of both the judges, when but one act
had been charged against Judge Peters.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH observed that he perceived no reason for the preamble.
He hoped therefore it would not be agreed to. General inquiry was his
object, and, as going to limit it, he was against the preamble.

Mr. ELLIOT said that, had the amendment of the gentleman from Connecticut
prevailed, he might have reconciled it to his mind to vote for the
resolution thus amended. But as it stood, he could not.

Mr. NICHOLSON remarked that when he offered the amendment, the
incorrectness suggested by the gentleman from North Carolina had not
occurred to him. To obviate this incorrectness he would move to amend the
amendment by saying “a certain act of Richard Peters.”

The SPEAKER said this amendment was not in order.

Mr. NICHOLSON said that under such circumstances he must vote against the
whole amendment.

The question being taken, the amendment as amended was lost without a
division.

When the resolution for appointing a committee of inquiry was
carried--yeas 81, nays 40, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, David Bard,
    George M. Bedinger, Phanuel Bishop, William Blackledge, Adam
    Boyd, John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William Butler,
    Levi Casey, Joseph Clay, John Clopton, Jacob Crowninshield,
    Richard Cutts, William Dickson, John B. Earle, Peter Early,
    Ebenezer Elmer, John W. Eppes, Wm. Eustis, William Findlay,
    John Fowler, James Gillespie, Edwin Gray, Andrew Gregg, John
    A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, William Hoge, James Holland, David
    Holmes, John G. Jackson, Walter Jones, Wm. Kennedy, Nehemiah
    Knight, Michael Leib, John B. C. Lucas, Matthew Lyon, Andrew
    McCord, David Meriwether, Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore,
    Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph
    H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer, John Patterson,
    Oliver Phelps, John Randolph, jun., Thomas M. Randolph, John
    Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee, Jacob Richards,
    Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver,
    Tompson J. Skinner, James Sloan, John Smilie, John Smith of
    Virginia, Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John Stewart, David
    Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, John Trigg, Philip
    Van Cortlandt, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Daniel C.
    Verplanck, Matthew Walton, John Whitehill, Marmaduke Williams,
    Richard Wynn, Joseph Winston, Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton, John Campbell, William
    Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett, Manasseh
    Cutler, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dennis, Thomas
    Dwight, James Elliot, Thomas Griffin, Gaylord Griswold, Roger
    Griswold, Seth Hastings, David Hough, Benjamin Huger, Samuel
    Hunt, Joseph Lewis, jun., Thomas Lewis, Henry W. Livingston,
    Thomas Lowndes, Nahum Mitchell, Samuel L. Mitchill, James Mott,
    Thomas Plater, Samuel D. Purviance, Joshua Sands, John Cotton
    Smith, John Smith of New York, Wm. Stedman, James Stephenson,
    Samuel Taggart, Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, George Tibbits,
    Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Peleg Wadsworth, and Lemuel Williams.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. JOHN RANDOLPH, jun., NICHOLSON, JOSEPH CLAY,
EARLY, ROGER GRISWOLD, HUGER, and BOYLE, be appointed a committee
pursuant to the said resolution.


MONDAY, January 9.

Another member, to wit, WILLIAM HELMS, from New Jersey, appeared,
produced his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


WEDNESDAY, January 11.

_Virginia Yazoo Company._

On a motion made and seconded,

    “That the agent or agents of the Virginia Yazoo Company,
    ‘claimants of compensation under the late cession and
    convention between the State of Georgia and the United States,
    and the acts lately passed by Congress thereon, as purchasers
    of land in the Mississippi Territory, in the year one thousand
    seven hundred and eighty-nine, from the said State of Georgia,’
    be heard in person, or by counsel, at the bar of the House, on
    Monday next:”

The question was taken thereupon, and resolved in the affirmative--yeas
61, nays 49.

On a motion made and seconded that the House do come to the following
resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the South Carolina Yazoo Company be heard by
    their agent, on Monday next, at the bar of the House:

And the said motion being twice read at the Clerk’s table, a motion was
made and seconded to amend the same, by striking out all the words from
the word “Resolved,” in the first line, to the end of the motion, and
inserting, in lieu thereof, the following words: “That this House will,
on Monday next, hear all the agents of the different companies claiming
lands south of the State of Tennessee, who may choose to speak at the bar
of this House.”

And on the question that the House do agree to the said amendment, it
passed in the negative. And the main question being taken that the House
do agree to the said motion, as originally proposed, it was resolved in
the affirmative--yeas 67, nays 46.


FRIDAY, February 3.

_Georgia Militia Claims._

The House went into Committee of the Whole on the report of the Committee
of Claims, on the petition of John M. Randolph and Randolph McGillis,
which is unfavorable to the prayer of the petitioners.

The petitioners claim their pay as militiamen, called out in the State
of Georgia for the protection of that State against the Indians. They
allege, that, being called out under the authority of the Government of
the United States, the General Government is bound to compensate them and
the other men called out for their services.

The Committee of Claims report that the petitioners are to look for
compensation to the State of Georgia, who, by the articles of cession
recently concluded, had agreed to receive one million two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars, in full for all demands for military service.

    [This debate, though nominally on a private claim, retains a
    surviving interest from its historic details, its connection
    with the Georgia cession, its references to the Yazoo
    speculation, and its dependence upon the question of protection
    between the Federal Government and a State.]

Mr. EARLY.--Mr. Chairman: I cannot but be sensible of the difficulty
which opposes itself to the present claim after an unfavorable report
from the committee to which it was referred. And it is impossible not
to discern that this difficulty is increased by the opinion of the
Attorney General upon the construction of the articles of cession
from Georgia to the United States. But as to that opinion, it may not
be improper to observe, that so far as it applies to the case of the
claimant, it is repelled by the positive certificates of two of the
Georgia Commissioners, gentlemen of veracity and legal talents equal
with himself. To give to the opinions, or rather the “private ideas and
recollections” of that officer, the weight and authority which have
been thereunto attached by the Committee of Claims, would be to adopt
in practice a principle at war with the maxims of all free Governments;
it would be to constitute the framer of an instrument the judge of its
construction. This is the essence of despotism. But I apprehend that
neither the principle laid down in that opinion nor the facts therein
stated do bear upon the case; but that the facts do negatively prove that
the claims now under discussion were not included in the compensation
stipulated to Georgia in the articles of cession and agreement. The
principles are, that the term “territory,” as used in the instrument,
meant not only the territory ceded, but that retained. Now, Mr.
Chairman, as I cannot possibly comprehend what bearing this has upon the
question before us, I must be excused if I leave the Attorney General in
the undisturbed enjoyment of his premises and pursue the discussion.

So early as the year 1787 the State of Georgia, being sorely distressed
by the violence of the Indians, passed a law directing the establishment
of two regiments of troops, to serve until a restoration of peace
could be secured. But the enlistments not having been completed, in
the following year a law was passed holding out additional inducement,
and in the year 1789 the present federal constitution having gone into
operation, and the rights of peace and war thereby vested exclusively
in the General Government, the Legislature of Georgia passed a law
discharging the troops which had been enlisted, and declaring the rate of
pay which they should receive. For this pay certificates were directed to
be issued, and these certificates constitute a debt unredeemed to this
day. [Mr. E. turned to the several laws above referred to, and read from
each extracts as proofs of his statement.] Here, Mr. Chairman, you have
unfolded a debt, which, without the least violence to construction, fills
up the description given in the articles of cession. Here are expenses
incurred by the State totally distinct from and unconnected with the
claims now under discussion. It is important also to observe, that every
attempt made by the State of Georgia prior to the cession to dispose
of her vacant territory, appears from the face of the acts to have
been dictated by a view of discharging the public obligations to those
troops. No less than three attempts at a disposition of her territory
were made prior to the cession. The first was an offer to cede to the
General Government, in 1788, provided Congress would pay the expenses
which had then accrued in defending the frontiers, and would yield the
wonted protection in future at their own expense. This was rejected. In
the following year a law passed for disposing of a part of the territory
to companies, notoriously with a view to raise money wherewith to meet
the same engagements. This also failed, for causes which have been amply
unfolded to the House on another occasion. The next attempt was in the
year 1795, which, in the very title of the law, is expressed to be made
to meet the particular engagements to the same soldiery. Of the result of
this transaction the House is also possessed. The last attempt was by the
articles of cession. Thus it appears that in no instance were the present
claims ever thought of as a debt to be met by the State of Georgia out of
the proceeds of her unlocated lands, but that the expenses incurred by,
and the engagements made to the troops in the years 1787, 1788, and 1789,
were uniformly the moving cause toward a disposition of her territory.

The Committee of Claims however, sir, notwithstanding they have
throughout their report endeavored to rest upon the Attorney General
the responsibility of the construction given to the cession, have at
the same time erected a pillar of their own to support it, where they
saw it must fall. They well perceived that all reasoning upon the
subject was idle, unless one principle could be established; this they
have boldly advanced to, and, instead of proving, have assumed as the
groundwork of their whole superstructure. It is, that the State was bound
in the first instance to compensate the soldiery, notwithstanding the
ulterior responsibility of the General Government. From this they infer
that the State had a right and by the cession did exercise the right
of exonerating the latter Government. Now, Mr. Chairman, grant to the
Committee their premises and there is an end to the question between us;
their consequences must result. But, sir, I must supplicate their pardon
if I refuse my assent to their position until my judgment is convinced.
And I must be pardoned for saying that the reasoning to which they have
resorted for the purpose of proving it, strikes my mind as the reverse
of sound; that it proves too much to prove any thing. It is, that the
State Government is in the first instance liable, because the troops
were called into the field by the State Executive. This reasoning, Mr.
Chairman, would go to prove that in every instance in which militia have
been called into the service of the General Government, the States from
which they were drafted were in the first instance liable for their
compensation, because, in every case which has taken place, they were
called into the field by State Executives. The truth is, sir, that in
every case the orders have issued from the Executive of the General
Government to that of the State Government, and that orders have from the
latter issued in consequence thereof, for making the requisite drafts;
so that the troops engaged in service under the immediate directions
of the State, but under the mediate directions of the United States.
This was the course pursued in both the insurrections in the State
of Pennsylvania; it was the course in the State of South Carolina in
relation to Indian invasion, at the same period at which the services
were performed in Georgia for which we are now claiming compensation.
It was the same course the other day with the troops ordered down the
Mississippi to occupy New Orleans and its dependency. In all these cases
the troops were compensated by the General Government in the first
instance. It never entered the heart of any man that the States from
which the drafts were made, were in the first instance liable, and that
resort must afterwards be had by the State Government against the United
States. I have always been taught that precedents established principles,
but it now seems that the Committee of Claims in the profoundness of
their researches have discovered that by assuming premises, principles
may be established in the face of a uniform current of precedents.

There are, Mr. Chairman, two modes marked out in the constitution in
which the militia may be called into service. The first is a case where
from necessity the war attribute of sovereignty is left in the individual
States. It is the case of invasion or such imminent danger thereof as
will not admit of delay. The other mode is that of issuing orders from
the Executive of the General, to the officers of the State Governments.
This is the usual method by which the militia of the States are drawn
into the service of the United States. And it is of importance to observe
here, that the act of Congress which was intended to give effect to
the constitutional powers of the General Government to “call forth the
militia,” authorizes the President “to issue his orders for that purpose
to such officer or officers of the militia as he shall think proper.”
For, inasmuch as there can be no other difference in a military point of
view, and for military purposes, between the Governor of a State and the
next highest military officer, than the difference of rank, the one being
first, the other second, in command, it must follow that if the militia
are to resort for pay to the State Governments because their orders have
passed through the Governor, they must also resort to the same source in
case their orders should pass through the second or third in command; the
principles upon which the committee found their reasoning apply equally
to both cases. The soundness of conclusions drawn by the committee is,
therefore, not merely questionable, but to me it appears not difficult to
prove that the conclusions themselves are at war with the most obvious
principles of justice.

I hold it, sir, accordant with the most common rules by which individuals
are regulated in a state of society, that when service is performed
the party for whom it was performed is the only one responsible for
the compensation. The rule applies with equal force to the case of
Governments, who are moral agents. Happily, Mr. Chairman, there is no
difficulty in ascertaining the party for whom the service was performed
in the case under discussion. Fortunately for the States in general, it
is made the constitutional duty of the General Government to “protect
each of them against invasion.” And fortunately for the State of Georgia
in the present instance, there is the recorded sanction of the Executive
of the Union, couched in the following words--“If the information which
you may receive, shall substantiate clearly any hostile designs of the
Creeks against the frontiers of Georgia, you will be pleased to take the
most effectual measures for the defence thereof, as may be in your power,
and which the occasion may require.” If, therefore, the principles and
reasoning of the committee be correct, it must follow that troops engaged
in performing the constitutional duty of the United States must resort
for their compensation in the first place to the States. To premises
leading to such conclusions, I will not, cannot yield assent.

Mr. Chairman: It is recollected that when this subject was under
discussion at the last session of Congress, a distinction was taken
between the situation of troops called into the field by order from the
General Government, and those called out by the State Executive in virtue
of authority given by the former. But, sir, I humbly apprehend that such
a distinction is one of words, and not of principles. And I must here
profess to the honorable Committee of Claims my profound acknowledgment,
for furnishing me with an idea, and a mode of phraseology most suited to
my purpose. They, in their report, have told the House that the “manner
of exhibiting” the demand assuredly cannot change its nature. Now, sir,
I repeat, in nearly their own words, that the manner of calling out
the troops, cannot change the nature of the service. It cannot change
the United States service into State service. And indeed the Committee
of Claims themselves have given us the strongest proofs, that with
them the distinction had no weight. For of claims which have been so
contradistinguished in the reports from the War Department, there were
committed to them both descriptions; but they draw no difference. Indeed,
their principles would admit of none.

But, sir, if a difference in principle did exist between claims of the
two kinds, it would prove nothing in the present case, because the
difference does not here appear in fact; and I cannot but consider it as
one of the unfortunate circumstances attendant upon our claims, that the
epithet _unauthorized_, has, without foundation, been attached to them,
because, as was supposed, they were founded upon services not specially
ordered. The fact is, Mr. Chairman, that they were not only _authorized_,
but they were _ordered_, by the General Government. I beg leave to
compare the tenor of the orders for drafting the militia in Georgia,
with the orders issued in other cases, about which no difficulty ever
occurred. The words used in the Georgia case are, “you will be pleased
to take the most effectual measures for the defence thereof,” &c. What
are the words used in the orders issued to the governors of four States,
to march militia to quell the insurrection in the Western counties of
Pennsylvania? “I have to request your Excellency,” &c. The words are the
same in every other instance in which militia have been ordered into
the service of the United States. They are the same which were used for
enlisting the one hundred horse and one hundred foot to serve upon the
frontiers of Georgia, about whose compensation there never has, until
the present moment, been any difficulty; they are the same under which
several corps were raised in the same quarter, whose services have long
since been remunerated.

Let us here pause for a moment, and view the extent to which we shall be
led by adopting the report. Sir, the principles of that report, and the
application therein made of those principles, lead to a conclusion from
which, if I mistake not, every gentleman upon this floor will revolt.
Sure I am, every State in the Union will reject it with horror. What,
sir! has the great, the all-important right of peace and war been yielded
up by the States to the General Government, and yet the States bound to
compensate for war services? It is no reply to this conclusion to be told
that the States are only liable in the first instance; for it is then
completely within the power of the General Government, by _withholding_,
to make them bear the burden altogether. And to that may be added, that
the expenditure might frequently be of such magnitude as to create
extreme oppression in the imposition of taxes, and, in some States, might
produce general ruin and bankruptcy.

Mr. J. C. SMITH observed that the Committee of Claims, in submitting to
the House the reports then before them, had not been influenced by the
magnitude of the sum claimed for services. The simple question considered
by them, was whether compensation had, or had not been rendered for those
services. The decision of this question depended on another question,
whether from the nature of our Government, the State of Georgia was to
be considered as, in the first instance, liable for the satisfaction
of these claims. If this should be admitted, he thought the proper
construction to be placed on the articles of cession was extremely plain.
There are two ways in which the militia of a State may be called out by
the Executive of the United States. The first is by a direct detachment
of any portion of the militia. It was not necessary, in any instance,
for the Government of the United States to call on the Executive of a
State for this purpose. It was in their power directly to call into the
public service a brigade or other division. This is one course, which
may be pursued, and in this case it is admitted that the soldiers are
soldiers of the United States, and that for their compensation they are
to look to no other Government than that of the United States, in the
first instance. The other course is that where a requisition is made by
the General Government on the Executive of a State. What is the state of
things in this case? It must be presumed that the citizens of a State,
thus called into service, are to look to their own State for compensation
in the first instance, though he admitted that the General Government was
in the last resort responsible. They are to look, in the first instance,
to the State Government, for this obvious reason: The Governor of a
State is not amenable to the General Government; and he consequently
cannot be punished for exceeding their orders. Is that Government then
bound at all events to pay the expenses incurred in consequence of the
orders of the State Executive, when they may be in direct violation of
the orders of the General Government? It is a clear position then, that
when the militia are called out by the Executive of a State they are to
look to the State in the first instance. Application may be made to the
General Government in the first instance, and if there shall have been no
disobedience to its orders it may make payment; but, put the case of the
orders of the General Government being disobeyed, will it be contended
that it will be obliged to remunerate services rendered in opposition to
its commands?

Contemplating the subject in this view, it must be admitted that the
militia are in the first instance to look to the State Government, which
may make a compromise with the General Government.

The second question is, what is the nature of the compromise made in this
case? The articles of cession purport to be [Mr. SMITH here quoted the
beginning of these articles.]

It may here be proper to premise that Georgia is the first State in the
Union that has ever received a compensation for her territory transferred
to the United States. That territory was acquired by the joint exertions
and blood of the citizens of all the States. Under such circumstances it
becomes necessary to inquire into the compensation stipulated to be given
by the United States to the State of Georgia; a compensation not given
for the land, but for expenses incurred by Georgia in relation to it.
The Attorney General tells us that these expenses were incurred for the
portion surrendered to the United States, as well as for the whole State.

It behooves the gentleman from Georgia to show the precise expenses
incurred. Were this once proved it would remove all doubt. The
Commissioners who formed the articles of cession, it may be presumed, had
before them the whole materials; and it must be inferred that the claims
now made were fully considered by them, and were, so far as they are
just, included in the settlement. Mr. S. concluded his remarks by saying
he felt no uncommon tenacity or zeal against the claims; but that he
would be very willing to allow them in case it should be satisfactorily
shown that they were not already compensated.

Mr. MERIWETHER and Mr. HOLLAND opposed the report, when a vote was passed
against the claims--yeas 73, nays 28; when the House, on the motion of
Mr. J. CLAY, postponed the further consideration of the subject till
Monday next.


MONDAY, February 13.

_Public Roads._

On motion of Mr. JACKSON, the House took up the bill making provision for
the application of the money heretofore appropriated to the laying out
and making public roads leading from the navigable waters emptying into
the Atlantic to the Ohio river.

Mr. J. CLAY moved to postpone the bill to the 1st Monday of December.
Lost--yeas 41, nays 40.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD moved so to amend the first section, as to vest the
President with a general power to appoint three Commissioners to
designate a route, to be reported to Congress for their ultimate
decision; which motion, after a short conversation, was agreed to by a
considerable majority.

Mr. LYON offered a motion for empowering the President to designate the
routes. Lost, without a division.

The committee rose and reported the bill with several amendments, in
which the House concurred, and ordered the bill to a third reading on
Wednesday.


TUESDAY, February 14.

_Importation of Slaves._

The following motion, offered by Mr. BARD, was taken into consideration
in Committee of the Whole:

    “_Resolved_, That a tax of ten dollars be imposed on every
    slave imported into any part of the United States.”

On motion of Mr. JACKSON, it was agreed to add after the words United
States, “or their territories.”

Mr. LOWNDES.--I will trespass but a very short time upon the attention
of the House at this stage of the business, but as I have objections to
the resolution, it may be proper that I should state them now. I will
do so briefly, reserving to myself the privilege of giving my opinion
more at length when the bill is before the House, should the resolution
be adopted, and a bill brought in. I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, to find
that the conduct of the Legislature of the State of South Carolina, in
repealing its law prohibitory of the importation of negroes, has excited
so much dissatisfaction and resentment as I find it has done with the
far greater part of this House. If gentlemen will take a dispassionate
review of the circumstances under which this repeal was made, I think
this dissatisfaction and resentment will be removed, and I should indulge
the hope that this contemplated tax will not be imposed. Antecedent to
the adoption of the constitution under which we now act, the Legislature
of South Carolina passed an act prohibiting the importation of negroes
from Africa, sanctioned by severe penalties. I speak from recollection,
but I believe not less than the forfeiture of the negro and a hundred
pounds sterling for each brought into the State; and this act has been
continued in force until it was repealed by the Legislature at its last
session. This long interdiction, I think, manifests, on the part of the
government of the State, a disinclination to the trade, and, had we
received the aid from Congress which was necessary to enforce the act,
the repeal which is now complained of would never, in my opinion, have
taken place. But, Mr. Speaker, the State was unable to enforce its laws.
It had given up to the Government of the United States all revenues
derived from foreign imposts, and was, therefore, necessarily divested
of the means of preventing the introduction into the country from sea of
whatever the excitements to gain might allure it into. The geographical
situation of our country is not unknown. With navigable rivers running
into the heart of it, it was impossible, with our means, to prevent our
Eastern brethren, who, in some parts of the Union, in defiance of the
authority of the General Government, have been engaged in this trade,
from introducing them into the country. The law was completely evaded,
and for the last year or two, Africans were introduced into the country
in numbers little short, I believe, of what they would have been had the
trade been a legal one. Under these circumstances, sir, it appears to me
to have been the duty of the Legislature to repeal the law, and remove
from the eyes of the people the spectacle of its authority being daily
violated.

I beg, sir, that from what I have said, it may not be inferred that I
am friendly to a continuation of the slave trade. So far from it that,
without adverting to considerations by which I know other gentlemen
are influenced, I think the period has passed when the interests of
the country required, and her policy dictated, that an end should be
put to it. I wish the time had arrived when Congress could legislate
conclusively upon the subject. I should then have the satisfaction of
uniting with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, who moved the resolution.
Whenever it does arrive, should I then have a seat in this House, I will
assure him I will cordially support him in obtaining his object. But, Mr.
Speaker, I cannot vote for this resolution, because I am sure it is not
calculated to promote the object which it has in view. I am convinced
that the tax of ten dollars will not prevent the introduction into the
country of a single slave. Gentlemen must be sensible of the truth of
this observation, when they are informed, and the fact is too notorious
even to be doubted, that, notwithstanding the expense and risk which
attend an illicit trade, they have been introduced in very great numbers.
Was I friendly to the trade, I should, without any hesitation, embrace
the proposition contained in the resolution, and I should consider it a
point gained of no small importance, that the Legislature of the General
Government had given a sanction to it--for I can regard the Government
deriving a revenue from it in no other light than a sanction. The
gentleman from Pennsylvania, and those who think with him, ought, above
all others, to deprecate the passing of this resolution. It appears to
me to be directly calculated to defeat their own object--to give to
what they wish to discountenance a legislative sanction; and, further,
an interest to the Government in permitting this trade after the period
when it might constitutionally terminate it. When I say that I am myself
unfriendly to it, I do not wish, Mr. Speaker, to be misunderstood; I do
not mean to convey the idea that the people of the Southern States are
universally opposed to it--I know the fact to be otherwise. Many of the
people in the Southern States feel an interest in it, and will yield
it with reluctance. Their interest will be strengthened by the immense
accession of territory to the United States by the cession of Louisiana.
Gentlemen cannot foresee what the situation of the country will be when
the period arrives when Congress may constitutionally interdict the
trade. The finances of the country, and the exigences of the times, may
be such as to prevent the Government from dispensing with any part of
its revenue. The tax, if imposed, will undoubtedly produce a revenue,
and in proportion to the amount of this revenue will be the interest of
the Government in the trade. But, Mr. Speaker, my greatest objection to
this tax is, that it will fall exclusively upon the agriculture of the
State of which I am one of the representatives. However odious it may be
to some gentlemen, and however desirous they may be of discountenancing
it, I think it must be evident that this tax will not effect their
object; that it will not be a discouragement to the trade, nor will the
introduction of a single African into the country be prevented. The only
result will be, that it will produce a revenue to the Government. I
trust that no gentleman is desirous of establishing this tax with a view
to revenue. The State of South Carolina contributes as largely to the
revenue of the United States, for its population and wealth, as any State
in the Union. To impose a tax falling exclusively on her agriculture
would be the height of injustice, and I hope that the Representatives
of the landed interest of the nation will resist every measure, however
general in its appearance, a tendency of which is to lay a partial and
unequal tax on agriculture.

Mr. BEDINGER observed, that the gentleman from South Carolina had so
fully expressed the opinions he entertained, that he should say but
little. Every body who knew his opinions on slavery might think strange
of the vote he should give against the resolution. There was not a member
on the floor more inimical to slavery than he was, still he was of
opinion that the effect of the present resolution, if adopted, would be
injurious. He should, therefore, vote against it.

Mr. BARD.--It was my wish that the question before the committee might be
taken without discussion, but, as the gentleman from South Carolina has
preferred a different course, I beg permission to offer a few thoughts on
the subject.

As to the constitutionality of the measure, I believe there can be but
one opinion. It is pretty well understood that the union of the States
was a matter of compromise; and, indeed, the language of the constitution
suggests the idea that the convention which formed that instrument, must
have had the emancipation of slaves under their consideration. They had
achieved liberty, and their object was to transmit it to posterity;
and we cannot permit ourselves to suppose that men whose minds were so
enriched with liberal sentiments, and who had so often reiterated the
sacred truth, “That all men were born equally free”--I say we cannot
suppose that they would consider slavery to be a subject unworthy their
discussion; and it appears to be equally suggested that the convention
were not all agreed to an absolute prohibition of the slave trade,
but yielded so far that a duty or tax might be imposed on the future
importation of that description of people. The question, then, is only on
the policy of laying this tax; and it appears that there can be no doubt
on this question.

The slave trade, in terms, makes African men mere articles of traffic,
and of course they must be as much a subject of commercial regulation as
any other species of foreign manufactures. The tax will be high or low,
in proportion to the price the article will bring. And if my information
is correct, a slave will bring four hundred dollars; the tax, then, is
but two and-a-half per cent., which is many degrees lower than any other
imported article pays. The tax is a general one; no State in the Union
is exempted; it will operate wherever its object can be found. It may
be that some States will pay more and some less, but it will be at the
option of any State how much, or whether it will pay any of this tax;
for it will be just as the State shall please to deal in this article of
commerce. And, on the score of uniformity, no objection can lie against
the tax--the slaves have already been the object of direct taxation,
and Vermont paid none of that tax, because she had none of that kind of
taxable property; and yet I never heard it complained of as not being
uniform. It is said the tax is impolitic, because it will not prevent the
importation of Africans into our country. This may, indeed, be the case;
and I believe it will be but a feeble check to the trade if not aided
by nobler motives. However, if any of the States engage in the trade,
the tax will have two effects--it will add something to the revenue, and
it will show to the world that the General Government are opposed to
slavery, and willing to improve their power, as far as it will go, for
preventing it. Both these ends are valuable; but I deem the latter to be
the more important one, for we owe it indispensably to ourselves and to
the world, whose eyes are on our Government, to maintain its republican
character. Every thing compared to a good name is “trash;” and it rests
with us whether we will preserve or destroy it. If our Government will
respect power only, and justify whatever it may be able to do, then will
our hands be against every man, and every man’s hand against us; and
Americans will become the scorn of mankind.

On what principles, whether moral or political, I do not know; but so it
was, that about the close of the Revolutionary war, the Quaker society
in South Carolina brought the slave trade, or perhaps slavery itself,
under their serious consideration, and declared it to be unjustifiable.
They afterwards, in 1796 or 1797, addressed Congress on the subject; but
failed in their object, and for no other reason, probably, than that the
powers of Congress did not reach it.

Some years ago the States, even those in which slaves abound most, loudly
exclaimed against the further importation of that class of people, and
by their laws prohibited their traffic. Either they did this on moral
principles or considerations of policy. In 1802, Congress stretched
out her arm to aid the State Governments against the evil they so much
deprecated, and passed a law inflicting fines and forfeitures on every
man who should be found importing slaves into the United States. What
might have been the issue of these combined exertions, or how far they
might ultimately secure their end, I cannot tell; but, as to South
Carolina, they have become nugatory; by repealing her prohibitory law she
has rejected the interference of Congress. Why that State has done so;
why she has abandoned a measure which, the other day, was considered so
much her interest, I know not, nor is it for me to offer any conjectures.
South Carolina is a sovereign State, and has a right to consult and
pursue her own interest, so far as the general good will permit; for
hitherto she may come, and no further. Every State has a right to import
slaves if it so chooses, and Congress has a right to tax all the slaves
imported; but when the powers of a State, though constitutional, operate
against the general interest, then the exercise of those powers is
politically wrong, because it is contrary to the fundamental principle of
society, the public good, which is paramount to law and the constitution
itself. And, in my opinion, the importation of slaves is hostile to the
United States: to import slaves is to import enemies into our country; it
is to import men who must be our natural enemies, if such there can be.
Their circumstances, their barbarism, their reflections, their hopes and
fears, render them an enemy of the worst description.

Gentlemen tell us, though I can hardly think them serious, that the
people of this description can never systematize a rebellion. I will
not mention facts, it is sufficient to say that experience speaks a
different language--the rigor of the laws, and the impatience of the
slaves, will mutually increase each other, until the artifices of the one
are exhausted, and until, on the other hand, human nature sinks under
its wrongs, or obtains the restoration of its rights. The negroes are
in every family; they are waiting on every table; they are present on
numerous occasions when the conversation turns on political subjects,
and cannot fail to catch ideas that will excite discontentment with
their condition. And what is to be expected from the people of this
description, but that they will some day, and especially if their
importation continues, produce a disturbance that may not be easily
quieted, or kindle a flame that may not be readily extinguished. If ten
thousand of them have been, as it is said, smuggled into the United
States, in the course of a year or two past, and if ten or fifteen
thousand of them may now be legally brought annually into our country,
for four years to come, it will hardly be imagined that the general
interest will be unaffected by such an importation.

If they are ignorant, they are, however, susceptible of instruction, and
capable of becoming proficients in the art of war. To be convinced of
this we have only to look at St. Domingo.

There the negroes felt their wrongs, and have avenged them; they learned
the rights of man, and asserted them; they have wrested the power from
their oppressors, and have become masters of the island. If they are
unarmed, they may be armed; European powers have armed the Indians
against us, and why may they not arm the negroes? And if they are already
as numerous as is consistent with safety, it must be extreme impolicy to
import more; it is to accelerate an event which we cannot contemplate
without pain.

Slavery is not only impolitic as it affects the strength and tranquillity
of the United States, but as it prevents their wealth, which can only
grow out of society where the arts, sciences, and manufactures, are
cultivated and improved. But, sir, I despise to argue on the advantages
or disadvantages of what is contrary to the genius of our Government;
what is radically unjust, and violates the principles of morality.

The Americans boast of being the most enlightened people in the
world--they certainly enjoy the greatest share of liberty, and understand
the principles of rational government more generally than any other
nation on earth. They have denounced tyranny and oppression; they have
declared their country to be an asylum for the oppressed of all nations.
But will foreigners concede this high character to us, when they examine
our census and find that we hold a million of men in the most degraded
slavery? This is nearly one-fifth of our whole population; in some of the
States nearly the half. Here, then, is a fact that must have weight to
sink our national character, in spite of volumes to support it. It is a
fact, from which foreigners will infer, that we possess the principles of
tyranny, but want the power to carry them into operation, except against
the untutored and defenceless African. If, then, we hold a consistency of
national character in any estimation, we will give every discouragement
in our power to the importation of slaves. It is in this view that the
tax contemplated by the resolution is principally to be considered, and
only incidentally as matter of revenue.

But, sir, I presume, on permission, to say, that the importation of
slaves is in direct contradiction to the principles of morality. On these
principles the Constitution of the United States is founded; on them
every law ought to be founded; otherwise legislation will progress in the
dark, and every step deviate still more from its true direction. “Do unto
others as you would that others should do unto you,” is a law paramount
to all human institutions; it is the fundamental law of human nature, of
Christianity, and of every rational Government; it is a law which we wish
all men to respect in their dealings with us; and it is a law which every
man confesses he ought to observe, and, in spite of all the sophistry of
depravity, must acknowledge himself subject to its cognizance. I need
not, nor will I, ask if we have observed this law as to the Africans; for
it must be obvious to every man that it is not possible to violate it in
a greater degree than we have done towards that unfortunate and wretched
people.

But, notwithstanding all the information our country enjoys, numbers
in the Eastern States have been embarked, for some years past, in the
cruel traffic of slaves, and smuggling them into other States. And it
is to be feared that many of them are, at this moment, preparing means
to stimulate the barbarous tribes of Africa to war against each other;
mutually to torture every human feeling; to violate the strongest ties
of nature and affection; to tear the husband from the wife, and the
wife from the husband; the parent from the child, and the child from
the parent; and are coolly and deliberately forging irons, that they
may have the infernal pleasure of coolly and deliberately riveting them
on the unfortunate men, women, and children, who may fall into their
hands. Such an enterprise, such a traffic as this, must affect our
national character; it is self-evidently wrong, and, at first view, must
receive the disapprobation of every disinterested man. The genius of our
constitution, the mildness of its administration, and the prevailing
sentiment of the nation, must sanction every measure to discourage the
further admission of a people whose numbers already excite most painful
sensations. In a word, the tax is constitutional; no article can bear a
tax better than the one here proposed; it is a uniform tax, and justified
on the ground of sound policy; and so far as it tends to discourage the
slave-trade, it is supported by every principle of virtue. If I have
uttered a word offensive to any member of the House, it will not be
attributable to design, but to an honest solicitude to promote the honor
and interest of our country.

Mr. BEDINGER said he differed widely, as to the effects of this motion,
from the gentleman who had just spoken. He was as hostile to the
slave-trade as any man in the Union; and if he could believe that the
imposition of a tax of ten dollars upon every imported negro would check
the importation, he would vote for it. But he believed the resolution
would have a different effect, and would rather sanction than discourage
the trade. In point of revenue, the tax was of little consideration.
Suppose a thousand slaves to be imported monthly, the amount of the tax
would be about $100,000 a year; which in four years, at the expiration of
which Congress would have power to prohibit the trade altogether, would
amount to $400,000--a sum too trifling to be put into competition with
the adoption of any measure that went to sanction such a trade.

Mr. MACON (the Speaker) believed the resolution was not founded in good
policy. All the declamation and appeal to the passions urged in its
behalf appeared to him unnecessary and irrelevant. The avowed object of
the proposed tax was to show the hostility of Congress to the principle
of importing slaves. How could this opposition of Congress be manifested,
when it would become the duty of the armed ships of the United States,
as soon as the tax was imposed, to protect this trade, as well as all
other trade on which taxes were laid? He asked whether vessels engaged in
this trade would not, under such circumstances, possess the same right
to the protection of the Government as any other vessels engaged in any
other kind of trade? Can this House tax this trade, and refuse it the
same protection that is extended to all other trade? The question is not
whether we shall prohibit the slave trade, but simply whether we shall
tax it. Gentlemen are of opinion that the State of South Carolina has
done wrong in permitting the importation of slaves. Suppose that this is
the case. May not this measure be wrong also? Will it not look like an
attempt in the General Government to correct a State for the undisputed
exercise of its constitutional powers? It appeared to him to be something
like putting a State to the ban of the empire. It will operate as a
censure thrown on the State. To this, said Mr. M., I can never consent.
As far as the law that may be founded upon this resolution can go, it
will hold forth an evidence of the opinion entertained by Congress of
the act of the Legislature of South Carolina. I know that these ideas
may be unpopular in some parts of the Union, but I, notwithstanding,
consider them just. There does not appear to me to be any necessity for
our interposition, as, since the adoption of the constitution, no slaves
have, I believe, been permitted to be imported, and as only four years
are yet to run before Congress will be possessed of the constitutional
right of prohibiting such importation altogether. And the simple question
now is, whether for a trifling revenue, we will undertake to protect
this trade. My idea is, that those who at present go into the traffic,
have no right to claim your protection; but once legalize it by taxing
it, and they will acquire the right thereto, and will demand it. All
that has been said on the circumstances connected with the slave trade
either here or in England, and on its morality or immorality, are in my
opinion foreign to the true point involved in this debate, which is, Is
the measure contemplated by the resolution politic, or is it not? In my
opinion it is impolitic, for the reasons I have assigned, and for many
others which might be added. I shall therefore, on this ground, vote
against it.

Mr. FINDLAY was of opinion that the policy of the measure embraced by
the resolution, and nothing else, was before them. Gentlemen seemed all
to unite in their abhorrence of the slave trade; they differed only
about the means of preventing it. It was well understood that a large
majority of the Federal Convention were inimical to the slave trade. That
convention had only acted upon it in a commercial point of view. As they
considered imported slaves an article of commerce, the House possessed
the same liberty of acting with regard to them, as with regard to other
articles of trade. In some of these articles, Congress had the right of
exercising unlimited taxation; in this case, their power was limited to a
certain amount. Imported goods, on an average, were subjected to a duty
of about 20 per cent. On this subject, a difference of opinion exists as
to the propriety of making imported slaves an article of revenue. This
is the true question, and not whether we shall cast a censure upon any
particular State. It does not follow, that, because we lay a particular
tax, we censure those who pay it. Considering this, then, as an article
of trade, the tax might have been long since laid, had not all the States
prohibited the traffic. Under those circumstances, it could not be taken
up as a subject of revenue.

Mr. F. observed, that, though it might be unbecoming in the House to be
influenced by resentment against the State of South Carolina, yet it
was proper that they should be influenced by the policy of the case.
As a profitable article of commerce, it appeared as eligible a subject
of taxation as could be found, and as justly liable to taxation as any
other. As to the disgrace, which some gentlemen were of opinion would
arise from taxing it, that arose from the existence of the slave trade.
In laying the tax, we shall do all we can to discourage it; and if we do
not like to use the money derived from taxing it in the common way, we
may apply it to special objects--to ameliorate the state of slavery, or
to any other object.

Mr. F. concluded his remarks by observing, that this question being
brought forward, he could not justify himself in neglecting to embrace
the opportunity it presented of discountenancing the importation of
slaves. He considered it proper that Congress should take up the subject
as the constitution presented it to them. At a certain period they would
possess the right of prohibiting it altogether, and until then they
enjoyed the power of taxation. This being the only constitutional power
they did possess, he trusted they would exert it.

Mr. S. L. MITCHILL declared his wish that the proposition of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. BARD) should be considered merely as a
subject of political economy. In the remarks which he proposed to offer
upon it, he should, therefore, confine himself to that object. He would,
therefore, say nothing on the immorality of a trade which deprived a
large portion of the human species of their rights. He should pass over,
in silence, every thing that might be urged to exhibit it as impious
and irreligious; and he would not utter a word on its repugnance to
the principles of our equal jurisprudence, and the spirit of our free
Government. The slavery of a portion of our species was a copious theme,
when viewed in either of these aspects; but, on the present occasion, he
was willing to waive them all. The proposition was to be considered only
in its commercial, economical, and fiscal relations; and on each of these
it would be proper to make a few observations.

It was much to be regretted that the severe and pointed statute
against the slave trade had been so little regarded. In defiance of
its forbiddance and its penalties, it was well known that citizens and
vessels of the United States were still engaged in that traffic. During
the present session, memorials had been presented to Congress praying
for exoneration from the exportation bonds, which had been given to
one of the collectors of the customs, to ensure the landing of a cargo
of New England rum in Africa, which it was not pretended to be denied
was bartered away for slaves. These voyages were said to be carried on
under the flag of a foreign nation; and the common practice, as was
alleged, was, to go to the island of St. Croix and procure Danish papers
and colors. Under this cover, the voyages were performed. To prevent
the confiscation of the vessels under the law, on conviction of being
engaged in the slave trade, it had been customary to sell that article of
property in a foreign port.

Mr. M. observed that the extent of this shocking commerce was very
considerable at this time. Some time ago, he had seen a list of the
American vessels then known to be hovering on the coast of Guinea
in quest of captive negroes. They were numerous and active, and so
fatally busy as to excite the apprehensions of the benevolent Sierra
Leone Company. In various parts of the nation, outfits were made for
slave-voyages, without secrecy, shame, or apprehension. The construction
of the ships, the shackles for confining the wretched passengers, and all
the dismal apparatus of cruelty, were attended to with the systematic
coolness of an ordinary adventure. Regardless of legal prohibitions,
these merciless men, as greedy as the sharks of the element on which they
sailed, collected their slaves along the shores, and at the factories
of Negroland, from the river Senegal to the countries of Congo and
Angola. Countenanced by their fellow-citizens at home, who were as ready
to buy as they themselves were to collect and to bring to market, they
approached our Southern harbors and inlets, and clandestinely disembarked
the sooty offspring of the Eastern, upon the ill-fated soil of the
Western hemisphere. In this way, it had been computed that, during the
last twelve months, twenty thousand enslaved negroes had been transported
from Guinea, and, by smuggling, added to the plantation stock of Georgia
and South Carolina.

So little respect seems to have been paid to the existing prohibitory
statute, that it may almost be considered as disregarded by common
consent. And, therefore, as was observed by a gentleman from South
Carolina, (Mr. HUGER,) the Legislature of that State had lately repealed
their restrictive law, and legitimated a trade which neither that
regulation of their common wealth, nor the concurrent authority of the
nation, could prevent. And it may be received as a correct general idea
on this subject, that the citizens of the navigating States bring negroes
from Africa, and sell them to the inhabitants of those States which are
more distinguished for their plantations.

Thus in spite of the spirit of our republican institutions, and the
letter of our laws, a commerce in slaves is carried on to an alarming
extent--a species of slavery peculiar in its form and character, and
unlike that which was practised in ancient or modern Europe--a kind of
servitude unheard of by the civilized world, until it was made known
among the discoveries of the Portuguese along the western coast of that
continent which reaches from Ceuta to the Cape of Good Hope. There it
seems to have been extant from time immemorial, among the barbarous
powers of a country who have eradicated all the tender relations of
society, and established in their place the forceful and ferocious
distinctions of MASTER and SLAVE. From those rude and uncivilized tribes,
did Christian people learn the lessons of negro slavery. Under such
instructors, and with such examples before them, have the Europeans and
their descendants carried those savage customs of Africans into the
New World, and most unfortunately tainted with them the manners and
ordinances of a more refined race of men. For a delineation of this
peculiar state of society, in its native regions, the world is much
indebted to the undaunted enterprise of Mr. Parke; as, for its baneful
effects upon the white nations who have adopted it, they will long
remember the disclosures of Mr. Wilberforce, and the researches of Mr.
Clarkson.

This doleful traffic it was not in the power of Congress to prevent by
any present regulations. By the 9th section of the first article of
the constitution the power of admitting such persons as they please
is reserved to the States, until the year 1808. South Carolina has
authorized the importation of negro slaves from Africa. This Congress can
neither prohibit nor punish. But the National Legislature can exercise
the authority granted by the same paragraph of the constitution, “of
imposing on such importation a tax or duty not exceeding ten dollars for
each person.”

There could be no doubt of the power of Congress to declare and levy such
an impost on imported slaves for four years to come. The only question
therefore was, whether it would be good policy to do so? Mr. MITCHILL
contended that it would. On this point he replied to a gentleman from
South Carolina, (Mr. LOWNDES,) who had argued that such a tax would
discourage agriculture. He contrasted the cultivation of lands by the
labor of freemen, with the more expensive management of them by slaves.
He compared the husbandry of the Northern and Middle States, with the
rural economy of the South. He examined in detail the moderate profits of
a plantation on which bread, corn, grass, and live stock, were raised,
and the enormous income derived to the proprietor of an estate employed
in the culture of tobacco, rice, cotton, and sugar. He examined the
smaller expense of feeding, clothing, and housing laborers in warm
than in cold climates. It has been computed by men of observation,
that a working slave on a cotton plantation would, besides supporting
himself, clear for his master a net sum of two hundred dollars a year.
On the average course of crops, where the plants were not attacked by
the cherille, this estimate was considerably below the mark. And on this
conviction he believed there was no important article whatever that would
bear an impost so well.

Mr. M. then replied to an argument of the gentleman from North Carolina,
(Mr. MACON,) that the imposition of the tax would be a recognition of
the right to trade in slaves, and bind the nation to protect it with
the force of the navy. He considered slavery already recognized in many
of the States, and permitted by the constitution. It was a fact that it
did exist, and Congress could not put an end to it. But this body might
interpose its authority, and discountenance it as far as possible; and by
laying the duty as high as the constitution permitted, a very desirable
addition would be made to the revenue. Two hundred thousand dollars might
be computed to be derived from this sort of merchandise imported into
the country. Nor would Congress be bound to protect the African commerce
on the high seas; the existing statute would be in force against it; the
trade would still be unlawful as far as the power of Congress extended.
And under the proposition now under debate, this species of traffic would
be so far from receiving encouragement, that it would be punished in
cases where Congress could punish it, and taxed in the cases to which the
power to punish it did not extend.

He then delineated the wretched condition of a man subdued by fraud or
force, deprived of the exercise of his will and judgment, subjected to
the dominion and caprice of another, robbed of his rights and privileges,
divested of moral power and agency, degraded from the rank of a human
being, and brutalized into a _chattel_--a _thing_--and divested of the
character of a _person_. In this point of view, such articles, bought and
sold publicly in the market, were to be considered as mere merchandise,
as working machines, or animals of labor? Distressing as the recollection
was to every sympathizing or patriotic heart, it was useless to dwell
upon it, as it was beyond our reach to grant relief. He would therefore
treat it strictly as a case of foreign merchandise heretofore admitted
free, but upon which it was now intended to impose a duty. For his own
part, he should be glad if it could be laid, _ad valorem_, upon the price
of the article. But, as the matter was circumstanced, there was no other
method that could be adopted than to impose it, _per capita_, upon the
individual persons imported. By laying the tax, he would imitate the ways
of Divine Providence, and endeavor to extract good out of evil.

Concluding thus that the tax was constitutional, that the subject would
bear it, and that it would be a seasonable and proper expression of the
Congressional sentiment on the subject. Mr. M. proceeded to show what an
abundance of excellent purposes could be answered by $200,000 collected
annually for four years.

In the course of his remarks, Mr. M. said, he had endeavored to avoid all
harshness of expression on a topic of a peculiarly delicate nature, and
prone to excite much sensibility in debate, but considered it strictly as
a matter of political economy. In his attempt to state his reasoning to
the committee, not as an abstract speculator, but as a man of business,
he hoped he had given no offence to any gentleman by any severity of
animadversion. He looked upon negro slavery as a dark spot on some of the
members of the national body, which was spreading wider, turning blacker,
and threatening a gangrene all around--and he felt a confidence that
all friends to the health of this body would take warning by its fatal
progress in a neighboring island--which had so mortified in St. Domingo,
as to make that extreme part rot and drop off from the system to which it
once belonged.

Mr. SLOAN said he rose to observe, in a few words, that however
afflicting it might be to contemplate a certain part of the creation used
as articles of traffic, imported and exported the same as cattle, he
did not consider the morality or immorality of the practice before the
House. We must take the constitution as we find it, and as it is not in
our power to prohibit the importation, the only question to be considered
is, whether we shall most encourage the traffic, by letting the articles
imported remain free of duty or by imposing a tax upon them. This view,
he believed, presented to the mind the true question, and believing
himself that a tax would, in some degree, discourage the importation, he
should vote for the resolution.

Mr. T. MOORE.--I am astonished to hear gentlemen, who advocate the
resolution now under consideration, reprobate a traffic as horrid and
infamous, and yet wish to draw a revenue from infamy, if it is an infamy.

I differ very widely in opinion from the honorable gentleman from
Pennsylvania, who thinks that a tax of ten dollars per head will operate
as a check to the growth of this horrid traffic. If I thought it would
have that effect I would cheerfully vote for the resolution. I believe a
tax of ten dollars will not prevent the importation of a single person of
this description.

The gentleman told us that he hoped the General Government were disposed
to discourage this traffic as far as they are authorized by the
constitution. I hope this House will discourage this impolitic act of
the Legislature of one of the Southern States--not by imposing a tax on
those unfortunate people imported into the United States, but by passing
a resolution expressive of its disapprobation of all acts permitting the
importation of certain people into the United States. As the General
Government cannot prohibit this traffic before the year 1808, I hope
this House will reject the resolution under consideration, and totally
disapprove every measure which attempts to draw revenue from an act that
rivets the chains of slavery on any of the human race.

Mr. HUGER regretted that he could not see the subject in the same light
with other gentlemen who had taken a part in the debate. He had no
hesitation in saying that he had always been hostile to the importation
of slaves. Nor had he any hesitation in saying that if he had the power
he would prohibit the importation. But the situation in which they
were now placed was very different from that in which they would find
themselves in the year 1808, when they would possess the constitutional
power to prohibit the introduction of slaves. The constitution was known
to be the offspring of concession and compromise, and in no part of
it was this feature more apparent than in that which related to this
subject. When the Southern States were admitted into the Union, they
were in the habit of carrying on this species of trade, and they, by the
express language of the constitution, retained the right of continuing
it until the year 1808. Under this constitution the State of South
Carolina enjoyed the exclusive right of judging of the propriety of
allowing the trade or of prohibiting it. Had he had the honor of a seat
in the Legislature of that State, Mr. H. certainly would have opposed
the passage of this law. But he was only one of that community, standing
here as their Representative, and after the State had exercised their
undoubted right, however he might dislike the measure, it was his duty to
defend the right which they had to adopt it. That State had in truth done
no more than she possessed a constitutional right to do, and he believed
there was in that State as much true compassion as in any other in the
Union. He said he could not therefore but feel sensibly the attempt to
single out this particular State to censure her for doing that which she
had an undisputed right to do.

This was not, as contended by some gentlemen, a mere question of revenue;
but it was a question whether the Government of the Union should come
forward and condemn the act of a State, which she was fully authorized
to pass. If it is necessary to increase the revenue, let us meet that
subject fairly and fully, and not single out a particular resource of
a particular State. It is on this ground that I principally object to
this measure. The gentleman from New York (Mr. MITCHILL) has endeavored
to prove that because in the Southern States the article of slaves
produces a great profit, it is therefore proper to make it the subject
of taxation. I ask if there should be a profitable species of trade
carried on in any other part of the Union, would it be deemed politic
or just on that account to lay an additional tax upon it? The fair
principle of taxation is, that every part of the Union should contribute
equally. When any branch of trade is profitable in New York, I, though
a Southern man, rejoice at it. When the fisheries of the Eastern States
prosper, I feel highly gratified--not because those whom I represent are
particularly interested in them, but because I consider myself as a part
of the whole, and that whatever advances the interests of any part of
this Union must promote the interests of every part of it.

With regard to the moral principle involved in the slave trade, we have
nothing to do with it. On this point the Union ought to be silent. On
this subject can any thing be more pointed than the provisions of the
constitution, which, contrary to most of the other provisions, cannot
be altered but with the consent of every State in the Union. Why then
shall we cry over what we cannot prevent, like a school boy? Each State,
so long as she confines herself within the limits of her constitutional
powers, must be the exclusive judge of her own conduct; and it becomes
not one State, influenced by different feelings, habits, and interests,
to pronounce upon the conduct of another. All, so far as regards
themselves, are judges of right and wrong. We, too, have as strong a
conviction of the propriety of our measures as those who differ from us
in sentiment on this subject. We may perhaps think it more blamable to
make slaves of white people than of the blacks.

I confess I have not been able clearly to understand the ideas of the
gentleman from New York (Mr. MITCHILL.) A few days since that gentleman
offered a report, the object of which was to free raw materials from
duty. Will the State of South Carolina profit by this? No. It will
conduce to the benefit of other parts of the Union; but we shall bear the
burden: and still, on this occasion, because we derive a certain profit
from a particular description of trade, the gentleman contends for taxing
it.

Let gentlemen also consider that we are not to be hurried away by our
feelings or passions. We are sent here to attend to the business of the
nation, and, to do that as it ought to be done, we must yield to a spirit
of mutual deference and compromise, we must act fairly and impartially.
All we ask in the present case is, to do as we would be done by. We
permit the Eastern States to import German redemptioners and others.
Let them then permit us to enjoy our constitutional right of importing
slaves, especially when that right will exist but for a short time.

We do not pretend to advocate the act, but the right of our State to
pass this law. It is not to be inferred that we are friendly to the
importation. I believe, on the contrary, every Representative of the
State on this floor is hostile to it. But how can gentlemen expect that
we will disregard the voice of our own State, and especially when the
measure may have been dictated by good and substantial reasons. One good
reason may be that the importation could not be prevented, and that the
restraining law was extensively broken. This we know was the fact. If
so, may it not have been sound policy in the State to repeal it? There
may have been another reason for the measure. It may have been conceived
to have been better to import slaves directly from Africa than to be
indebted for them to New York and other States, in which they may have
been surreptitiously introduced.

The gentleman from New York (Mr. MITCHILL) observes that it is
demonstrable that, even in a pecuniary point of view, slaves are an evil;
and that they impoverish those who hold them. What does this show, but
that in the North they kept slaves as long as their interest dictated,
and then got rid of them; and that because it is a misfortune to have
them, we must be punished for our poverty. Though young, I am happy to
state that I have seen the evil decreasing in the State I have the honor
to represent. Let us alone, and we will pursue the best means the nature
of the case admits of. Interfere and you will only increase the evil;
for, whenever the Government of the Union interferes in the peculiar
concerns of a State, it must excite jealousy and a spirit of resistance.

I beg gentlemen to lay aside, on this occasion, the prejudices to which
local circumstances and peculiar State interests and feelings expose
them. When I see the lowest of the animal tribe tortured, I feel for
them; but does it follow that my interference will mitigate their pain?
Do we not all know, that by interfering between a man and his wife,
we only aggravate the difference; and do we not likewise know that
any interference between a master and his slave induces the former to
be more severe. I believe the State of South Carolina has as great an
inclination as any State similarly circumstanced, to do away this evil.
But they must, and ought to take their own course. It is a circumstance
well known, that the people to the North, who make the most noise on this
subject, are those, who, when they go to the South, first hire, then buy,
and last of all turn out the severest masters among us.

Mr. LUCAS observed that, though much had been said on the merits of the
resolution, he would take the liberty of adding a few remarks. It was
a maxim that, to justify the raising of a revenue, a Government ought
previously to stand in need of money. The pecuniary wants of a Government
were absolute and relative. The fit objects of taxation were likewise
various. Some objects bore taxation better than others. When Governments
want money to satisfy indispensable demands, taxes must be laid; and even
when they are not in immediate want of money for pressing emergencies,
there are frequently important purposes that might be answered in case
they possessed resources. On this occasion it is said that the Government
is not in want of money, that the existing revenue meets the wants of the
nation, and that, consequently, a new tax ought not to be laid. This may
possibly, strictly speaking, be correct. But to say absolutely that we do
not want money, he must deny; for he believed if they had money in the
Treasury, not required for pressing exigencies, they could find abundant
occasions for spending it to good effect. It was known that there were
many claims preferred against the Government, of a meritorious kind,
and which had been disallowed, not so much on their intrinsic merits,
as from the operation of the statute of limitations. This limitation,
said Mr. L., it is my wish should be removed, and one way of effecting
that end will be to increase our revenue, as we shall thereby be enabled
to discharge all just demands exhibited. The laying out, likewise, of
roads was an important object. One is contemplated from this place to New
Orleans. Without going further into a view of the various demands on the
Government, we shall see the occasion that exists for more money being
drawn into our Treasury.

As to the nature of the slave trade, we must, in my opinion, consider
slaves imported as so much produce or merchandise. This article ought,
in my opinion, likewise to be taxed, because the trade is odious; also,
because it affords a great profit to those who carry it on. It was
yesterday stated by a gentlemen from New York that a slave employed in
the Southern States would pay for himself in two years; that is, that a
slave that costs four hundred dollars will give a profit to the owner of
two hundred dollars a year. As, therefore, no article imported into the
United States gives a greater profit, so no article can better bear a
tax. It ought also to be taxed, because the importation of slaves into
the United States operates injuriously on the poor whites who draw their
subsistence from labor. Their comparative situation in relation to the
rich, is reduced; for if you increase the black laborers, so as to make
them work for a lower compensation, you virtually reduce the value of the
labor of the whites, and proportionally lessen the chance of a poor white
man getting employment on favorable terms. It is well understood that
competition always reduces the price of an article in the market; and
although the blacks may not, in all respects, enter into a competition
with the whites, yet, so far as respects labor, the competition will be
complete. The rich part of the community will not employ a white man who
feels the spirit of a freeman, and who will not submit to be subservient
to the caprices of his employer, so long as they can employ a slave
whom they can control as they please, and at a smaller expense. The
indisputable effect, therefore, of the introduction of additional slaves
will be the reduction of the value of labor, and the augmented severity
of the lot of the poor white man, who is entirely dependent on his labor
for the support of himself and family.

Gentlemen tell us we ought not so closely to scrutinize the conduct
of the Legislature of South Carolina. I am, said Mr. L., far from
scrutinizing in this instance the conduct of that State. I respect the
people of South Carolina. Their situation may, perhaps, be such as in
a great measure to justify their conduct, though I am far from saying
that I approve it. But when we lay a tax on the importation of slaves,
it is a sufficient reply to such remarks to say that the tax is not laid
exclusively on slaves admitted into South Carolina. It does not therefore
apply to South Carolina alone. That State has an undoubted right to admit
the importation; but Congress have also an undoubted right of taxing
them. The resolution, therefore, does not encroach on the rights of that
State. The United States and South Carolina form two bodies politic, both
of which are possessed of constitutional rights. To the one belongs the
right of importing, to the other, the right of taxation; and this last
right may be exercised without involving any censure of the State of
South Carolina. The only necessary inquiry is, whether the proposed tax
will be oppressive or unjust. I believe it will be universally agreed
that an imported article worth four hundred dollars will not be taxed
high compared with other articles, when it pays a duty of ten dollars. As
to the constitutionality of the tax not a word need be said; that has not
and cannot be disputed.


WEDNESDAY, February 15.

_Importation of Slaves._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on Mr.
BARD’s resolution to impose a tax of ten dollars on every slave imported
into the United States; the debate on which occupied the remainder of the
sitting.

Mr. LUCAS supported, and Mr. HOLLAND opposed the resolution.

Mr. EARLE moved that the committee rise and report progress. His
reason for this motion was, that, from information received from South
Carolina, on which he placed much reliance, it was expected that the
Legislature would meet in April, and would then repeal the act admitting
the importation of slaves. Should the committee rise, he would move a
postponement of the consideration of the resolution to the first Monday
in May.

Mr. GREGG.--I hope the motion for the committee to rise will prevail;
and that any further proceeding on this subject will be postponed for
the present. It has been said by the gentleman from South Carolina
who made the motion, and I have heard it mentioned by others, that a
considerable ferment has been excited in that State by the passage of
the law authorizing the importation of slaves, and that it is highly
probable the Legislature, at its next session, will repeal that law. That
session, it is expected, will be held in April, the Governor having it
in contemplation to convene the Legislature at that time for the purpose
of submitting to their consideration the proposed amendment to the
constitution.

Let it not, Mr. Chairman, be inferred, from what I have said, that I am
in principle opposed to the effect which I am confident the mover of the
resolution expected it would produce. No member of this House is, or can
be, more decidedly opposed to slavery than I am. In the State from which
I come slavery is scarcely, if at all, known. I do not know whether,
at this moment, it has any existence there. However the inhabitants of
that State may differ on other points, on the subject of slavery we are
all united. All parties have joined in abolishing it. I sincerely wish
that Congress possessed a constitutional power to abolish it, or at
least to check its further progress in the United States. If they did
possess such power, I would most cordially concur in putting it into
operation. Instead of ten dollars, I wish the constitution would warrant
us in imposing a tax of one hundred, or of five hundred dollars on each
imported slave. I would willingly vote for that sum, because it would
amount to an entire prohibition of such importation, and effectually
destroy the traffic which I consider highly impolitic, as well as
contrary to the principles of justice.

When the present constitution was adopted, there were no laws in several
States to prohibit the importation of slaves. It is but a few years
since such a law was passed by the State of Georgia. During all that
period money was much wanted. The revenue was not adequate to the demand.
Government was compelled to have recourse to loans, and in some instances
had to submit to a heavy interest; yet in all that time the idea, I
believe, was never suggested in Congress of supplying the deficiency
by imposing a tax on slaves, although numbers were then imported. From
this it may be inferred, that at that time the power vested in Congress
by the constitution of imposing a tax of ten dollars on each person
imported into any of the then existing States, agreeably to its laws,
was not considered as given for the purpose of raising revenue. It was
given, it may be presumed, for the purpose of being used as a check to
the trade, and at the time the constitution was adopted, the exercise of
that power might have contributed to produce such effect. The price of
slaves was then low; their labor was not so productive to their owners,
and, of course, ten dollars in addition to the then current price might,
in some measure, have checked the spirit of purchasing. But soon after
that period, by the introduction of the cultivation of cotton, the labor
of slaves became more valuable, and their price enhanced in proportion.
Ten dollars then bore some proportion to the price of a slave, but at
this time it is comparatively as a cipher. A planter who can find his
advantage in giving four hundred dollars, which is said to be the present
current price of a good negro, will think but little of ten additional
dollars. In the present state of things, therefore, I take it the
proposed tax cannot effect the object contemplated by the mover of the
resolution--it can neither prevent nor remedy the evil; and as it has
the appearance of giving legal sanction to the trade, and may have an
influence on the Legislature of South Carolina, inasmuch as it is an
implied attack on their sovereignty, and a censure on them for passing
an act which, however important it may be in our view, the constitution
certainly did authorize them to pass, I think the further consideration
of the subject had better be postponed for the present; perhaps always,
until Government may have it in its power to adopt measures calculated to
produce an entire prohibition of the trade.

Mr. HUGER said the arguments urged by the friends of the motion were
two-fold. One class of gentlemen say they are not in favor of this tax
for purposes of revenue, but to manifest the opinion of the National
Legislature; while another class declares their only reason for laying it
is the revenue it will bring into the Treasury. A decision, therefore,
by the House, will settle no principle; for supposing that a majority
of the members shall be found in favor of the tax, one-half of them
will vote for it on one principle and one-half on another. Under these
circumstances, he appealed to gentlemen inclined to favor the resolution,
whether it would not be the best policy to wait until the Legislature
of South Carolina had an opportunity of repealing the obnoxious law. Is
it a pleasant thing to any gentleman on this floor to throw a stigma
upon a State? And will not gentlemen from the Middle and Eastern States
recollect that the situation of South Carolina is very different from
that of their States? Let them, then, do as much good as they can at
home; but let them, in God’s name, permit us to act for ourselves. It is
a very easy thing to make some harsh remarks on the conduct of particular
States, even of the State of Pennsylvania, much as that State is
deservedly respected. Mr. H. said he did not believe that State stood one
iota higher than other States in the Union. For he believed that peculiar
interest operated there as well as in other States.

Mr. H. said, from what had been expressed to-day, he did not believe the
people of South Carolina friendly to the act admitting the importation
of slaves. Every Representative of that State on this floor wished, he
believed, that it had never been passed. But as it had passed, they
conceived it to be their duty to resist a measure which went to censure
the State for the exercise of an undoubted right.

Mr. STANTON.--Mr. Speaker: I am highly gratified to find honorable
members in every part of the House who reprobate the infamous traffic of
buying and selling the human species. On this occasion but a few remarks
are necessary, if morality, humanity, and justice, are conducive to the
happiness of society. It is not my duty nor intention to criminate the
State of South Carolina, whose late conduct has created serious and well
founded alarm. It is a duty I owe to my constituents and myself not
to connive at a measure that, in my humble opinion, goes to shake the
pillars of public security, and threatens corruption to the morals of our
citizens, and tarnishes the American character. Sir, while I deprecate
the repeal of the non-importation act of South Carolina, I console myself
with the pleasing expectation that the State will retract the error they
have recently and unguardedly fallen into, and I cannot doubt but the
honorable members from that State, on this floor, will lend their aid to
effect so desirable a measure--to enact again the prohibitory statute.
We are told if the House adopt the resolution, it will irritate South
Carolina, notwithstanding the opposers of the resolution confess the
impolitic conduct of South Carolina. I wish not to offend any of our
sister States, much less, that important State whose wisdom, virtue, and
patriotism, have been conspicuous on every other occasion. The opposers
of the resolution inform us its adoption will both encourage and sanction
the importation, and that they have a constitutional right to import
until 1808. I grant it, but I hope better things of that State; and
things that accompany reformation. She has recently, with other States,
emancipated herself from tyranny and oppression, and will she sully her
fair fame by commencing tyrant herself? Sir, the speakers from the State
of South Carolina, and particularly the honorable member who offered a
resolution as a substitute for the one under consideration, delivered
himself in sentiments of the most admirable humanity, and constitutional
love and zeal for his country; and, if he were a member from any other
State in the Union, I should have the honor, I make no doubt, of voting
with him for the resolution on your table. Sir, I am sensible the General
Government cannot prohibit the traffic previous to the year 1808. This is
one of the most humiliating concessions made by that venerable convention
which framed the constitution, and we are bound by it. I ask, is the
policy of the measure embraced by the resolution sound? I believe it is.
I consider slaves a luxury--they are considered by the constitution,
three-fifths of them, to give a Representative, and I ask why not tax
them? It is a sound maxim that representation and taxation should go hand
in hand. To lay a tax being the only constitutional power the General
Government possesses, I think it good policy to exercise it.

The State of Rhode Island, from whence I came, passed a law declaring
negro children born posterior to 1784, as free as white children.
Mr. Speaker, I mention this statute merely to obviate the erroneous
impression, that otherwise might be made with a view to mislead the
public mind, that the citizens of Rhode Island are disposed to favor the
villanous traffic. I wish not to egotize, but I can assure the House this
traffic has been abhorrent to me upwards of forty years, and if I should
live to see 1808--that auspicious period in our national compact which
shall be exonerated from the tragic feature that has cast a shade on that
valuable instrument--if the important acquisition of Louisiana gave ample
cause for festivity, still greater cause shall we have when the glorious
period shall arrive of 1808. That shall be my jubilee.

After a few further remarks, by Mr. HUGER and Mr. LUCAS, the question was
taken on the rising of the Committee, and passed in the negative--yeas
58, nays 60. When the resolution was agreed to.

The committee rose and reported their agreement to the resolution, which
the House immediately took into consideration.

Mr. WYNN moved to postpone the further consideration of the resolution
till the first Monday in January, and required the yeas and nays.

The question was then taken on the postponement, by yeas and nays, and
passed in the negative--yeas 54, nays 62, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, George Michael
    Bedinger, Silas Betton, William Blackledge, Walter Bowie,
    John Boyle, William Butler, John Campbell, Levi Casey, Thomas
    Claiborne, Joseph Clay, Jacob Crowninshield, Richard Cutts,
    Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dawson, William Dickson,
    Thomas Dwight, John B. Earle, Peter Early, James Elliot,
    William Eustis, John Fowler, Edwin Gray, Andrew Gregg, Roger
    Griswold, Samuel Hammond, Wade Hampton, Seth Hastings, Joseph
    Heister, James Holland, Benjamin Huger, Michael Leib, Thomas
    Lowndes, Matthew Lyon, Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Thomas
    Moore, Joseph H. Nicholson, Thomas Plater, John Randolph, John
    Rhea of Tennessee, Thomas Sanford, Tompson J. Skinner, John
    Cotton Smith, James Stephenson, Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher,
    Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Daniel C. Verplanck, Lemuel
    Williams, Richard Wynn, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Isaac Anderson, John Archer, Simeon Baldwin, David Bard,
    Adam Boyd, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William Chamberlin,
    Clifton Claggett, Matthew Clay, Frederick Conrad, Ebenezer
    Elmer, John W. Eppes, William Findlay, James Gillespie,
    Peterson Goodwyn, Gaylord Griswold, John A. Hanna, William
    Helms, William Hoge, David Holmes, David Hough, John G.
    Jackson, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Joseph
    Lewis, jr., Henry W. Livingston, John B. C. Lucas, William
    McCreery, Samuel L. Mitchill, Nicholas R. Moore, Jeremiah
    Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jr., Gideon Olin, Beriah
    Palmer, Thomas M. Randolph, Jacob Richards, Cæsar A. Rodney,
    Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons, Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan,
    John Smilie, John Smith of New York, John Smith of Virginia,
    Henry Southard, Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John Stewart,
    Samuel Taggart, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, John Trigg,
    Philip Van Cortlandt, Isaac Van Hornee, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg
    Wadsworth, Matthew Walton, Marmaduke Williams, and Joseph
    Winston.

And then the main question being taken that the House do agree to the
said resolution, as amended to read as follows:

    _Resolved_, That a tax of ten dollars be imposed on every slave
    imported into any part of the United States:

It was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 71.

_Ordered_, That a bill or bills be brought in, pursuant to the said
resolution; and that the Committee of Ways and Means do prepare and
bring in the same.


FRIDAY, February 17.

_Importation of Slaves._

The House resumed the consideration of the unfinished business of
yesterday, viz: “What day should be made the order to the Committee of
the Whole to consider the bill laying a tax of ten dollars upon every
slave imported into the United States.”

Mr. LOWNDES moved that the further consideration of the bill should be
postponed till the first Monday in December.

Mr. LOWNDES.--In moving a postponement of the bill to the first Monday
in December next, my object is to get rid of it altogether. Gentlemen
have supported the resolution upon which this bill is founded, upon
such a variety of, and contradictory grounds, that their arguments are
not very susceptible of a reply. I am, however, very glad that it has
been conceded by every gentleman who has spoken upon the subject, that
this tax, if laid, would not have the effect of diminishing the number
of Africans imported into the country. When it was admitted that the
object for which the resolution was avowedly brought forward, would not
be obtained, I did hope that the resolution itself would not have been
persevered in. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. GREGG,) to whose
arguments I generally listen with pleasure, has told us that he would
not for the world give his vote for this tax, for the purpose of raising
revenue; but that he would be obliged to vote for the resolution, to show
his disapprobation of the trade. The gentleman did, however, manifest
a disposition to get rid of the question, without taking a direct vote
upon it. Another gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. SMILIE) has told us,
that he too is averse to this tax with a view to revenue, but that he
must vote for it, for if he does not, it will be an admission, on his
part, that Congress is favorable to the trade. What am I to infer from
this observation? Am I to infer that Congress until this time has been
favorable to the trade; and am I to infer that the gentleman himself, who
has for so long a time been an active member of Congress, has also been
favorable to it? This trade has from the adoption of the constitution
until a few years ago, when it was first prohibited by Georgia, been
carried on; and yet Congress have never exercised their power of imposing
any tax, nor have I heard that the gentleman did ever bring forward a
resolution for the purpose. There is another description of persons
imported into the United States--I mean those bound to serve for a term
of years. The comparison I admit is not analogous throughout, but it is
to a certain extent. These persons are chiefly introduced into the States
of Pennsylvania and New York; none, or at least very few of them, into
New England. Were it proposed to embrace them by this tax, would the
Representatives from those States be satisfied with the arguments that
it was a tax upon merchandise, and a general one, and therefore fair?
Their discernment would quickly point out to them, that whatever was the
appearance, it was a tax principally falling upon those States, and they
would resist.

Entertaining the opinions which I have expressed against the principle
of the bill, and wishing to get rid of it in a manner most agreeable to
those gentlemen who feel a difficulty of voting directly upon it, I move
that the further consideration of the bill be postponed until December
next.

Mr. BEDINGER said he felt the greatest veneration for the honorable mover
of the resolution, as he thought it proceeded from the purest motives.
But as he thought the slave trade was but little better than murder,
he felt a difficulty in his mind as to the propriety of admitting one
shilling of it into the treasury of the United States, lest those traders
should think themselves entitled to protection; but as the mover and
many others declare their assent towards the appropriation of said tax
hereafter to humane purposes, he believed he should vote for a bill, if
drawn in correspondence with such principles.

Mr. FINDLAY observed that it was not his wish to go into a lengthy
argument on this subject; but merely to observe that this was the first
instance of a law prohibiting the importation of slaves being repealed,
and that it might not be the last; and that, therefore, if the argument
advanced by gentlemen was good against taking it up in the first
instance, it would be equally good against taking it up in case all the
States should repeal their prohibitory laws. He also wished gentlemen to
consider that the friends of the motion were conscience-bound as well as
they, and that they considered it a moral duty to restrain, as far as
they could, the continuance of the slave trade. As, however, a question
of expediency was involved in this measure, he entertained no desire
to hasten its decision; on the contrary, his wish was to allow ample
time for considering its merits. He should therefore vote against the
postponement to December; but would move a postponement to the 2d Monday
of March, not with the view of getting rid of the subject altogether, but
to allow an opportunity of considering it fully.

Mr. HUGER did not rise with the view of going into the merits of the
bill, but to impress the propriety of agreeing to the postponement. It
was a painful subject, which necessarily excited unpleasant feelings. He
thought, if gentlemen suffered it to lie over to the next session, there
was a probability that by giving the Representatives of South Carolina an
opportunity of returning home and expressing the sentiments of Congress,
the Legislature of that State would repeal the law; whereas, should the
tax be laid, it would prevent this desirable effect. Where we differ,
said Mr. H., it is proper for us to accommodate--to meet each other half
way.

Mr. EPPES, believing that either motion of postponement would defeat
the main measure, said he should vote against both. It was not his wish
to erect the Government of the United States into a national tribunal
to censure the proceedings of the Legislature of South Carolina, or to
wound their feelings; but he was not prepared to say that Congress,
in exercising a constitutional right, erected such a tribunal. It was
in some respects immaterial whether they interfered or not, so long
as the world knew that a Legislature of a respectable State, in the
eighteenth century, passed an act allowing the importation of slaves.
That Legislature ought not to complain if the United States availed
themselves of the measure to raise revenue from it. According to the
estimate of some gentlemen, there would probably be an importation of one
hundred thousand in four years, which if this tax shall be laid, will
produce a revenue of a million of dollars. And yet we are entreated by
the gentleman from South Carolina not to molest the trade. Mr. E. said he
was not surprised at this anxiety, as, by gaining a delay of one year,
that State might be saved from the payment of above one hundred thousand
dollars.

Mr. E. said he came from a Southern country, where slaves were as much
a subject of taxation as lands; and he did not know that the statute
books of Virginia or South Carolina were stained by imposing taxes upon
them. He believed them as fair a subject of taxation as any other species
of property. He believed it as fair to lay taxes upon them as to make
the poor pay a tax upon brown sugar and other articles of the first
necessity. For these reasons he was against the postponement either to
December or March.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD considered a postponement till December as destructive
to the bill. He said he would as soon meet it on its merits, but being
prepared, as far as his vote went, to reject the bill, he should vote
for what he considered equivalent, a postponement to December. He did
not think it proper for the House to go into the measure contemplated by
the bill. There were but two principles that would justify the laying
a duty on imported articles: the one to discourage the importation of
particular articles, and the other with a view to revenue. As to the
first principle, under the constitution as it at present stood, Congress
had no right to interfere; as the States had an undoubted right to admit
the importation of slaves until the year 1808. The constitution, on this
point, had gone so far as to restrict the right of the General Government
to a tax not exceeding ten dollars upon each slave imported. This would
not amount to a prohibition or prevention of the importation. Congress
was, therefore, precluded the right of taxing, with this view, until the
year 1808. This part of the argument, on which gentlemen support the
measure, must be laid, therefore, out of view. The question then recurs,
whether we shall lay this tax for purposes of revenue? For one, (said
Mr. G.,) I am unwilling to do this. I abhor the slave trade as much as
any member on this floor, and therefore I will not consent to give it a
legislative sanction. For this measure will certainly be viewed in that
light by the people of this country and by the civilized world. It will
appear to the world that Congress are raising a revenue from a commerce
in slaves. I am not for introducing such a law, calculated to have this
impression, on our statute book. Were it in our power to prohibit the
trade, there is not, I trust, a member on this floor that would not unite
in the prohibition. But on this point our hands are tied.

Mr. GREGG observed, that when this subject was on a former day before
the House, he assigned his reasons at some length, in favor of a
postponement. The same reasons would influence his vote this day, and
he should not trouble the House with a repetition of them. He only rose
to suggest to his colleague that, by attending to one consideration, he
would be induced, he thought, to change his opinion, and to vote for
the most distant day to which it was proposed to postpone this subject.
It had been stated by a gentleman from South Carolina, and he believed
correctly stated, that by the law lately passed in South Carolina, a
considerable ferment had been excited in that State, and that it was
probable that the Legislature would, at their next session, repeal it. If
it were probable that they would repeal this law in April, it appeared
to him improper to pass an act that would operate as a censure upon the
conduct of that State.

Mr. ALSTON was surprised how it was that he and his worthy friend from
Virginia (Mr. EPPES) differed so widely upon the present occasion,
living, as it were, in the same country, and owning property of the
same kind, and pursuing the same means of obtaining a living. My friend
advocates the resolution for laying a tax of ten dollars on each slave
imported into the United States, because a considerable revenue will be
derived from such a tax; it is for that very reason that he opposed it,
because he would not consent to pass a law which had for its operation
a partial effect. Can it be right to pass a law which will impose a
heavy tax upon one part of the community, and not a cent upon the
other? No State in the Union would be affected except South Carolina.
Gentlemen ought to take care how they acted towards a sister State, and a
respectable one too.

Mr. RODNEY said, he should not have troubled the House with any remarks
on the present occasion, had he not made up his mind to vote differently
from the vote which he had before given. He said he had before voted
against the postponement of the consideration of this subject; he should
now vote in favor of a postponement; and he would, in a few words,
assign his reasons. When the resolution for imposing a tax on imported
slaves was first laid on the table, he was of opinion that he could not
vote for it without sanctioning the practice it was meant to censure.
Reflecting further, he afterwards got his own consent to vote for it.
First thoughts were frequently best; we sometimes miss the mark by taking
sight too long. In this instance, after a more mature consideration, his
mind inclined to his original opinions, for reasons which he would assign.

It was agreed, on all hands, that the conduct of the Legislature of
South Carolina was such as to merit the disapprobation of the members
of that House. On many occasions there were political dissensions
within these walls. But he rejoiced that, when questions of this kind
presented themselves, they were sure to find us unanimous. Inhumanity
was considered as a common enemy, and so inhuman a practice was justly
reprobated by all. Every gentleman from the South, as well as the East,
deprecated the act and lamented its existence.

After a few additional remarks from several gentlemen, the question was
taken by yeas and nays on a postponement to the first Monday in December,
and passed in the negative--yeas 55, nays 62.

Mr. FINDLAY moved a postponement to the second Monday in March; which,
after some debate, prevailed--ayes 56, noes 50.

[To prevent an erroneous impression being made on the public by the above
proceedings, it is proper to remark that, during the whole discussion,
not a single voice was raised in defence of the act of the Legislature
of South Carolina, allowing the importation of slaves; but that, on the
contrary, while by some of the speakers its immorality and impolicy were
severely censured, by all its existence was deprecated. A large number
of those who voted for the postponement, advocated it on the express
and sole ground that it would give the Legislature of South Carolina an
opportunity, which they believed would be embraced, to repeal the act.]


MONDAY, February 20.

_Georgia Claims._

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said, the House would recollect that he had, on a former
day, offered a resolution barring any claims derived under any act of
the State of Georgia passed in the year 1795, in relation to lands ceded
to the United States. It was not his purpose in rising at this time to
trespass on the patience of the House; nor did he know that he should in
future offer any remarks additional to those he had already made. But he
conceived it his duty to place the subject in such a point of light that
every eye, however dim, might distinctly see its true merits. For this
purpose he withdrew the resolution which he had before offered, and moved
the following resolutions:

    _Resolved_, That the Legislature of the State of Georgia were,
    at no time, invested with the power of alienating the right of
    soil possessed by the good people of that State in and to the
    vacant territory of the same, but in a rightful manner, and for
    the public good:

    That, when the governors of any people shall have betrayed
    the confidence reposed in them, and shall have exercised that
    authority with which they have been clothed for the general
    welfare, to promote their own private ends, under the basest
    motives, and to the public detriment, it is the inalienable
    right of a people, so circumstanced, to revoke the authority
    thus abused, to resume the rights thus attempted to be
    bartered, and to abrogate the act thus endeavoring to betray
    them:

    That it is in evidence to this House, that the act of the
    Legislature of Georgia, passed on the seventh of January,
    one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, entitled “An act
    for appropriating a part of the unlocated territory of this
    State, for the payment of the late State troops, and for other
    purposes,” was passed by persons under the influence of gross
    and palpable corruption, practised by the grantees of the lands
    attempted to be alienated by the aforesaid act, tending to
    enrich and aggrandize, to a degree almost incalculable, a few
    individuals, and ruinous to the public interest:

    That the good people of Georgia, impressed with general
    indignation at this act of atrocious perfidy and unparalleled
    corruption, with a promptitude of decision highly honorable to
    their character, did, by the act of a subsequent Legislature,
    passed on the thirteenth of February, one thousand seven
    hundred and ninety-six, under circumstances of peculiar
    solemnity, and finally sanctioned by the people, who have
    subsequently ingrafted it on their constitution, declare the
    preceding act, and the grants made under it, in themselves
    null and void; that the said act should be expunged from the
    records of the State, and publicly burnt; which was accordingly
    done; provision at the same time being made for restoring
    the pretended purchase-money to the grantees, by whom, or by
    persons claiming under them, the greater part of the said
    purchase-money has been withdrawn from the treasury of Georgia:

    That a subsequent Legislature of an individual State has an
    undoubted right to repeal any act of a preceding Legislature,
    provided such repeal be not forbidden by the constitution of
    such State, or of the United States:

    That the aforesaid act of the State of Georgia, passed on
    the thirteenth of February, one thousand seven hundred and
    ninety-six, was forbidden neither by the constitution of that
    State, nor by that of the United States:

    That the claims of persons derived under the aforesaid act
    of the seventh of January, one thousand seven hundred and
    ninety-five, are recognized neither by any compact between the
    United States and the State of Georgia, nor by any act of the
    Federal Government: Therefore,

    _Resolved_, That no part of the five millions of acres reserved
    for satisfying and quieting claims to the lands ceded by the
    State of Georgia to the United States, and appropriated by
    the act of Congress passed at their last session, shall be
    appropriated to quiet or compensate any claims derived under
    any act, or pretended act, of the State of Georgia, passed,
    or alleged to be passed, during the year one thousand seven
    hundred and ninety-five.

On considering the resolutions, the House divided--ayes 53. Carried.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH then moved their reference to the Committee of the Whole
on the bill providing for the settlement of sundry claims to public lands
lying south of the State of Tennessee. Carried--yeas 50, nays 30.


WEDNESDAY, February 22.

_Naval Peace Establishment._

The House went into Committee of the Whole on the bill supplementary to
an act providing for a Naval Peace Establishment.

[This is the bill introduced at the instance of Mr. NICHOLSON, with a
view to a more economical and beneficial arrangement in relation to the
national ships laid up in ordinary.]

Mr. LEIB moved an additional section, virtually abolishing the office of
Lieutenant Colonel Commandant of the Marine Corps, and authorizing the
President to make such other reductions of the subordinate officers as
he may think fit. The object of the bill being a reform of the expenses
attending the Naval Establishment, the measure contemplated in the
amendment was, in his opinion, a very proper one to be answered by it.
The bill, he said, contemplated an annual saving, in the single article
of provisions, of $7,000. By abolishing the office of Lieutenant Colonel
Commandant, a saving of sixty thousand dollars in addition might be
made. This officer made, it appeared, all the contracts, and it would be
seen by documents before the House, that while the price of the ration
in the War Department was fifteen cents, that fixed by this officer was
twenty cents--the difference made the sum of $3,750 a year. It would also
be seen that exorbitant sums were expended in postage and fuel. In the
single article of postage, $150 had been expended within three months.
The amendment was then agreed to--yeas 62.

Mr. EUSTIS moved a new section, for the allowance to captains, holding
themselves in readiness to enter the service, of the same rations they
are entitled by law to receive when in actual service. Disagreed to--yeas
37, nays 45.

The committee rose, and the House agreed to the amendment of Mr. LEIB
without a division.

Mr. JACKSON moved a new section, for the allowance to captains, required
to hold themselves in readiness for service, of the same rations they are
entitled to receive when in actual service.

Mr. NICHOLSON supported the amendment, to which the House agreed--yeas
44, nays 40; when the bill was ordered to a third reading to-morrow.

On motion, the House adjourned.


FRIDAY, February 24.

_Contested Election._

Mr. FINDLAY, from the Committee of Elections, to whom was referred a
memorial of Andrew Moore, of Virginia, respecting the election of THOMAS
LEWIS, a sitting member, made a report, which, after stating the bad
votes given for each of the candidates, concludes with the opinion that
THOMAS LEWIS is not, and that ANDREW MOORE is entitled to a seat in the
House. The report is as follows:

    “That, at an election held on three several days, in the month
    of April, in the year one thousand eight hundred and three,
    directed by the law of the State of Virginia, for a member
    of the House of Representatives of the United States for the
    district composed of the counties of Botetourt, Rockbridge,
    Kenawha, Greenbriar, and Monroe, in the western district of
    Virginia, it appears--

    “That, of the polls taken in the county of Botetourt, Thomas
    Lewis had one hundred and fifty-five votes, and Andrew Moore
    had three hundred and five votes; that, out of the persons
    who voted for Thomas Lewis, twenty-three were unqualified to
    vote; and that out of the persons who voted for Andrew Moore,
    twenty-eight were unqualified to vote.

    “That, of the polls taken in Rockbridge, Thomas Lewis had
    sixty-five votes, and Andrew Moore had three hundred and
    twenty-one votes; that out of the persons who voted for Thomas
    Lewis, there were four persons unqualified to vote; and out
    of the persons who voted for Andrew Moore, there were twenty
    persons unqualified to vote.

    “That, of the polls taken in Kenawha county, Thomas Lewis had
    one hundred and sixty-one votes, and Andrew Moore had one vote;
    that out of the persons who voted for Thomas Lewis there were
    ninety persons unqualified to vote.

    “That, of the polls taken in Greenbriar, Thomas Lewis had
    five hundred and thirty-nine votes, and Andrew Moore had one
    hundred and three votes; that out of the persons who voted for
    Thomas Lewis two hundred and two were unqualified to vote; and
    out of the persons who voted for Andrew Moore thirty-two were
    unqualified to vote.

    “That, of the polls taken in Monroe county, Thomas Lewis had
    eighty-four votes, and Andrew Moore had one hundred and two
    votes; that out of the persons who voted for Thomas Lewis
    thirty-six were unqualified to vote; and out of the persons who
    voted for Andrew Moore, forty-four were unqualified to vote.
    Hence it appears--

    “That all the persons who voted for Thomas Lewis in the several
    counties aforesaid, which compose the western district of the
    State of Virginia, were one thousand and four; and that all the
    persons who voted for Andrew Moore in the said counties were
    eight hundred and thirty-two.

    “It further appears, on a deliberate scrutiny, that, of the
    above votes, three hundred and fifty-five persons voted for
    Thomas Lewis who were unqualified to vote, and that one hundred
    and twenty-four voted for Andrew Moore who were unqualified to
    vote; and that, by deducting the unqualified votes from the
    votes given for each of the parties at the elections, Thomas
    Lewis has six hundred and forty-nine good votes, and Andrew
    Moore has seven hundred and eight good votes, being fifty-nine
    more than Thomas Lewis. Whereupon,

    “Your committee are of opinion that Thomas Lewis, not being
    duly elected, is not entitled to a seat in this House; and
    they are further of opinion that Andrew Moore, who has the
    highest number of votes, after deducting the before-mentioned
    unqualified votes from the respective polls, is duly elected
    and entitled to a seat in this House.”

_Ordered_, That the report be committed to a Committee of the whole House
on Wednesday next.


TUESDAY, February 28.

_Louisiana Territory._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
sent from the Senate, entitled “An act erecting Louisiana into two
Territories, and providing for the temporary government thereof.”

The fourth section being under consideration, as follows:

    “SEC. 4. The Legislative powers shall be vested in the
    Governor, and in thirteen of the most fit and discreet persons
    of the Territory, to be called the Legislative Council, who
    shall be appointed annually by the President of the United
    States, from among those holding real estate therein, and who
    shall have resided one year at least in the said Territory,
    and hold no office of profit under the Territory or the United
    States. The Governor, by and with advice and consent of the
    said Legislative Council, or of a majority of them, shall have
    power to alter, modify, or repeal the laws which may be in
    force at the commencement of this act. Their Legislative powers
    shall also extend to all the rightful powers of legislation:
    but no law shall be valid which is inconsistent with the
    constitution and laws of the United States, or which shall
    lay any person under restraint, burden, or disability, on
    account of his religious opinions, professions, or worship;
    in all which he shall be free to maintain his own, and not
    burdened for those of another. The Governor shall publish
    throughout the said Territory all the laws which shall be made,
    and shall from time to time report the same to the President
    of the United States, to be laid before Congress; which, if
    disapproved of by Congress, shall thenceforth be of no force.
    The Governor or Legislative Council shall have no power over
    the primary disposal of the soil, nor to tax the lands of the
    United States, nor to interfere with the claims to land within
    the said Territory. The Governor shall convene and prorogue
    the Legislative Council, whenever he may deem it expedient. It
    shall be his duty to obtain all the information in his power
    in relation to the customs, habits, and dispositions of the
    inhabitants of the said Territory, and communicate the same,
    from time to time, to the President of the United States.”

Mr. LEIB observed that he did not like the provisions of this section,
and least of all that which gave the Governor the right of proroguing
the Legislative Council. It appeared to him that that body was the most
dependent thing of its nature in the United States; and when the power of
prorogation vested in the Governor was considered, it seemed to him that
the people would do much better without any such body. This was a royal
appendage which he did not like. He, therefore, moved to strike out the
words “and prorogue.”

Mr. GREGG said he was not only in favor of the motion of his colleague,
but against the section generally. It would require much further
amendment to induce him to vote for it. He was opposed to the power it
gave the President to appoint the members of the Legislative Council. It
appeared to him a mere burlesque to say they shall be appointed by the
President. How is the President to get information of the qualifications
for office? This could only be obtained from the officers appointed by
him, and principally from the Governor, who will not fail to recommend
to the President the appointment of persons favorable to his own views.
Mr. G. said that they would, therefore, rather vest the appointment of
the members of the Legislative Council in the Governor; the mode pointed
out in the bill was only calculated to rescue the Governor from the
responsibility attached to his office, by dividing it among others.

Mr. LEIB said his amendment did not in the least interfere with that of
his colleague, with whom he fully accorded in sentiment.

Mr. VARNUM was of opinion that the section in the bill provided such
a kind of Government as had never been known in the United States. He
thought sound policy, no less than justice, dictated the propriety of
making provision for the election of a legislative body by the people.
There was not only the common obligation of justice imposed upon Congress
to do this, but they were bound by treaty. The treaty with France
expressly says:

    “The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be incorporated
    in the Union of the United States, and admitted as soon
    as possible, according to the principles of the federal
    constitution, to the enjoyment of all the rights, advantages,
    and immunities of citizens of the United States.”

The treaty makes it obligatory on the United States to admit the
inhabitants of Louisiana, as soon as possible, to the enjoyment of
all the rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens of the United
States. In order to decide the principle of this section of the bill
by an expression of the sense of the committee, he would move that the
committee should rise, report progress, and ask leave to sit again, with
the view of refusing them leave, and afterwards referring the bill to a
select committee to receive a modification in conformity to the opinions
of the House.

Mr. HUGER trusted the committee would not rise. He knew not the
impressions on this subject on the minds of other gentlemen; but the
information lately received from Louisiana convinced him of the propriety
of proceeding with the bill immediately. In addition to the principles
contained in the section under consideration, there were others of great
importance. He thought it would be most advisable, in a future stage of
discussion, to commit the bill to a select committee, if any material
alterations should be made in it. It was best, at present, to deliberate
fully on the several provisions of the bill, and for gentlemen to make
an interchange of opinions. Were the bill now committed, the report of
the committee would not advance the business in the least, as that report
might be as objectionable to the House as the bill from the Senate.

Mr. ELLIOT, for like reasons assigned by the gentleman from South
Carolina, and for other reasons, hoped the committee would not rise. He
did not believe the section under consideration was, in its present form,
consistent either with the spirit of the constitution or the treaty; but
he believed that, by the introduction of a small amendment, the section
might be rendered perfectly consistent with them, and the passage of
the bill be greatly accelerated. He preferred a middle course between
the existing section and the amendment offered by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania. Whatever amendments were necessary would be easily offered
and discussed at present; whereas no desirable object could be effected
by a reference.

Mr. GREGG said it also appeared to him that no valuable purpose would
be answered by referring the bill to a select committee. What can such
a committee do? There exists no diversity of sentiment in the House on
principle. Some are for giving to the people of the Territory, instead of
the President, the power of electing members of the Legislative Council.
Here, then, are two distinct principles, and unless the House determine
which of them it will adopt, a select committee can do nothing. Let us
settle the principle of the bill first, and then refer it to a select
committee, to modify it in correspondence with them.

Mr. EUSTIS said this subject was, in his opinion, inferior to no other
discussed this session. With regard to the provisions of the section
under consideration, it was to be expected that there would be a
diversity of opinion. Gentlemen inimical to them had taken different
grounds. One gentleman desires the power of the Governor to prorogue the
Council to be rescinded; another gentleman wishes an entire change in
the formation of the Council; and a third is in favor of the committee
rising, that the bill may go to a select committee to report different
provisions for the government of the people of Louisiana from those
contained in the bill before us. This motion necessarily brings the
principle on which the Council is organized by the bill before us.

According to this bill, the Governor and Council are to make the laws.
Suppose the Council is in session, and the Governor possess no power to
prorogue them. Suppose they should engage in acts subversive of their
relation to the United States. Would not this power be of essential
utility? It appears to me indispensably necessary that a vein of
authority should ascend to the Government of the United States, until
the people of the Territory are admitted to the full enjoyment of State
rights. From that knowledge of this people which I have been able to
acquire, I have formed an opinion that authority should be constantly
exercised over them, without severity, but in such a manner as to secure
the rights of the United States and the peace of the country.

The government laid down in this bill is certainly a new thing in the
United States; but the people of this country differ materially from
the citizens of the United States. I speak of the character of the
people at the present time. When they shall be better acquainted with
the principles of our Government, and shall have become desirous of
participating in our privileges, it will be full time to extend to
them the elective franchise. Have not the House been informed from
an authentic source, since the cession, that the provisions of our
institutions are inapplicable to them? If so, why attempt, in pursuit of
a vain theory, to extend political institutions to them for which they
are not prepared? I am one of those who believe that the principles of
civil liberty cannot suddenly be ingrafted on a people accustomed to a
regimen of a directly opposite hue. The approach of such a people to
liberty must be gradual. I believe them at present totally unqualified
to exercise it. If this opinion be erroneous, then the principles of
the bill are unfounded. If, on the contrary, this opinion is sound, it
results that neither the power given to the President to appoint the
members of the Council, nor of the Governor to prorogue them, are unsafe
or unnecessary.

Mr. LUCAS was against the rising of the committee, inasmuch as the bill
under consideration offered the widest field of discussing the subject
before them, and inasmuch as it was proper, that the principles of it
should be settled by a majority, to enable a select committee to collect
the sense of the House. When this decision should have taken place, he
should have no objections to a recommitment for the purpose of modifying
the bill in consonance with it.

It was known, by the treaty, that the United States are bound to secure
to the people of Louisiana as large a portion of liberty and security of
rights, as though they remained under the Government of France and Spain;
and he trusted the bill as it stood secured to them much more. As an
instance, it might be mentioned that the privilege of habeas corpus had
never been enjoyed by them while they were connected with either Spain
or France. An argument was drawn from the treaty, that these people are
to be admitted to the absolute enjoyment of the rights of citizens; but
gentlemen would not deny, that the time when, and the circumstances under
which this provision of the treaty was to be carried into effect, were
submitted to the decision of Congress. It has been remarked, that this
bill establishes elementary principles of government never previously
introduced in the government of any Territory of the United States.
Granting the truth of this observation, it must be allowed that the
United States had never before devolved upon them the making provision
for the government of people under such circumstances. Governors must not
rest on theory, but must raise their political structures on the state of
the people for whom they are made. Mr. LUCAS said, that without wishing
to reflect on the inhabitants of Louisiana, he would say that they are
not prepared for a government like that of the United States. Governed by
Spanish officers, exercising authority according to their whim, supported
by a military force, it could not be said that a people thus inured to
despotism, were prepared on a sudden to receive the principles of our
Government. It was questionable whether there was a nation in Europe
whom these principles would be so advantageous to as they are to us.
It would be recollected by gentlemen, who so strenuously advocated the
abstract principle of right, that the people of Louisiana have not been
consulted in the act of cession to this country, but had been transferred
by a bargain made over their heads. It was a proof this act had not been
received with approbation by them, that when they saw the American flag
hoisted in the room of the French, they shed tears; this was a proof that
they were not so friendly to our Government as some gentlemen imagined.
He was persuaded the people of the Mississippi Territory would not have
acted in this manner. There is no doubt but that after they shall have
experienced the blessings of a free Government, they will wonder at their
having shed tears on this occasion; but they must, in the first instance,
feel these blessings.

Mr. L. said he was fully of opinion with the gentleman from Massachusetts
(Mr. EUSTIS) in the sentiments he had expressed. The United States had it
eminently in their power to make these people happy without an extension
to them of all our privileges. They will not be gratified from knowing
that the theory of liberty is extended to them, but from its practical
effects. The people of Louisiana know but little of political theories,
but they will feel the just operation of equal laws; and if they can
obtain practical justice, though it may not arise from an extension of
our elementary political principles, they will not find fault with it.

Mr. L. said he was not among those who considered the bill, in all its
provisions, perfect. He considered it susceptible of much amendment;
though not in the principle now under review. In this provision, by
declaring that the inhabitants of the Territory shall compose the
Legislative Council, a great point is gained by the people. For it
cannot be supposed that the inhabitants, thus called upon to discharge
high duties to society, will so far lose sight of their own permanent
interests as to sacrifice them, together with the good of the country, to
whim or corruption.

Their election by the President is another important security. Suppose
the Governor shall wish to render the Council his puppets. The President
will not feel an interest in gratifying his improper views. It is,
however, said that his information will be derived from the Governor. But
the fact is, he will receive it in part from the Governor, and in part
from others; and he will be sagacious enough to judge, not from a part,
but from the whole that reaches him.

A valuable effect will flow from composing the Council of the inhabitants
of the country; its members will thereby be initiated in the theory of
our Government and laws, and this knowledge will hereafter qualify them
for higher political trusts; they will acquire much political knowledge;
they will return home, and their conversation with their friends will
naturally turn on political topics, and on the laws they have passed;
thus will a spirit of inquiry and of political discussion spring up
in the country. When this effect shall be produced, it will be time,
and only then, to give them a government as liberal and free as that
contemplated by the amendment.

Mr. MACON (Speaker) observed that he coincided in opinion with the
gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. VARNUM,) whose object would, he
thought, be better tried by a motion to strike out the section. This
motion would bring the principle before the House. If the section should
be stricken out, the bill would be recommitted for new modification to
a select committee. Mr. M. accordingly moved to strike out the fourth
section.

This motion having been stated from the Chair,

Mr. MACON again rose. I will endeavor, said he, to compress my ideas on
this point in a few words. My first objection to the principle contained
in the section is, that it establishes a species of government unknown to
the laws of the United States. We have three descriptions of Government;
that of the Union, that of the States, and Territorial governments. I
believe the Territorial government, as established by the ordinance of
the Old Congress, the best adapted to the circumstances of the people
of Louisiana; and that it may be so modified as best to promote their
convenience. The people residing in the Mississippi Territory, are now
under this kind of government.[8] Is it not likely that the people
of Louisiana will expect the same form of government and laws with
their neighbors; and is it not desirable for the general peace and
happiness that there should be a correspondence between them? If they
are as ignorant as some gentlemen represent them, (and of this I know
nothing,) will they not expect the same grade of government with the
inhabitants of the Mississippi Territory, with whom they will have a
constant intercourse? Although they lived previously under the Spanish
Government, and although their number did not entitle them, when formed
into a Territory, to the second grade of government, no inconvenience
resulted. It is said, in reply to this observation, that a large number
of inhabitants of that Territory were Americans. It is true that many of
them were native Americans, but some also were Spanish.

The simple question is, what kind of government is most fitted to this
people? It is extremely difficult to legislate for a people with whose
habits and customs we are unacquainted. I, for one, declare myself
unacquainted with them; nor would I in fixing the government, unless
for the safety of the Union, do an act capable of disgusting the people
for whom it is adopted. It will be a wise policy to avoid whatever is
calculated to disgust them. My opinion is that they will be better
satisfied with an old-established form of government, than with a new
one. Why? Because they have seen it established in the adjacent Territory
of Mississippi, and know the manner in which it operates. If there are
bad men in Louisiana, will any thing be more easy than to disgust the
people against the General Government by showing that they have given
one kind of government to the people of the Mississippi Territory, and
a different kind to them? In my mind, it is sound policy to give them
no cause of complaint. We ought to show them that we consider them one
people.

I will not pretend to say that the people of Louisiana are prepared for
a State government, which differs most materially from a Territorial
government. The best way to prepare them for such a government, is to
take the system already known to our laws; one grade or the other of the
Territorial government. For myself, I would prefer the adoption of the
second grade, but I would prefer the first to any new system. For these
reasons, I hope the section will be struck out, and the bill referred to
a select committee.


WEDNESDAY, February 29.

_Government of Louisiana._

The House went again into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for the
government of Louisiana.

The fourth section of the bill being under consideration--

Mr. JACKSON said: As this section is the corner stone on which the whole
superstructure rests, and involves the most important principle of the
bill, I will ask the indulgence of the committee to make a few remarks
upon it. It presents two important questions; first, whether it is proper
on the broad principle of political justice to adopt it? And secondly,
whether it is consistent with our treaty with France? Two questions arise
out of the first proposition; first, Is the system consonant to the
habits of a free people? And, secondly, if not, is it the best calculated
to advance the happiness of those who have never tasted the blessings of
liberty? The first question requires no discussion; it will be answered
in the negative by every section of this Union. Every section has been
engaged in forming a constitution, and both the State and Federal
constitutions have decided this point in the negative, because neither
partake of the aristocratical or monarchical features contained in this
section.

It is urged by gentlemen, that we ought to give to this people liberty
by degrees. I believe, however, there is no danger of giving them too
much of it; and I am unwilling to tarnish the national character by
sanctioning the detestable calumny that man is not fitted for freedom.
What will the world say if we sanction this principle? They will say we
possess the principle of despotism under the garb of Republicans; and
that we are insincere, with whatever solemnity we may declare it, in
pronouncing all men equal. They will tell us that we have emphatically
declared to the American people and to the world, in our first act
evincive of emancipation from the tyranny of England, that all men are
equal; and that all governments derive their rightful power from the
consent of the governed; and that notwithstanding, when the occasion
offers, we exercise despotic power, under the pretext that the people are
unable to govern themselves.

Mr. HOLLAND.--As my ideas are very different from those of the gentleman
who has preceded me, and as I do not believe that either policy or moral
obligation recommends the adoption of a system such as he has avowed to
be proper, I will, in a few words, state the sentiments I entertain.

Can gentlemen conceive the people of Louisiana, who have just thrown
off their chains, qualified to make laws? Under the late system the
people had no concern in the government, and it was even criminal for
them to concern themselves with it; they were set at a distance from
the government, and all required from their hands was, to be passive
and obedient. Can it be supposed such a people made the subject of
government their study, or can it be presumed they know any thing about
the principles of the Constitution of the United States? Would persons
thus elected be of any service to the Government? So far from being an
assistance, they would be an encumbrance. Why then impose this burden
upon them? The object of this bill is to extend the laws of the United
States over Louisiana, not to enable the people of Louisiana to make
laws. This extension, so far from being an act of despotism, will be an
important privilege. If the laws of the United States were founded in
injustice they might have some right to complain, but we only apply to
them laws by which we ourselves consent to be governed.

The provisions of this section are said to be worse than those of the
first grade of Territorial governments; but this is incorrect. This plan
is not equal to the second grade, but it is certainly superior to the
first grade. The first grade gives the Governor and judges all the powers
granted by this section; and this section, in addition to the Governor
and judges, contemplates the appointment of thirteen councillors. Is not
this preferable to giving the whole power to the Governor and judges?

Mr. BOYLE said he should not have risen on this occasion but for the
impression that some arguments of weight had been omitted, or had not
been sufficiently dwelt on. In the few remarks he purposed to make,
he should endeavor to avoid a repetition of ideas already expressed.
It was not so much to the novelty, as to the nature of the plan of
government contained in the fourth section, that he was opposed. He did
not consider the Territorial government proposed to be substituted as
perfect, but he believed it infinitely preferable to that contemplated
in the bill. Preferring, therefore, either grade to this, said Mr. B., I
shall concur in supporting the substitution of the second grade as most
fitted to the circumstances of the people of Louisiana. I feel peculiarly
hostile to the mode of appointing the Legislative Council. The power of
appointing them is unnecessarily vested in the President. Waiving all
objection arising from the distance of the President from the men to
be appointed; from the necessity of his relying on the representations
of others as to their qualifications, and his liability to be deceived
by misrepresentations; still one objection remains, which, to my mind,
is most important. I am, said Mr. B., unwilling to extend executive
patronage beyond the line of irresistible necessity. For, I believe, if
ever this country is to follow the destiny of other nations, this destiny
will be accelerated by the overwhelming torrent of executive patronage.
I feel as high a veneration for the present Chief Magistrate as any man
on this floor. Early attached to him, I have retained the full force of
my regard for him. But, were he an angel, instead of a man, I would not
clothe him with this power; because, in my estimation, the investiture
of such high powers is unnecessary. My opinion is, that they will be
more properly exercised by the people. To give them to the President
is to furnish a dangerous precedent for extending executive power and
patronage; and as he has himself said, one precedent in favor of power is
stronger than a hundred against it. I am in favor of giving to the people
all that portion of self-government and independence which is compatible
with the constitution.


WEDNESDAY, March 7.

_Georgia Claims._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
providing for the settlement of sundry claims to public lands lying south
of the State of Tennessee; to which Committee of the Whole were also
referred, on the twentieth ultimo, a motion containing sundry resolutions
“respecting claimants to the said lands under an act of the Legislature
of the State of Georgia, passed in the year one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-five.”

Mr. J. RANDOLPH called for the reading of sundry resolutions lately
offered by him on this subject. The resolutions having been read, Mr.
R. said, when he had submitted them, it was with the view of trying
the question then before the committee as he thought fairly. It was no
part of his intention to embarrass the operations of the friends of the
bill, further than to take the sense of the committee and of the House
on each specific proposition embraced by the resolutions. His wish,
therefore, was, that the sense of the committee, in the first instance,
should be taken on the resolutions. If they should be rejected, the vote
of rejection would be a virtual admission of the claims of 1795; and
gentlemen might then modify the bill in such manner as might best please
them to do.

Mr. MITCHILL.--These resolutions tend to involve Congress in the
proceedings of the State of Georgia. I consider myself as one of those
who, by assenting to certain acts heretofore passed by Congress, have
consented to a hearing and compromise with the grantees. If this
construction be correct, the Committee are precluded from adopting these
resolutions; nor is it proper, in my opinion, for Congress to go into
a view of the proceedings of Georgia on this occasion. That State is
sovereign to a certain extent, and this Government possesses no right to
interfere with her sovereignty. Attached to this sovereignty is the right
of granting land belonging to her. But it is alleged that Georgia was,
in the year 1795, in a disorderly state, and that a certain Legislature
in that year did a certain act which a subsequent Legislature declared
to be totally unauthorized. This may be so. It is certain the second
Legislature declared the act of the first null, under circumstances of
a very extraordinary nature. I do not, however, see that it is our duty
to give an opinion whether the Legislature of Georgia acted wickedly or
uprightly. Whichever course they may have pursued, I do not believe this
body to be a constitutional board of censors. We find frequent occasions
enough on which, without going out of our way, our duty calls upon us to
give our opinions. Believing this to be an occasion on which no opinion
is required from us, and one which it is most prudent to pass by without
giving such opinion, I wish not to vote for or against the resolutions. I
am, therefore, for the committee’s rising and reporting the bill.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--I had hoped that when these resolutions were sent from
the House to the committee, they would have received the respectful
attention to which every such reference is entitled; and that the
committee would at least have deemed them worthy of some expression
of opinion on them; that they would have deigned to say whether the
reasoning or facts contained in them are or are not erroneous and
unfounded. The gentleman from New York tells the committee that, by
an act passed at a previous session of Congress, a pledge has been
given to a certain description of claimants under the act of 1795, to
do something in relation to their claims. If so, is this a reason for
not acting on the resolutions? No; it is a reason for taking them up
and rejecting them. One of those resolutions says, and I am prepared
to prove it true, and I call on gentlemen to show its falsehood, “that
the claims of persons derived under the act of January first, 1795, are
recognized neither by any compact between the United States and the State
of Georgia, nor by any act of the Federal Government.” I deny that they
are so recognized. If they are, what can be easier than for the learned
gentleman to refer to the compact under which they are recognized? This
he cannot show, and hence his unwillingness to express an opinion. At an
antecedent session we passed a law on this subject. The gentleman may
have given his vote for this law under the impression he states, but it
does not follow that the Legislature acted under the same impression; on
the contrary, I know several gentlemen who voted for it, though hostile
to the claims under the act of 1795, because it contained a general
provision for claims, and did not particularly recognize those arising
under the act of 1795; and now, because Congress have passed an act of
a general nature, when it was notorious there are a variety of claims
besides those under the act of 1795, and none of which are mentioned
either in the compact or treaty with the State of Georgia, it is said
we have given a pledge, and we are called upon to fulfil it. And this
language is held by gentlemen who, in the same breath, have expressed a
disposition to reject another description of claims. Could absurdity
speak in stronger language? A general appropriation has been made by
Congress for claims; the claims preferred are of two classes--those
under the acts of 1789 and 1795. There might have been claims of a
hundred other descriptions--for all these Congress have made a general
appropriation--and yet we are told by gentlemen hostile to the claims of
1789 that we are pledged to provide for those of 1795. If we are pledged
to satisfy one description, are we not equally pledged to the other? But
the truth is, we have given no pledge. If we have, nothing is so easy
as to refer to the statute book, and to point it out. No such pledge
is recognized by our compact with Georgia. While I am up, permit me to
say, if the compact with Georgia be construed according to its letter,
the appropriation of $5,000,000 ought to be considered as not embracing
claims under the act of 1795, for the best reason in the world: the
statute book of Georgia shows the reason. But, say gentlemen, we possess
the power to satisfy these claims, though such satisfaction may not have
been contemplated by our compact with Georgia. There must, say they,
have been an understanding between the Commissioners of Georgia and our
Commissioners in favor of compromising them, and therefore it is inferred
that we ought to be governed more by the _quo animo_ with which the
compact was formed than by its strict letter; it is accordingly attempted
to be proved, that there was an understanding between our Commissioners
and those of Georgia, that relief should be extended to claimants under
the act of 1795. I am authorized by the Commissioners to say that this
was not the case. Whether, therefore, we are governed by the strict
letter of the contract, or by the _quo animo_, we cannot discover the
grounds for this opinion. I have been told, in a way which removes all
doubts, by the Commissioners on both sides, at least by a Commissioner of
the United States having a great participation in the business, and by
the Georgia Commissioners, that the stipulation in the compact was not
inserted at the instance of Georgia, but reluctantly inserted by them at
the instance of the Commissioners of the United States.

Mr. MACON (Speaker) remarked that this question, like many others
which presented themselves, had taken up a long time in discussing the
preliminary point that might have been required on the resolutions. To
rise and report the bill, without acting on the resolutions, would be
a virtual rejection of them; especially as the House had determined to
rise on the 19th. For one, Mr. M. said, he was ready to vote on the
resolutions. If it were wrong to vote on them, it was certainly proper
to vote against their reference. But why not vote on them? We may not
all agree; but have we not a right to think for ourselves? Let us then
meet them, and vote as we see best. Mr. M. said he was more desirous of
meeting the question, as he differed from those with whom he generally
coincided in opinion. It may be said the resolutions embrace an abstract
question. If so, gentlemen ought not to have allowed their reference.
In the present stage of the business, no question could be taken unless
in the committee, or on a motion to discharge the committee from their
further consideration. Mr. M. said, he thought it the right of every
member of a deliberative body to express his sentiments and record his
opinion on any subject before it. This had always been the practice. He
trusted, therefore, the committee would not rise, but proceed to the
discussion of the resolutions.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--I little expected to stand on this floor, in the list
of persons hostile to State rights--to be charged, as the gentleman
before me has expressed himself, with having brought forward propositions
subversive of the rights of the States. The sovereignty of the States
has ever been the cardinal principle of my political opinions, and in
the outset, I enlisted under the banner of State rights in opposition to
federal usurpation. The doctrine of exalting the General Government on
the ruin of the authority of the States, is at length exploded, and those
who have heretofore been most conspicuous in encroaching upon the rights
of the States, generally, and upon those of Georgia in particular, are
now foremost in displaying their zeal for both. I cannot but rejoice at
the acquisition which this cause has made. But to those of its friends
who are too new to it to understand its interests as yet, I would
recommend, that they would take the conduct of the Georgia delegation
as an evidence of the rights and interests of that State. They surely
are not so destitute of information or fidelity, as to misunderstand or
abandon the rights of the people whom they represent.--So long, however,
as I have the honor of concurring with them in opinion, I shall be very
easy under any clamor which the new friends of Georgia and of the rights
of States may endeavor to excite. If, however, gentlemen are unwilling
to rely on the opinions of so few, however respectable men, I refer them
to the act of the Legislature of Georgia herself, generally called the
rescinding act, passed under circumstances of unparalleled unanimity, and
confirmed by the general voice of the people, who subsequently recognized
it in, and ingrafted it upon their constitution. If still they remain
dissatisfied, I would ask them if the recognition of the claims against
Georgia, in the bill which they are so eager to pass, be not equally
a violation of the rights of that State, with the rejection of those
claims. Does not the bill before you, in pronouncing upon the validity of
the act of Georgia, equally involve the principle against which gentlemen
protest so loudly, with the resolutions themselves? They have their
choice either to pronounce the corrupt act of 1795, or the rescinding act
of 1796, invalid. Are not the rights of Georgia as much affected by the
one as by the other? and even more, by annulling the act of 1796, since
she alone recognizes that to be her own.

Here Mr. R. read the first and second resolutions:

    “_Resolved_, That the State of Georgia was at no time invested
    with the power of alienating the right of soil possessed by the
    good people of that State in and to the vacant territory of the
    same, but in a rightful manner and for the general good.”

Who will deny it? If Georgia has made a valid contract we must execute
it. If invalid, there is no obligation on us to perform it.

    “That when the governors of any people shall have betrayed
    the confidence reposed in them, and shall have exercised that
    authority with which they have been invested for the general
    welfare, to promote their own private ends, under the basest
    motives, and to the public detriment, it is the inalienable
    right of a people, thus circumstanced, to revoke the authority
    thus abused, to resume the rights thus attempted to be
    bartered, and to abrogate the act thus endeavoring to betray
    them.”

I am afraid if we deny this position we have no title to show for our own
existence as a nation.

Mr. R. here read the third resolution:

    “That it is in evidence to this House that the act of the
    Legislature of Georgia passed on the 7th of January, 1795,
    entitled an act &c., was passed by persons under the influence
    of gross and palpable corruption, practised by the grantees
    of the lands attempted to be alienated by the aforesaid
    act, tending to enrich and aggrandize, to a degree almost
    incalculable, a few individuals, and ruinous to the public
    interest.”

If there be any objection in my mind to this resolution, it is that
it does not sufficiently detail what it contains in substance; that
the vendors of this iniquitous bargain being at the same time the
vendees, the contract was therefore void. On a former occasion, when
this position was advanced, we were told that, on the same principle,
the sale of our western lands might be set aside, since members of the
Legislature speculated in them to a vast amount. However indecorous
and reprehensible this may have been in persons in their situation;
there was a wide and material difference between the sales made by the
United States and a pretended sale like this--not of a few acres, but
of millions; not of sections and half sections, but of thousands of
square miles; not measured by chains and perches, but by circles of
latitude and longitude; not made in the face of day, on public notice,
for a reasonable equivalent, and with the general participation of the
citizens, but bartered away in the dark by wholesale for the emolument
of the partners in the job, for a pretended consideration too paltry to
give an air of validity to the contract; and even this sum, pitiful as
it was, had since been drawn from the treasury of Georgia by those who
had paid it, or others claiming under them by an act yet more infamous
and disgraceful if possible than that by which it was deposited there.
But it is not my intention at this time to enter into the particulars
of this transaction. In the former stages of this bill I have endeavored
to give a faithful history of it. Weak and vain, however, must be every
effort to do justice to this enormous and atrocious procedure. Some
gentlemen indeed will tell you that we have no proof of these facts. The
depositions are _ex parte_, say they, and therefore in strictness of law
cannot be considered as evidence. But when was it known that men could
not legislate on less than legal evidence? Have we not the same evidence
of the fraud that we have of the existence of the claims? Are not the
evidences of both in the same report? the same proof of the corruption
as of the claims? They both hang together. Do not gentlemen themselves
admit the existence of the corruption? On what other principle could
they justify their proposition to withhold from these harpies the whole
of their glorious booty, and put them off with a comparative pittance?
Set aside the evidence of the corruption, and it cannot be denied, that
instead of five, they are entitled to fifty millions of acres. I repeat
they are entitled to all or nothing. We at least are consistent, we deny
their title to anything, and we propose to give them nothing. Gentlemen
on the other side can support the claim to the five millions, which they
propose to give, only by arguments which justify a claim to ten times
that amount.

Mr. R. here read the fourth resolution:

    “That the good people of Georgia, impressed with general
    indignation at the act of atrocious perfidy and unparalleled
    corruption, with a promptitude of decision highly honorable
    to them, did, by the act of a subsequent Legislature, passed
    on the 13th day of February, 1796, under circumstances of
    peculiar solemnity, and finally sanctioned by the people, who
    have subsequently ingrafted it on their constitution, declare
    the preceding act and the grants made under it, in themselves
    null and void; that the said act should be expunged from the
    records of the State and publicly burnt--which was accordingly
    done--provision at the same time being made for restoring
    the pretended purchase money to the grantees, by whom, or by
    persons claiming under them, the greater part of the said
    purchase money has been withdrawn from the treasury of Georgia.”

This is another of the resolutions not even substantially embraced in
the proffered amendment, which has been rejected by the committee. The
evidence of the facts contained in the former part of it is to be found
in the act of Georgia, which I hold in my hand, commonly called the
rescinding act. The report of our Commissioners furnishes the proof
of the withdrawal of the money, with a detailed statement of that
nefarious business, which in the former stages of this bill has been
amply explained. In the rescinding act the Legislature of Georgia take
other objections to the usurpation of 1795, besides those founded on its
corruption. They deny the constitutional right of their predecessors to
have made such an alienation of the public domain, even with honorable
views and for a fair equivalent. They declare that their constitution
prescribes a certain mode whereby vacant lands shall be sold and granted,
and that the pretended act of 1795 is void, not only from its corruption,
but from its contravening those provisions. This is a weighty and vital
objection. The slow yet equitable method known to the Constitution of
Georgia of laying off new counties, granting out the lands, when they
were appropriated and settled, laying off and settling others, was
ill-suited to the gigantic rapacity of the Assembly of 1795, and their
ravenous accomplices, who grasped at every acre within the nominal limits
of the State, whether covered by Indian titles, or whether those claims
were extinguished.

I must beg leave, in answer to the objection of some gentlemen here, to
repeat what was advanced by me in a former discussion of the subject.
Georgia ceded this territory to us subject to certain specified claims,
arising under Great Britain, under Spain, and under her Bourbon act, as
it is commonly called, which has no relation to any of the Yazoo acts,
as they are termed. For these claims we have stipulated to provide,
moreover paying her a certain sum out of the first proceeds of the lands,
as a consideration for the grant. Besides the above-mentioned claims
there were others not recognized by, or provided for, in our compact.
In relation to these, Georgia gives a reluctant assent, (which is to
be inferred as well from the expressions which are used in the treaty,
as from the declaration of the Commissioners on both sides,) that we
may apply, not exceeding five millions of acres to quiet other claims,
generally, without specifying what they are--the appropriation not to
exceed the amount above, and to be made within six months from the
ratification of the compact, or to revert back to Georgia. Among the
claims of this vague description may be ranked those of the Virginia
and South Carolina Yazoo Companies (under the act of Georgia of 1789,
and those arising under the corrupt act of 1795.) We are at liberty,
therefore, to give these reserved five millions of acres to either, or
to both, of those descriptions of conflicting claimants, but we are
certainly not bound to bestow an acre on one of them, either by compact
with Georgia or by our own act of appropriation. When that act passed it
was at the close of our session; there was not time to investigate any of
these claims. It was then understood that some of them were equitable,
and not founded in corruption. If we had not then made the appropriation,
the term within which we were permitted to make it, would have elapsed
before the next session of Congress. We therefore made the appropriation
in the same general terms of our compact with Georgia, pledging
ourselves to none, while we thereby reserved the right of examining and
recompensing all, in case they should thereafter be found to deserve
it. The day of investigation having arrived, you are invited to decline
it altogether, and hold that the reservation of the right to give, is
converted by some political magic into a duty, and that too by those who
propose to give nothing to the companies of 1789, although their claim is
embraced by the general provision of our compact with Georgia, and by the
terms of our act of appropriation as much as the claims of the companies
of 1795.


FRIDAY, March 9.

_Government of Louisiana._

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for the
government of Louisiana. The fifth section being read, as follows:

    “SEC. 5. The judicial power shall be vested in a superior
    court, and in such inferior courts, and justices of the peace,
    as the Legislature of the Territory may, from time to time,
    establish. The judges of the superior court, and the justices
    of the peace, shall hold their offices for the term of four
    years. The superior court shall consist of three judges,
    any one of whom shall constitute a court. They shall have
    jurisdiction in all criminal cases, and exclusive jurisdiction
    in all those which are capital, and original and appellate
    jurisdiction in all civil cases of the value of one hundred
    dollars. Its sessions shall commence on the first Monday of
    every month, and continue till all the business depending
    before them shall be disposed of. They shall appoint their own
    clerk. In all criminal prosecutions which are capital, the
    trial shall be by a jury of twelve good and lawful men of the
    vicinage; and in all cases, criminal and civil, in the superior
    court, the trial shall be by a jury, if either of the parties
    require it. The inhabitants of the said Territory shall be
    entitled to the benefits of the writ of _habeas corpus_; they
    shall be bailable, unless for capital offences, where the proof
    shall be evident, or the presumption great; and no cruel and
    unusual punishment shall be inflicted:”

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL moved to strike out “which are capital, the trial
shall be by a jury of twelve good and lawful men of the vicinage; and in
all cases, criminal and civil, in the superior court, the trial shall
be by a jury, if either of the parties require it,” and to insert “the
trial shall be by jury, and in all civil cases above the value of twenty
dollars.”

Mr. C. said he conceived that in legislating for the people of Louisiana,
they were bound by the Constitution of the United States, and that
they had not a right to establish courts in that Territory on any
other terms than they could in any of the States. Wherever courts were
established in a Territory, they must be considered as courts of the
United States, and of consequence cannot be otherwise constituted than
as courts in the States. The constitution expressly declares that, in
criminal cases the trial shall be by jury, and in all civil cases where
the sum in controversy exceeds the value of twenty dollars, the trial
shall be likewise by jury. In the ninth article of the amendments to the
constitution, we find the following words: “In suits at common law where
the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial
by jury shall be preserved.” The eighth article says: “In all criminal
prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public
trial by an impartial jury.”

I will observe that the right of trial given by this section, to wit: “if
either of the parties require it,” is a dangerous mode of proceeding, and
may tend unwarily to entrap them. The person brought before the court for
a misdemeanor, asked if he requires a jury trial, may be ignorant of the
evidence, and may not know the benefits of a trial by jury; he must at
all events show a want of confidence in the court, or waive a jury trial.
If he does the first, he may sour the minds of the court. The party
is thus put in a situation which may be worse than if he was deprived
altogether of the right of a trial, by the necessity of making a choice
which may operate more against him. The bill therefore does not secure
the right of a jury trial, as contemplated by the constitution.

Mr. SLOAN said a few words in support of the motion, which was lost--yeas
20.

[At this stage of the business we attended the trial of impeachment
in the Senate, and cannot with perfect correctness state the further
proceedings of the House on the bill. We understand, however, that the
new section, sometime since offered by Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL, providing
for the election of a Legislature by the people of Louisiana, instead
of their being governed according to the bill from the Senate by a
council appointed by the President, was disagreed to--yeas 37, nays
43.--_Reporter._][9]


SATURDAY, March 10.

_Georgia Claims._

Mr. J. RANDOLPH moved the taking up for consideration the resolution
offered by him on the claims under the act of Georgia of 1795.

Mr. ELLIOT moved the order of the day on the bill for the compromise of
those and other claims.

Mr. GREGG moved to postpone the further consideration of the resolutions
till the first day of December next. He was, he said, perfectly prepared
to act on the bill for the settlement of the claims, and to give it his
decided negative; and should have no objections, but for the lateness
of the session, and the great mass of important business that demanded
attention.

The SPEAKER said, the motion to consider the resolutions, being first
made, must be first put.

It accordingly was put, and carried--yeas 58.

Mr. JACKSON then moved a postponement of the resolutions until the 1st
Monday in December.

Mr. STANFORD inquired whether the motion of postponement was not
susceptible of a division, so as to apply to each resolution separately.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH hoped the question would be so taken.

Mr. RODNEY expressed the same wish, and that the yeas and nays might be
taken on each division of the question. He was opposed to a postponement.
He should not have risen at this late period but for the warm opposition
the resolutions had received from various quarters, and but for his
desire to avail himself of the opportunity to state his reasons for
giving them a firm support.

It is objected to these resolutions that they are abstract propositions.
By abstract principles, I understand axioms unapplied. But when they
are applied to facts, they cease to be considered in the abstract. In
geometry there are certain elementary principles which are the basis of
all reasoning on any proposition in that department of science. So in law
there are principles in the abstract while they remain unapplied, and
which bear in every case where facts admit of their application. So in
politics certain principles are held sacred, either in the view of right,
or in relation to the constitution of a State. But when these principles
are applied to a given state of things, they cease to be abstract. In
the Declaration of Independence there are several abstract principles,
such as “that all men are free,” &c. But when applied to a certain state
of things, they are no longer abstract. I apprehend, therefore, that my
worthy friend from Pennsylvania will, on more mature reflection, perceive
that the principles contained in the resolutions bearing on facts cease
to be abstract; on facts which it is necessary for us to decide, and
against examining the consequences of which no reason can be urged. But,
says another gentleman, we have no jurisdiction in the case; we have
nothing to do with the act of Georgia of 1795; we have no authority
over it. I confess myself really surprised to be assured, over and over
again, that the act of 1795 which gives the House all this trouble, is
the corner stone of the present claims, and without which there would
not be a shadow of claim, is not to be considered as blended with our
proceedings. What! when we are called upon to compromise claims, are we
not to go to the cause, to the fountain source, and decide whether they
have, or have not, a foundation in justice? Put the act of 1795 out of
the way, and would we have ever heard of this compromise? Remove it, and
would we have a single claimant before us soliciting a compromise? I
consider the act, to Georgia, as involving the all-important point; as
intimately and indissolubly blended with the question before us. That
question is whether we will consent to give five millions to effect a
compromise of claims, directly emanating from the act of 1795; and then,
as an incidental question, we are obliged to look at the act of 1795.
If the House have authority over the main question, _ex vi termini_,
they have authority over every question incidental to it; and common
sense teaches us that it is absolutely necessary to determine on the
validity of the act of 1795, in order to decide the justice or policy of
compromising claims arising out of it.

Having settled, as I conceive, these preliminary points, I will call the
attention of the House to the great point on which their decision must
turn. Either the act of 1795 or of 1796 is in force. If that of 1795 is
in force the claimants have a legal title to unascertained millions. If
that act is not binding, they have no claim at all. If that act is of
no authority, there is an end of their title. The tree is cut up by the
roots, and all its branches fall. They have either then a title to fifty
millions, or they have no title at all. Their case cannot be compared to
a common saying, which declares half a loaf better than no bread.

Now let us compare these facts and reasonings with the resolutions. When
I rose I intended to have taken them up in order, but as I have been
diverted by the course of the argument, I shall pursue the track I have
taken. One of the resolutions states “that a subsequent legislature of an
individual State has an undoubted right to repeal any act of a preceding
legislature, provided such repeal be not forbidden by the constitution of
such State, or of the United States.”

This is, I think, a plain and clear axiom. Both legislatures flow from
the same source, and are armed with equal powers. What one legislature
can do, another may undo, if the interest of the public prescribes it. I
know an ingenious distinction is taken, as to the power of a legislative
body, between municipal acts and those constituting contracts. The
distinction holds to a certain degree as to expediency, but not as to
power. When a legislative body forms a contract, it is a solemn thing,
and it ought not to be touched, except when the private evil arising from
its being annulled should rather be endured than the public calamity
arising from its continuance. But still the position of the resolution is
perfectly tenable. What one legislature has done another may undo; what
one has enacted, a subsequent one may repeal.

Let us examine whether there is any thing in the rescinding act of
Georgia at variance with the constitution of that State, or the
Constitution of the United States. The whole course of the business
shows the previous act to have been a violation of the Constitution of
Georgia. The Constitution of the United States declares that no State
“shall pass any _ex post facto_ law, or law impairing the obligation of
contracts.” That no contract has been impaired, is evident from attending
to the sense of the word. I know of no contract formed, either in a
legal or equitable sense. Did the Constitution of Georgia authorize her
Representatives to rob the people of their property? Or did it authorize
them only to dispose of it for their welfare? If they had a right to
dispose of it in a wrongful manner, it knocks up the argument at once. If
they were vested with a right to rob and plunder their constituents, I
give up the point. But until this is shown I shall remain of opinion that
they only had the right of disposing of it for the general good. I am not
about to travel through the fruitful wilderness of inquiry disclosed in
the progress of this affair. But gentlemen say that we have no evidence
of corruption. What do they want more than we possess? The whole business
has been referred to a set of Commissioners, whose comprehensive powers
embraced an investigation of every claim. They have fully examined the
claims under the act of 1795, and they have reported that--

    “A comparison of the schedule annexed to the articles, and
    which is declared to be a part of the agreement, with the yeas
    and nays on the passage of the act authorizing the sale, (E.)
    shows that all the members, both in the Senate and House, who
    voted in favor of the law, were, with one single exception,
    (Robert Watkins, whose name does not appear,) interested in,
    and parties to, the purchase.

    “The articles of agreement, and list of associates of the
    Tennessee company, which have been voluntarily furnished by
    one of the trustees, show that a number of the members of the
    Legislature were also interested in that company.”

This stubborn fact appears on the face of a report made by persons
duly authorized to investigate the whole transaction. The fact is
indisputable, and ought to satisfy the most reluctant and unwilling mind
of the enormity of the corruption attending this business. It is fully
satisfactory to my mind. But it is said that this statement is founded
on _ex parte_ depositions, and that no opportunity has been allowed to
cross-examine the witnesses. But where were they taken? In Georgia;
in probably the same House that witnessed the scene of disgrace; by a
tribunal competent to take them and to inquire into facts.

Upon the whole, it appears to me most evident, on referring to the acts
of Georgia, the articles of cession, and the laws of Congress, that the
claims under the acts of Georgia have no validity. If, therefore, we give
any thing, it must be from compassion, and not from the obligations of
justice. Let the House, ere it do this, reflect whether there are not
objects in the country equally worthy of their compassion. Let them
visit the straw shed of the war-worn soldier who bled in the defence
of our rights; the comfortless hut of the widow who lost her husband
in battle. With but little search we shall find a mountain of claims
that overhangs the justice of the country. If, after this view, we
shall consider any unfortunate victims of injustice in this transaction
entitled to compassion, I will agree to go as far as any man in affording
them relief. But were we as rich as Crœsus, I would first administer
relief to the Belisariuses of our country. Let us be just to these before
we are generous to other descriptions of claimants.

Mr. T. M. RANDOLPH.--Mr. Speaker: I hope the House will not consent to
postpone these resolutions. I hope it will, on the contrary, immediately
proceed to consider them, and conclude by adopting them, for, taken
generally, they meet my warm approbation as to the principles they lay
down, and I am anxious to see the last one, which is the fair corollary
of the other, incorporated into the bill now before us.

My opinion is, that it will cast a broad stain on the American character,
as it must be exhibited in future history, for this body which represents
it to grant compensation for their pretended losses, under whatever form
ingenuity may invent to disguise it, to any of those adventurers who made
the spurious contract with Georgia in the year 1795, for the purchase of
her western territory, upon the ground that the fictitious bargain gave
the least shadow of title to any part of that territory. This opinion is
a conviction irresistibly given to my mind by an impartial investigation,
that what were at that time called companies of land adventurers, were,
with the exception of one or two misled individuals, whose delusion and
consequent implication I lament, no other, in their conduct on this
occasion, than shameless bands of sharpers; what was impudently called a
contract, was, in reality, a fraud of unprecedented enormity, and what
has since been declared an unjust interposition of the primary sovereign
authority of the State, to cancel a fair bargain, was no more than the
regular and proper application of the only sufficient means which could
be used to redress a cheat upon the people of Georgia of unparalleled
audacity and magnitude. I am sorry, by entertaining this opinion, to
differ with so many on this floor, with whom it is my pride to think;
but I am not much surprised at that difference. Very rarely, indeed,
have I heard of important questions which did not divide opinions; never
have I been at a criminal trial where numbers did not doubt the reality
of the crime. Such is the difference in the impression made by the same
testimony upon different minds. Were it not for this extraordinary
circumstance in our nature, which almost precludes unanimity, and which
completely defies explanation upon any general principles of the moral
structure of man, there would be but one sentiment in this House upon the
question now before it. The information which has satisfied my mind, I
have derived from the declarations of the counties of Georgia, in their
petitions and remonstrances presented to the convention of that State,
which assembled in the month of May, 1795; from the acknowledgment made
by that convention of the dignity of those applications, and the respect
due to them, in the resolve which referred the matter they contained to
the consideration of the succeeding Legislature; from the proceedings
of the General Assembly of 1796, upon that matter, and the evidence
it collected and recorded relative thereto; and, lastly, from certain
declarations and provisions confirming those proceedings, and thereby
establishing that evidence, which were made by the convention of 1798,
and which exist now in the body of the present Constitution of Georgia.
The same means of information are within the reach of all; I ought to
say, should be possessed by all; I might say, should be satisfactory to
all; since the witnesses are the great body of the people of one of our
respectable States, and the testimony is authenticated, confirmed, and
preserved, as well by the constitutional as the ordinary code of that
State.

It has not been my object in making this inquiry, to learn in what
deep sharper’s brain this scheme was first engendered, which of the
associates stood most prominent in the development and execution of
it, how the price paid for the flagrant treason against posterity was
apportioned, or how the spoil obtained by such a stupendous larceny,
committed upon the inheritance of the unborn, was divided. I have not
desired to know, and it would be unimportant to the House to be informed,
which of the associates had no moral sense at all, whose conscience was
subdued by his avarice, or who, unthinkingly, gave the control of it
into the hands of his friend. I desire not to see any name consigned
to infamy; of those which have come to my knowledge, one or two I yet
respect; the remainder have not more distinct images annexed to them,
in my mind, than those of the men who conceived and executed the South
Sea cheat in England, or the Mississippi fraud in France. But, from the
investigation I have made, I have learned, as certainly as the actions
of men can be known to others than the actual beholders of them, that
the Legislature of Georgia, which commenced its session in the autumn of
1794, was assailed by every possible artifice of seduction, to procure
from it the act of 7th January, 1795, which constituted what has since
been impudently called the Yazoo contract. That it yielded to those
artifices, and a considerable majority of its members became treacherous
to their constituents, and deaf to the voice of their honor. That bribes
were daringly offered and unblushingly received for votes in favor of
the land. That the property of the State of Georgia, to the amount of
forty millions of dollars, at the most reasonable estimate, was sold
by those trustees of the people of Georgia for one half million, and
purchased by the sellers themselves in combination with certain abject
worshippers of gold, who had artfully infused into them their blind
fanaticism. That another offer of four-fifths of a million, made by other
men at the same time, was rejected, because the Legislature itself was
concerned in the first. That the Chief Magistrate of the State, after
one feeble effort of resistance, and a declaration which ought to have
bound him to an obstinate opposition, with a conduct which, to my mind,
manifests a thorough knowledge of the corrupt views of the Legislature,
as well as a want of energy to defeat them, yielded to the impulse, and
ratified the fraudulent sale. That the moment his irresolute hand gave
the illusive sanction to the vain and ineffectual deed, this ravenous
pack of speculators, keen with the hunger of avarice, unkennelled and
scoured the whole peopled territory of the Union in quest of their
appropriate game--the simple, the credulous, and those who are hoodwinked
by the excess of their own cupidity. The most voracious of them sought
the great cities, where numbers of the thirsty sons of gain became their
prey, while numbers more joined in the promising chase, led the way
to the victims, and fattened on their spoil. Many, more fell in their
nature, though less keen in their appetites for gold, traversed the
tranquil country of New England, scenting the homely purses which hung
in the smoky corner of peaceful cottages, into which the solitary dollar
had been dropped with religious punctuality every week, perhaps every
month only, by the hand of the provident father, from the time when the
first birth under his roof gladdened his heart. Great numbers of these
receptacles of hard-earned gain, with all their rusty treasure, the fruit
of long continued industry and frugality, destined to ensure to many of
the rising race the innocent joys of a life of wholesome exertion in
their own fields, were devoured by them, and that happy destiny in a
moment changed for a short period of certain pain, and, too probable,
vice, in the moving prisons of the ocean.

The promulgation of the law produced one general murmur of indignation
throughout the State of Georgia. The crime committed by the
Representatives of the people was strongly denounced by the grand juries
of all the succeeding courts. An assembly of special Representatives,
which had been summoned for constitutional purposes, meeting in the
succeeding spring, was addressed by all the counties of the State, and
by nearly the whole people of it, with memorials, remonstrances, and
petitions, according to the different degrees of excitement, all setting
forth in strong terms the nefarious act; complaining with bitterness
of the perfidy of the Legislature, requiring, urging, and imploring
the convention to proclaim the fact, and annul the fraudulent sale. No
laborious investigation into the huge and naked scheme of speculation,
no troublesome search after testimony to expose the framer of it was
necessary. Nothing was requisite but to receive, condense, and record
the decisive evidence voluntarily offered from all quarters. But this
legitimate and easy task the convention, naturally enough, thought fit
to decline, as many of its members were themselves openly concerned, and
many more secretly interested in the purchase. The pack of speculators
were then in full cry, the game were falling abundantly into their
jaws; it could scarcely be expected that those who had contributed so
much to set this chase on foot, who expected to share so largely in its
profits, should sound the horn of alarm to the objects of it. It quickly
occurred to a majority of this body, that a reference of these addresses
to the Legislature of the next year, would not only give time for the
continuance of the chase, but might be productive of something like
safety in the after possession of the spoils of it; while it promised
to afford some shield against the popular discontent and indignation
which a total neglect, so desirable to themselves, must inevitably have
brought on them. Notwithstanding, before midsummer of the same year,
the fraudulency and consequently invalidity of the sale must have been
unequivocally known throughout the Union, by the ferment in the State of
Georgia. Early in the succeeding year all the records of State relative
to this transaction were burned, and all recorded evidences of private
contracts which had arisen out of the land were cancelled, destroyed,
and forbidden to be renewed or afterwards admitted in the courts by the
Legislature acting under the authority to consider the matter, and of
course the power to redress the complaint of the petitions, which had
been given to it by the convention, and also under the express injunction
of the people themselves, laid on the individual members of that body at
the elections. But the speed of the sharpers had outstripped the slow
step of the State. They had, in a great measure, executed their swindling
scheme; a number of their dupes were already, instead of amusing their
own credulity, insincerely, and I will say, insolently, accusing the
perfidy of Georgia.

The question was then taken by yeas and nays on the postponement, until
the first Monday of December, of the following resolution:

    “_Resolved_, That the Legislature of the State of Georgia were,
    at no time, invested with the power of alienating the right of
    soil possessed by the good people of that State, in and to the
    vacant territory of the same, but in a rightful manner, and for
    the public good:”

And passed in the negative--yeas 51, nays 52.

So much of the said original motion as is contained in the second clause
thereof, being again read, in the words following, to wit:

“That, when the Governors of any people shall have betrayed the
confidence reposed in them, and shall have exercised that authority with
which they have been clothed for the general welfare, to promote their
own private ends, under the basest motives, and to the public detriment,
it is the inalienable right of a people, so circumstanced, to revoke
the authority thus abused, to resume the rights thus attempted to be
bartered, and to abrogate the act thus endeavoring to betray them:”

The question was taken that the House do agree to the motion for
postponement of the said second clause of the original motion; and
resolved in the affirmative--yeas 52, nays 50.

So much of the said original motion as is contained in the third clause
thereof, being twice read, in the words following, to wit:

    “That it is in evidence to this House, that the act of the
    Legislature of Georgia, passed on the seventh of January, 1795,
    entitled ‘An act for appropriating a part of the unlocated
    territory of this State, for the payment of the State troops,
    and for other purposes,’ was passed by persons under the
    influence of gross and palpable corruption practised by
    the grantees of the lands attempted to be alienated by the
    aforesaid act, tending to enrich and aggrandize, to a degree
    almost incalculable, a few individuals, and ruinous to the
    public interest:”

The question was taken that the House do agree to the motion for
postponement of the said third clause of the original motion; and
resolved in the affirmative--yeas 54, nays 49.

So much of the said original motion as is contained in the fourth, fifth,
sixth, and seventh clauses thereof, being again read, in the words
following, to wit:

    “That the good people of Georgia, impressed with general
    indignation at this act of atrocious perfidy and of
    unparalleled corruption, with a promptitude of decision highly
    honorable to their character, did, by the act of a subsequent
    Legislature, passed on the thirteenth of February, 1796, under
    circumstances of peculiar solemnity, and finally sanctioned
    by the people, who have subsequently ingrafted it on their
    constitution, declare the preceding act, and the grants made
    under it, in themselves null and void; that the said act should
    be expunged from the records of the State, and be publicly
    burnt, which was accordingly done; provision at the same time
    being made for restoring the pretended purchase-money to the
    grantees, by whom, or by persons claiming under them, the
    greater part of the said purchase-money has been withdrawn from
    the treasury of Georgia.”

    “That a subsequent Legislature of an individual State has an
    undoubted right to repeal any act of a preceding Legislature;
    provided such repeal be not forbidden by the constitution of
    such State, or of the United States.”

“That the aforesaid act of the State of Georgia, passed on the thirteenth
of February, 1796, was forbidden neither by the constitution of that
State, nor by that of the United States.”

“That the claims of persons derived under the aforesaid act of the
seventh of January, 1795, are recognized neither by any compact between
the United States and the State of Georgia, nor any act of the Federal
Government.”

The question was taken that the House do agree to the motion for
postponement of the said fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh clauses of the
original motion; and resolved in the affirmative--yeas 53, nays 50.

And then the residue of the said original motion, contained in the eighth
and last clause thereof, being twice read, in the following words, to
wit:

    “_Therefore, Resolved._ That no part of the five millions
    of acres reserved for satisfying and quieting claims to
    lands ceded by the State of Georgia to the United States,
    and appropriated by the act of Congress passed at their last
    session, shall be appropriated to quiet or compensate any
    claims derived under any act, or pretended act of the State of
    Georgia, passed, or alleged to be passed, during the year 1795:”

The question was taken that the House do agree to the motion for
postponement of the said residue of the original motion; and resolved in
the affirmative--yeas 54, nays 51, as follows:

YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton, Phanuel Bishop,
John Campbell, William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett,
Jacob Crowninshield, Manasseh Cutler, Richard Cutts, Samuel W. Dana, John
Davenport, John Dawson, William Dickson, Thomas Dwight, James Elliot,
Ebenezer Elmer, William Eustis, William Findlay, John Fowler, Andrew
Gregg, Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings, William Helms,
David Hough, Benjamin Huger, Nehemiah Knight, Henry W. Livingston, Thomas
Lowndes, Matthew Lyon, Nahum Mitchell, Samuel L. Mitchill, Jeremiah
Morrow, Joseph H. Nicholson, Thomas Plater, Erastus Root, Tompson J.
Skinner, John Smilie, John Cotton Smith, Joseph Stanton, William Stedman,
James Stephenson, Samuel Taggart, Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, David
Thomas, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Joseph B. Varnum, Daniel C. Verplanck,
Peleg Wadsworth, Lemuel Williams, and Marmaduke Williams.

NAYS.--Isaac Anderson, David Bard, George Michael Bedinger, William
Blackledge, Adam Boyd, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William Butler, Levi
Casey, Joseph Clay, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, John B.
Earle, James Gillespie, Peterson Goodwyn, Thomas Griffin, Samuel Hammond,
John A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, James Holland, William Kennedy, Michael
Leib, Joseph Lewis, jun., Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Andrew Moore,
Nicholas R. Moore, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Gideon Olin, Beriah
Palmer, John Randolph, Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania,
Jacob Richards, Cæsar A. Rodney, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer
Seaver, James Sloan, John Smith of Virginia, Henry Southard, Richard
Stanford, John Stewart, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, Isaac Van Horne,
Matthew Walton, Richard Wynn, and Joseph Winston.[10]


WEDNESDAY, March 14.

_Government of Louisiana._

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the bill from the Senate,
providing for the government of Louisiana.

Mr. SLOAN moved an amendment, inhibiting the admission of slaves into
Louisiana, as well from the United States as from foreign places.

Mr. S. concisely stated his reasons in favor of this provision, when the
question was taken, and the amendment agreed to--ayes 40, noes 36. Mr.
G. W. CAMPBELL proposed an amendment, withholding from the parties to a
civil suit the right of waiving a jury trial. The bill provides a jury
trial in all cases in which either party shall require it.

This amendment, after being supported by Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL, and opposed
by Messrs. HOLLAND, SOUTHARD, and DANA, was negatived--ayes 12.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL moved to strike out that part of the bill which
renders every person settling on lands of the United States liable to a
fine of one thousand dollars, and to one year’s imprisonment.

This produced a debate of some length and more animation, in which the
motion to strike out was urged by Messrs. G. W. CAMPBELL, LYON, and
CLAIBORNE; and opposed by Messrs. GREGG, NICHOLSON, BOYD, SMILIE, MACON,
SLOAN, and HOLLAND.

The question was taken, and the amendment was negatived--ayes 23.


SATURDAY, March 17.

_Government of Louisiana._

The bill erecting Louisiana into two Territories, and providing for the
temporary government thereof, was read the third time.

Mr. DAWSON moved a recommitment of the bill for amendment.

Mr. ALSTON was against a general recommitment of the bill, but friendly
to a recommitment for the purpose of limiting its duration.

Messrs. NICHOLSON, SMILIE, EARLY, and S. N. MITCHILL, opposed the
recommitment.

Mr. BEDINGER advocated the recommitment.

The motion to recommit was then negatived--ayes 39, noes 43.

Mr. ALSTON said, if there was no objection, he would move the insertion
of a clause to limit the period of the bill, on account principally of
the great powers conferred on the Executive.

This motion being objected to, by Mr. LYON, was declared out of order.

The question was then put on the passage of the bill.

Messrs. LYON, SLOAN, JACKSON, and BEDINGER opposed, and Mr. SMILIE
supported its passage.

Mr. VARNUM moved to recommit, for amendment, that part of the bill that
vests equity powers in the courts of Louisiana.

Motion negatived--ayes 39, noes 44.

A motion was made to recommit the fourth section, which was lost--ayes 15.

Mr. BEDINGER moved to recommit the last section for the purpose of
obtaining a limitation to the act.

Motion carried--ayes 52.

The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the last section,

When Mr. NICHOLSON moved an amendment limiting the act to two years, and
to the end of the next session thereafter.

Mr. BEDINGER said, he would like its limitation to one year better, but
would, if it were the sense of the House, be satisfied with two years.

Mr. NICHOLSON’s motion was agreed to without a division.

The House agreed to the amendment; when the final question was put on
the passage of the bill, and carried in the affirmative by yeas and
nays--yeas 66, nays 21, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, junior, Isaac Anderson, David Bard,
    George Michael Bedinger, Walter Bowie, Adam Boyd, John Boyle,
    Robert Brown, Levi Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph Clay,
    Frederick Conrad, Jacob Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, William
    Dickson, John B. Earle, Peter Early, Ebenezer Elmer, William
    Eustis, William Findlay, James Gillespie, John A. Hanna,
    Josiah Hasbrouck, Joseph Heister, William Hoge, James Holland,
    Benjamin Huger, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Nehemiah
    Knight, Michael Leib, Andrew McCord, William McCreery, David
    Meriwether, Samuel L. Mitchill, Andrew Moore, Nicholas R.
    Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas
    Newton, junior, Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah
    Palmer, Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea
    of Tennessee, Jacob Richards, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons,
    Thomas Sandford, Ebenezer Seaver, Tompson J. Skinner, John
    Smilie, John Smith of Virginia, Richard Stanford, John Stewart,
    David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, John Trigg,
    Philip Van Cortlandt, Isaac Van Horne, Marmaduke Williams,
    Richard Wynn, and Joseph Winston.

    NAYS.--John Archer, Silas Betton, Martin Chittenden, Clifton
    Claggett, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Samuel W. Dana, John
    Davenport, John Dawson, James Elliot, Gaylord Griswold, Roger
    Griswold, Seth Hastings, John G. Jackson, Henry W. Livingston,
    Matthew Lyon, Thomas Plater, James Sloan, John C. Smith, Samuel
    Tenney, and Lemuel Williams.[11]

WEDNESDAY, March 21.

_Tripolitan War and Mediterranean Fund._

Mr. NICHOLSON, from the Committee of Ways and Means, presented a bill
further to protect the commerce and seamen of the United States against
the Barbary Powers.

[The bill provides that an additional duty of two and a half per centum
be laid upon all imported goods at present charged with a duty ad
valorem, and an additional duty of ten per cent. on all such duties
payable on goods imported in foreign vessels. The proceeds of these
duties are to constitute a fund to be called the Mediterranean fund. The
duties to cease within three months after a peace with Tripoli, in case
the United States are not engaged in war with some other of the Barbary
Powers, in which case they are to cease within three months after a peace
with such powers. The President is authorized to cause to be purchased
or built two vessels of war, to carry sixteen guns each, and as many
gunboats as he may think proper. One million of dollars, additional to
the sum heretofore appropriated, is placed under the direction of the
President for the naval service, which sum he is authorized to borrow at
a rate of interest not exceeding six per cent.]

Mr. NICHOLSON moved that this bill should be made the order for this day.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD moved to-morrow.

The question on “to-morrow” was lost--yeas 33, nays 50, when Mr.
NICHOLSON’s motion prevailed.


_Duties on Imports._

The bill laying more specific duties on certain articles, and imposing
light-money on foreign vessels entering the ports of the United States,
was read the third time.

Mr. HUGER moved its postponement to the first Monday of December, under
the impression that its merits, and the principles it contained, had not
received that full and deliberate examination to which they were entitled.

Mr. J. CLAY observed that a postponement would be virtually a rejection
of the bill.

Mr. MITCHILL concisely advocated the principles of the bill.

Mr. BLACKLEDGE also defended it.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD opposed it, principally on the ground that it increased
the existing rate of duties.

Mr. J. CLAY replied, and allowed that the duties imposed by the bill
would produce more revenue than that heretofore received, but contended
that this would arise from the fraudulent practice heretofore in use
of making out invoices of articles subject at present to ad valorem
duties. In removing this evil, the necessary effect would be an increase
of revenue, not exceeding, however, the probable receipt in case the
invoices were fairly made out.

Mr. HUGER followed, in a speech of considerable length, in which he
contended that the operation of the bill would be to promote the
manufactures of the Eastern and Middle States, to the great detriment of
the Southern States. Principally, though not entirely on this ground, he
declared himself hostile to the bill.

After a few remarks from Mr. BOYD in defence, and of Mr. CLAIBORNE
against the bill, the question of postponement was taken by yeas and
nays, and lost--yeas 40, nays 68.

Mr. KENNEDY moved a recommitment of the motion imposing a specific duty
on printed calicoes and lime.

Motion rejected--yeas 34.

The question was then taken on the passage of the bill, and carried in
the affirmative by yeas and nays--yeas 65, nays 41.[12]


THURSDAY, March 22.

_Protection against the Barbary Powers._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
further to protect the commerce and seamen of the United States against
the Barbary Powers.

Mr. GRISWOLD moved to strike out the first section, which is as follows:

    “_Be it enacted, by the Senate and House of Representatives of
    the United States of America in Congress assembled_, That, for
    the purpose of defraying the expenses of equipping, officering,
    manning, and employing such of the armed vessels of the United
    States, as may be deemed requisite by the President of the
    United States, for protecting the commerce and seamen thereof,
    and for carrying on warlike operations against the Regency of
    Tripoli, or any other of the Barbary Powers, which may commit
    hostilities against the United States, and for the purpose also
    of defraying any other expenses incidental to the intercourse
    with the Barbary Powers, or which are authorized by this act,
    a duty of two and a half per centum ad valorem, in addition
    to the duties now imposed by law, shall be laid, levied, and
    collected upon all goods, wares, and merchandise, paying a
    duty ad valorem, which shall, after the thirtieth day of June
    next, be imported into the United States from any foreign port
    or place; and an addition of ten per centum shall be made to
    the said additional duty in respect to all goods, wares, and
    merchandise, imported in ships or vessels not of the United
    States, and the duties imposed by this act shall be levied and
    collected in the same manner, and under the same regulations
    and allowances, as to drawbacks, mode of security, and time of
    payment, respectively, as are already prescribed by law, in
    relation to the duties now in force on the articles on which
    the said additional duty is laid by this act.”

Mr. G. said, that it was much to be regretted that gentlemen had thought
proper, upon this occasion, to connect with the great and ostensible
object of the bill, any provisions which should produce a disunion in
the House. The unfortunate event in the Mediterranean called loudly for
vigorous and decisive measures, and he trusted there would not exist on
the floor a difference of opinion on that point. For himself, he was
disposed to clothe the President with all the power, and to furnish him
with all the means which were necessary to bring the war with Tripoli to
a successful and speedy termination. And when this was done, to make him,
as he ought to be, responsible for the event.

It is always improper, said Mr. G., to connect in the same bill two
subjects which are in their natures distinct; and much more improper upon
this occasion, to tack to the provisions for the Mediterranean service,
upon which there could be no difference of opinion, a new tax, in respect
to which gentlemen could not agree.

The first section of the bill, which he had moved to strike out, imposed
a new tax of two and a half per centum ad valorem on all goods now liable
by law to an ad valorem duty. Goods paying at this time an ad valorem
duty were divided into three classes--the first class was liable to a
duty of twelve and a half per cent.; the second, to a duty of fifteen per
cent.; and the third, to a duty of twenty per cent.

The addition of two and a half per cent. now proposed, would increase
the duties to fifteen, seventeen and a half, and twenty-two and a half
per cent., when the goods were imported in American bottoms; and if they
were imported in foreign bottoms, the duties would be further increased
by the addition of ten per cent.

This view of the import, said Mr. G., will satisfy gentlemen that the
duties are already high, and that the proposed addition will render them
enormous. This step, therefore, ought not to be hazarded, unless the
necessities of the Government are absolutely imperious, and no other
means can be resorted to for obtaining the money.

The proposed tax, if fairly collected, would produce at least $750,000
per annum. This result might be seen from a view of the imports into
the United States of goods now liable to an ad valorem duty. From the
last official report, it appeared that the importation of goods of
that description, amounted in that year to about forty millions of
dollars--the two and a half per cent. on the whole sum would, of course,
produce one million, but, allowing for the drawback of duties on goods
exported, the net revenue could not be less than $750,000. Why, then,
impose a tax of seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars to meet an
expenditure which will not probably exceed four or five hundred thousand
dollars?

Mr. NICHOLSON.--We are now about to authorize a greater expense than
usual, and the Legislature are called upon to provide means for its
discharge. For one, said Mr. N., I can never consent to add to the public
debt, while the resources of the country are adequate to its wants.
These are my ideas; and I feel somewhat surprised at the calculation of
the gentleman from Connecticut, on the expense about to be incurred. He
estimates this expense at $388,000; though yesterday when this subject
was laid before the Committee of Ways and Means, and it was contemplated
to provide $750,000, he moved to strike out $750,000, and insert
$1,000,000. And yet he now tells us that only $388,000 are required.
As to the specie in the Treasury, the gentleman states that on the 1st
of October there were $5,000,000. But with what disbursements is this
chargeable? Out of it there are to be paid American citizens for French
spoliations the sum of $3,750,000 in cash, which must remain in the
Treasury, that just claims may be paid as soon as presented. Under the
British Convention there is to be paid $800,000; and there is likewise
to be paid the interest on Louisiana stock, amounting to $685,000; the
aggregate of which sums is $5,235,000. Not having made this calculation
until the gentleman made his observation, it is possible it may not be
perfectly correct.

When the loss of the Philadelphia was announced, my first inquiry of
the Secretary of the Treasury was what money could be spared from the
Treasury for the prosecution of vigorous measures. His answer was, that
the greatest sum which could be spared would not exceed $150,000. I did
not, like the gentleman, go to the clerks or to the navy yard; but I got
the best information I could.

The gentleman from Connecticut, who appears willing to incur an expense
of a million of dollars, while he is unwilling to provide the means
of meeting it, objects to the mode of raising revenue proposed by the
Committee of Ways and Means, without proposing any other. He objects to
the laying additional duties on imported goods. In his remarks he has
made an erroneous statement of the quantity of goods on which ad valorem
duties are paid. His error has arisen from not deducting the amount of
drawbacks. By an official statement made this session, it will be found
that during the year 1802, goods paying ad valorem duties were as follows:

       _Rate._       _Amount._       _Duty._
    12½ per cent.   $23,377,717    $2,922,214
    15     ”          7,888,614     1,183,292
    20     ”            439,830        87,966
                    -----------    ----------
      Amounting to  $34,706,161    $4,193,472

The average duty on goods charged ad valorem is about thirteen and a
half per cent. Let us consider the duties paid by other articles. The
gentleman says in laying duties there is a point beyond which we cannot
go in safety on account of the temptation to smuggling. This is true.
But of all goods imported those chargeable with ad valorem duties are
the most difficult to smuggle. The invoices are made out in the country
from which they are imported. These must be authenticated, and presented
at the custom-house and sworn to. If the collector has any reason to
suspect that there are goods on board of a vessel, not in the entry, he
is to make a thorough examination of the vessel. If he sees a bale in
which he suspects there are goods not stated in the invoice, it is in
his power to have it examined. I believe there is but little smuggling
at this time; but that the articles on which there is most smuggling are
rum and coffee. If the gentleman allows that the duty on articles charged
specifically is not so high as to encourage smuggling to any great or
dangerous extent, he will allow the same in the case of articles charged
ad valorem. The great articles from which revenue is obtained, are

Spirits, which pay an average duty of twenty-nine and two-tenth cents,
and which produce $2,253,496, and cost the importer from twenty-five to
fifty cents per gallon. Spirits which pay twenty-five cents a gallon do
not cost the importer more than fifty cents, and consequently pay a duty
of fifty per cent. on the price of the article. Spirits of the third
proof pay twenty-eight cents, and do not cost more than fifty-six cents
a gallon, which is equal to a duty of fifty per cent. So with spirits
of higher proof. From this article is derived more than a fifth of our
revenue, and yet I never heard the amount of the duty complained of,
until a few days since a petition was presented from the merchants of
Connecticut. It is certain that Congress have never considered it so high
as to encourage smuggling.

Of imported sugars 39,443,814 lbs. are consumed within the United States,
which pay, on an average, a duty of two and a half cents per pound. The
price of brown sugar to the importer is about five or six dollars the
hundred. The duty is therefore between forty-five and fifty per cent. Is
this duty considered so high as to encourage smuggling? If not, shall
gentlemen complain when we are about to lay an additional duty of two and
a half per cent. upon articles now chargeable with duties of from twelve
and a half to twenty per cent.?

Of salt there is consumed 3,244,309 bushels in the United States. It pays
a duty of twenty cents a bushel. In many instances this is equal to the
first cost; and amounts therefore to one hundred per cent.

The consumption of wines amounts to 1,912,274 gallons, and the average
duty is thirty-three cents. The duty on Madeira wine is fifty-eight
cents, and it costs the importer one dollar and twenty-five cents. The
duty therefore amounts to near fifty per cent. If the cost be taken at
one dollar and fifty cents, the duty will be thirty-three and a third per
cent. And yet it is not complained that it encourages smuggling.

The greater part of goods charged ad valorem are woollens, linens,
manufactures of steel, brass, and articles of a similar kind, and
muslins. In a muslin gown the additional duty will make a difference of
about five cents. India muslins cost about fifteen cents a yard, and
English about twenty-five cents. The additional duty will therefore
be about three-eighths of a cent on India, and about three-fourths of
a cent on English muslins. This I consider a burden which no one can
feel. The additional duty on linens will be equally unfelt. In a bale of
osnaburgs, which costs twenty cents, the additional duty on a hundred
yards will not exceed fifty cents. So as to Irish linens and woollens.
The difference in a coarse suit of clothes for a common man will not be
more than twenty-five cents, and that of a better kind will not exceed
one dollar and twenty-five cents. I am surprised, after taking this view
of the operation of the proposed duty, that gentlemen should dwell upon
the great burden it will impose, when it can, in truth, scarcely be felt
by the poorest man in the country. It is indeed of no consideration but
on account of the money raised by it, which I have estimated at about
$750,000.

The gentleman from Connecticut thinks he has discovered in the second
section a design that is not avowed, to wit: to liberate the present
resources from their application to the support of the Navy. I wonder,
however, that the gentleman, before he made this unguarded remark, did
not read the section through. He would then have seen that the fund
established by this act is to exist no longer than three months after
the discontinuance of war in the Mediterranean. Nor is it true that the
whole expenses of the Navy are in the Mediterranean. It is true, that at
this time they are principally there. But there is likewise considerable
expense incurred here in the navy yard on the ships, and on the half-pay
of officers not in actual service. Whence the gentleman deduces the
inference, when the bill itself declares that the new duties shall cease
three months after the end of the war, I am altogether at a loss to
comprehend. The duties are to cease with the occasion which produced
them. When we shall no longer be at war, the war duties will be at an end.

Mr. DANA.--The gentleman from Maryland must surely have committed a
mistake, when he said that there is no measure proposed on his side
of the House which does not meet with opposition. When the President
considered vigorous measures necessary against the Emperor of Morocco,
the Journal will show that we entered into them unanimously. Nor is
the objection now urged in any way an objection to the general measure
contemplated. The only objection is to the imposition of unnecessary
taxes. If the force necessary to be sent into the Mediterranean will not
exceed an expense of $380,000, the necessity of the imposition of the
proposed taxes surely does not exist. I admit that, after the force is
raised, the President, in virtue of his authority as commander-in-chief,
is to have its whole direction; but it is perfectly novel to me to learn
that we are not previously to be informed of the extent to which it is
proposed to carry it. If to the present number of vessels in service we
add two frigates and five smaller vessels, they will require only an
additional appropriation of $354,000. This, I believe, is the full extent
of the additional force contemplated. As to raising money to that amount,
I make no objection. Though I dislike laying duties thus in gross, yet I
do not know that there can be any great objection to it. The sum proposed
to be raised will give $750,000, which is more than double the sum
necessary.

Is it proper thus to raise these duties, and hold forth to the nation
that the commerce of the Mediterranean is so expensive? The late disaster
in the Mediterranean is not of itself an adequate cause for the measure.
I object to this measure, because it goes to give an improper impression
of the causes of the bill.

Mr. NICHOLSON said, the gentleman from Connecticut seemed to consider the
object too general; he would, in case the committee refused to strike out
the first section, move to limit the application of the fund “to protect
the commerce and seamen of the United States in the Mediterranean.”

The question was then taken on striking out the first section, and passed
in the negative--ayes 26.

Mr. N. then offered the amendment just stated.

Mr. EUSTIS hoped the gentleman from Maryland would withdraw his
amendment, as in a subsequent part of the bill the object is distinctly
specified. It is altogether unnecessary; and if agreed to, it will be
necessary to add, “or adjacent seas.”

Mr. NICHOLSON said, he considered the amendment as unnecessary; but as he
had promised to make it, he could not withdraw it.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said he would suggest one reason why it ought not
to obtain. One of the Barbary Powers possessed a coast out of the
Mediterranean. If the misfortune of the United States should dispose
this power, (Morocco,) already predisposed to hostility, to war upon
the United States, it would not be in our power to block up the port of
Sallee, and several other ports out of the Mediterranean.

The question was taken on the amendment, which was lost without a
division.

The committee then rose and reported the bill without amendment.

The House immediately took it up--when Mr. R. GRISWOLD renewed his motion
to strike out the first section.

The question on striking out the first section was taken by yeas and
nays--yeas 28, nays 77.


FRIDAY, March 23.

_District of Columbia._

Mr. DAWSON moved that the House should resolve itself into a Committee
of the Whole on the resolutions offered by him, for the recession of the
District of Columbia.

Mr. HUGER said this point had been fully and ably investigated the last
session. He did not expect, after the decision then made, that the House
would have been again called upon to discuss it. He believed the mind of
every member was made up respecting it. He hoped, therefore, the House
would not agree to go into committee.

Mr. J. LEWIS said he should vote against the House resolving itself
into a Committee of the Whole, and should that motion be negatived, he
would move to discharge the Committee of the Whole from all further
consideration of the resolutions. The question was taken on going into
committee, and lost--yeas 20.

Mr. J. LEWIS then moved to discharge the committee. This motion was
carried without debate--yeas 53, embracing a great majority of the
members present.


MONDAY, March 26.

_Impeachment of Judge Chase._

Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, from the committee appointed on the thirteenth
instant, to prepare and report articles of impeachment against Samuel
Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United
States, made a report thereon, which was read.

_Ordered_, That the said report be printed for the use of the members of
both Houses; and that the Clerk of this House be directed to transmit
to each of the members of the two Houses of Congress, a copy of the said
report, as soon as the same shall be printed.

_Ordered_, That there be a call of the House to-morrow morning at eleven
o’clock.

The House adjourned until four o’clock, post meridian.


_Four o’clock, p. m._

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have passed
a resolution, that the resolution of the two Houses authorizing the
President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives to
adjourn their respective Houses on this day, be rescinded; and that the
said President and Speaker of the House of Representatives be authorized
to close the present session, by adjourning their respective Houses on
Tuesday, the 27th of this month; to which they desire the concurrence
of this House. The Senate adhere to their amendment, disagreed to by
this House, to the bill, entitled “An act supplementary to the act,
entitled ‘An act providing for a Naval Peace Establishment, and for other
purposes.’”

The House proceeded to consider the resolution of the Senate to rescind
the resolution of both Houses, of the thirteenth instant, for an
adjournment of the two Houses of Congress, on this day; and authorizing
the President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives,
to close the present session, by adjourning their respective Houses on
Tuesday the 27th of the present month: whereupon,

_Resolved_, That this House doth agree to the said resolution of the
Senate--yeas 49, nays 44.

The House proceeded to reconsider the amendment disagreed to by this
House, and adhered to by the Senate, to the bill, entitled “An act
supplementary to the act, entitled ‘An act providing for a Naval Peace
Establishment, and for other purposes,’” whereupon,

_Resolved_, That this House doth recede from their disagreement to the
said amendment.


TUESDAY, March 27.

_Specific Duties._

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have passed
the bill, entitled “An act for imposing more specific duties on the
importation of certain articles, with amendments, and also for levying
and collecting light-money on foreign ships or vessels.”

The House proceeded to consider the amendments proposed by the Senate
to the bill, entitled “An act for imposing more specific duties on the
importation of certain articles, and also for levying and collecting
light-money on foreign ships or vessels,” whereupon,

_Resolved_, That this House doth agree to the said amendments.


_Half-past four o’clock, p. m._

Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, from the committee appointed on the part of this
House, jointly with the committee appointed on the part of the Senate,
to wait on the President of the United States and notify him of the
proposed recess of Congress, reported that the committee had performed
that service; and that the President signified to them he had no farther
communication to make during the present session.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate to inform them that
this House, having completed the business before them, are now about to
adjourn until the first Monday in November next; and that the Clerk of
this House do go with the said message.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate, having
completed the Legislative business before them, are now ready to adjourn.
Whereupon the SPEAKER adjourned the House until the first Monday in
November next.




EIGHTH CONGRESS.--SECOND SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, NOVEMBER 5, 1804.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


MONDAY, November 5, 1804.

The second session of the Eighth Congress, conformably to the act passed
at the last session, entitled, “An act altering the time for the next
meeting of Congress,” commenced this day; and the Senate assembled at the
City of Washington.


PRESENT:

AARON BURR, Vice President of the United States and President of the
Senate.

SIMEON OLCOTT and WILLIAM PLUMER, from New Hampshire.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, from Massachusetts.

URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

CHRISTOPHER ELLERY, from Rhode Island.

STEPHEN R. BRADLEY and ISRAEL SMITH, from Vermont.

JOHN CONDIT, from New Jersey.

SAMUEL WHITE, from Delaware.

SAMUEL SMITH, from Maryland.

ABRAHAM BALDWIN, from Georgia; and

THOMAS WORTHINGTON, from Ohio.

WILLIAM B. GILES, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the
Commonwealth of Virginia, in place of Abraham B. Venable, resigned, took
his seat, and his credentials were read.

The VICE PRESIDENT gave notice that he had received a letter from WILLIAM
HILL WELLS, a Senator from the State of Delaware, resigning his seat in
the Senate.

The number of Senators present not being sufficient to constitute a
quorum, the Senate adjourned.


TUESDAY, November 6.

JESSE FRANKLIN, from the State of North Carolina, GEORGE LOGAN, from
the State of Pennsylvania, and TIMOTHY PICKERING, from the State of
Massachusetts, severally attended.

ANDREW MOORE, appointed a Senator by the Executive of the Commonwealth of
Virginia, in place of Wilson C. Nicholas, resigned, took his seat, and
his credentials were read.

The PRESIDENT administered the oath to Mr. GILES and Mr. MOORE, as the
law prescribes.

_Ordered_--That the PRESIDENT be requested to notify the Executive of
the State of Delaware of the resignation of Mr. Wells.

No quorum being present, the Senate adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 7.

ROBERT WRIGHT, from the State of Maryland, attended.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary notify the House of Representatives that a
quorum of the Senate is assembled and ready to proceed to business.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of the House of Representatives is assembled and ready to proceed
to business. The House of Representatives have appointed a committee on
their part, jointly, with such committee as the Senate may appoint, to
wait on the President of the United States, and notify him that a quorum
of the two Houses is assembled and ready to receive any communications
that he may be pleased to make to them. The House of Representatives have
also passed a resolution that two chaplains, of different denominations,
be appointed to Congress for the present session, one by each House, who
shall interchange weekly; in which several resolutions they desire the
concurrence of the Senate.

The Senate took into consideration the resolution of the House of
Representatives for the appointment of a joint committee to wait on the
President of the United States, and notify him that a quorum of the two
Houses is assembled; and concurred therein, and Messrs. SAMUEL SMITH and
BALDWIN were appointed the committee on the part of the Senate.

The Senate took into consideration the Resolution of the House of
Representatives for the appointment of two chaplains to Congress during
the present session, and, having agreed thereto, proceeded to the choice
of a chaplain on their part; and the Rev. Mr. MCCORMICK was duly elected.

Mr. SAMUEL SMITH reported, from the joint committee, that they had waited
on the President of the United States, agreeably to the resolution of
this day, and that the President of the United States had informed the
committee that he would make a communication to the two Houses to-morrow
at 12 o’clock.


THURSDAY, November 8.

JONATHAN DAYTON, from the State of New Jersey, and JAMES HILLHOUSE, from
the State of Connecticut, severally attended.

The following message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:--

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    To a people, fellow-citizens, who sincerely desire the
    happiness and prosperity of other nations, to those who justly
    calculate that their own well-being is advanced by that of
    the nations with which they have intercourse, it will be a
    satisfaction to observe, that the war which was lighted up in
    Europe a little before our last meeting, has not yet extended
    its flames to other nations, nor been marked by the calamities
    which sometimes stain the footsteps of war. The irregularities,
    too, on the ocean, which generally harass the commerce of
    neutral nations, have, in distant parts, disturbed ours less
    than on former occasions. But, in the American seas, they have
    been greater from peculiar causes; and even within our harbors
    and jurisdiction, infringements on the authority of the laws
    have been committed, which have called for serious attention.

    While noticing the irregularities committed on the ocean by
    others, those on our own part should not be omitted, nor left
    unprovided for. Complaints have been received that persons
    residing within the United States have taken on themselves to
    arm merchant vessels, and to force a commerce into certain
    ports and countries in defiance of the laws of those countries.
    That individuals should undertake to wage private war,
    independently of the authority of their country, cannot be
    permitted in a well-ordered society. Its tendency to produce
    aggression on the laws and rights of other nations, and to
    endanger the peace of our own, is so obvious that I doubt not
    you will adopt measures for restraining it effectually in
    future.

    With the nations of Europe, in general, our friendship and
    intercourse are undisturbed, and from the governments of the
    belligerent powers especially, we continue to receive those
    friendly manifestations which are justly due to an honest
    neutrality, and to such good offices consistent with that as we
    have opportunities of rendering.

    The activity and success of the small force employed in the
    Mediterranean in the early part of the present year, the
    reinforcements sent into that sea, and the energy of the
    officers having command in the several vessels, will, I trust,
    by the sufferings of war, reduce the barbarians of Tripoli to
    the desire of peace on proper terms.

    The Bey of Tunis having made requisitions unauthorized by our
    treaty, their rejection has produced from him some expressions
    of discontent. But to those who expect us to calculate whether
    a compliance with unjust demands will not cost us less than a
    war, we must leave as a question of calculation for them; also,
    whether to retire from unjust demands will not cost them less
    than a war. We can do to each other very sensible injuries by
    war; but the mutual advantages of peace make that the best
    interest of both.

    In pursuance of the act providing for the temporary
    government of Louisiana, the necessary officers for the
    Territory of Orleans were appointed in due time, to commence
    the exercise of their functions on the first day of October.
    The distance, however, of some of them, and indispensable
    previous arrangements, may have retarded its commencement in
    some of its parts; the form of government thus provided having
    been considered but as temporary, and open to such future
    improvements as further information of the circumstances of our
    brethren there might suggest, it will of course be subject to
    your consideration.

    The act of Congress of February 28, 1803, for building and
    employing a number of gunboats, is now in a course of execution
    to the extent there provided for. The obstacle to naval
    enterprise which vessels of this construction offer for our
    seaport towns; their utility towards supporting, within our
    waters, the authority of the laws; the promptness with which
    they will be manned by the seamen and militia of the place in
    the moment they are wanting; the facility of their assembling
    from different parts of the coast to any point where they
    are required in greater force than ordinary; the economy of
    their maintenance and preservation from decay when not in
    actual service; and the competence of our finances to this
    defensive provision, without any new burden, are considerations
    which will have due weight with Congress in deciding on the
    expediency of adding to their number from year to year, as
    experience shall test their utility, until all our important
    harbors, by these and auxiliary means, shall be secured against
    insult and opposition to the laws.

    The state of our finances continues to fulfil out expectations.
    Eleven millions and a half of dollars, received in the course
    of the year ending the 30th of September last, have enabled us,
    after meeting all the ordinary expenses of the year, to pay
    upwards of three million six hundred thousand dollars of the
    public debt, exclusive of interest. This payment, with those
    of the two preceding years, has extinguished upwards of twelve
    millions of the principal and a greater sum of interest within
    that period; and, by a proportionate diminution of interest,
    renders already sensible the effect of the growing sum yearly
    applicable to the discharge of the principal.

    These, fellow-citizens, are the principal matters which I have
    thought it necessary, at this time, to communicate for your
    consideration and attention. Some others will be laid before
    you in the course of the session; but, in the discharge of
    the great duties confided to you by our country, you will
    take a broader view of the field of legislation. Whether the
    great interests of agriculture, manufactures, commerce, or
    navigation, can, within the pale of your constitutional powers,
    be aided in any of their relations; whether laws are provided
    in all cases, where they are wanting; whether those provided
    are exactly what they should be; whether any abuses take place
    in their administration, or in that of the public revenues;
    whether the organization of the public agents, or of the public
    force, is perfect in all its parts: in fine, whether any thing
    can be done to advance the general good, or questions within
    the limits of your functions, which will necessarily occupy
    your attention. In these and all other matters which you in
    your wisdom may propose for the good of our country, you may
    count with assurance on my hearty co-operation and faithful
    execution.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    NOVEMBER 8, 1804.

The message was read, and with the documents therein referred to, ordered
to be printed for the use of the Senate.


FRIDAY, November 9.

THOMAS SUMTER, from the State of South Carolina, attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House have appointed the Rev. WILLIAM BENTLEY a chaplain to Congress on
their part during the present session.


MONDAY, November 12.

WILLIAM COCKE, from the State of Tennessee, and DAVID STONE, from the
State of North Carolina, severally attended.


THURSDAY, November 15.

SAMUEL MACLAY, from the State of Pennsylvania, and JOHN SMITH, from the
State of New York, severally attended.


TUESDAY, November 20.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that the
House have passed a “resolution expressive of the sense of Congress of
the gallant conduct of Captain Stephen Decatur, the officers and crew of
the United States ketch Intrepid, in attacking in the harbor of Tripoli,
and destroying a Tripolitan frigate of forty-four guns,” in which they
desire the concurrence of the Senate.

The resolution last mentioned was read and passed to the second reading.


THURSDAY, November 22.

The resolution of the House of Representatives expressive of the sense of
Congress of the gallant conduct of Capt. Stephen Decatur, the officers
and crew of the United States ketch Intrepid, was read the second time,
and referred to Messrs. BRADLEY, BALDWIN, and GILES, to consider and
report thereon to the Senate.


FRIDAY, November 23.

The PRESIDENT laid before the Senate the credentials of JAMES A. BAYARD,
appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of Delaware, in place
of WILLIAM HILL WELLS, resigned, and the credentials were read.

SAMUEL L. MITCHILL, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of New York,
in place of John Armstrong, whose seat has become vacant by his mission
to France, took his seat in the Senate, and produced his credentials,
which were read, and the oath was administered to him by the PRESIDENT,
as the law prescribes.


FRIDAY, November 30.

JOHN SMITH, from the State of Ohio, and JOHN BRECKENRIDGE, from the State
of Kentucky, severally attended.


MONDAY, December 3.

BENJAMIN HOWLAND, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Rhode Island, in the place of Samuel J. Potter, deceased, took his
seat and produced his credentials; which were read, and the oath was
administered to him by the PRESIDENT, as the law prescribes.


TUESDAY, December 4.

JAMES JACKSON, from the State of Georgia, attended.


THURSDAY, December 6.

JOSEPH ANDERSON, from the State of Tennessee, attended.


MONDAY, December 17.

The credentials of WILLIAM B. GILES, appointed a Senator by the
Legislature of the Commonwealth of Virginia, in the room of Wilson C.
Nicholas, resigned, and the credentials of ANDREW MOORE, appointed a
Senator by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Virginia, in the room
of Abraham B. Venable, resigned, were severally read, and the oath was
administered to them, respectively, as the law prescribes.


WEDNESDAY, December 26.

JOHN BROWN, from the State of Kentucky, attended.


MONDAY, January 7, 1805.

The letter of PIERCE BUTLER, Esq., announcing the resignation of his seat
in the Senate, was read.


MONDAY, January 14.

_Mourning for the Honorable Mr. Potter._

On motion, it was

_Resolved_, That the members of the Senate, from a sincere desire
of showing every mark of respect to the Honorable SAMUEL J. POTTER,
deceased, late a member thereof, will go into mourning for him one month,
by the usual mode of wearing a crape round the left arm.[13]


TUESDAY, January 15.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a
President _pro tempore_, as the constitution provides, and the Honorable
JOSEPH ANDERSON was elected.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States
and acquaint him that, the VICE-PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate have
elected the Honorable JOSEPH ANDERSON President of the Senate _pro
tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary make a like communication to the House of
Representatives.

JAMES A. BAYARD, from the State of Delaware, attended. His credentials
having been presented and read on the 23d of November last, the oath was
administered to him by the President, as the law prescribes, and he took
his seat in the Senate.


THURSDAY, January 17.

_General Moses Hazen._

The bill entitled “An act for the relief of Charlotte Hazen, widow and
relict of the late Brigadier General Moses Hazen,” was read the third
time, further amended, and the blank filled with the words “two hundred;”
and on the question, Shall this bill pass as amended? it was determined
in the affirmative--yeas 20, nays 8, as follows:

    Yeas.--Messrs. Anderson, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke,
    Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Howland, Logan, Maclay, Mitchill,
    Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Vermont,
    Stone, Sumter, Worthington, and Wright.

    Nays.--Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Dayton, Hillhouse, Olcott,
    Plumer, and Tracy.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill do pass as amended.


MONDAY, January 21.

_African Slavery._

Mr. LOGAN presented a petition signed Thomas Morris, clerk, on behalf
of the meeting of the representatives of the people called Quakers,
in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, &c., stating that the petitioners, from
a sense of religious duty, had again come forward, to plead the cause
of their oppressed and degraded fellow-men of the African race; and
on the question, Shall this petition be received? it passed in the
affirmative--yeas 19, nays 9, as follows:

    Yeas.--Messrs. Adams, Bayard, Brown, Condit, Franklin,
    Hillhouse, Howland, Logan, Maclay, Mitchill, Olcott, Pickering,
    Plumer, Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Stone, Sumter, White,
    and Worthington.

    Nays.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Bradley, Cocke, Jackson,
    Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, and Wright.

So the petition was read.


TUESDAY, January 29.

_Government of the Territory of Orleans._

Mr. GILES, from the committee to whom was referred, on the 4th instant,
the petition of the merchants, planters, and other inhabitants of
Louisiana, reported a bill further providing for the government of the
Territory of Orleans; and the bill was read, and ordered to the second
reading.

The bill is as follows:

    A Bill further providing for the government of the Territory of
    Orleans.

    _Be it enacted, &c.,_ That the President of the United States
    be and he is hereby authorized to establish within the
    Territory of Orleans, a government in all respects similar
    (except as is herein otherwise provided) to that now exercised
    in the Mississippi Territory, and shall, in the recess of the
    Senate, but to be nominated at their next meeting, for their
    advice and consent, appoint all the officers necessary therein,
    in conformity with the ordinance of Congress, made on the 20th
    day of July, 1787, and that from and after the establishment
    of the said government, the inhabitants of the Territory
    of Orleans shall be entitled to and enjoy all the rights,
    privileges, and advantages, secured by the said ordinance, and
    now enjoyed by the people of the Mississippi Territory.

    Sec. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That so much of the said
    ordinance of Congress as relates to the organization of a
    General Assembly, and prescribes the power thereof, shall,
    from and after the ---- day of ---- next, be in force in the
    said Territory of Orleans; and in order to carry the same into
    operation, the Governor of the said Territory shall cause to
    be elected twenty-five representatives, for which purpose he
    shall lay off the said Territory into convenient election
    districts, on or before the ---- day of ---- next, and give
    due notice thereof throughout the same and first appoint the
    most convenient place, within each of the said districts, for
    holding the elections; and shall nominate a proper officer or
    officers to preside at and conduct the same, and to return to
    him the names of the persons who may have been duly elected.
    All subsequent elections shall be regulated by the Legislature;
    and the number of representatives shall be determined, and
    the apportionment made in the manner prescribed by the said
    ordinance.

    Sec. 3. _And be it further enacted_, That the representatives
    to be chosen as aforesaid, shall be convened by the Governor,
    in the city of Orleans, on the ---- day of ---- next. The
    General Assembly shall meet at least once in every year, and
    such meeting shall be on the ---- Monday in ---- annually,
    unless they shall by law appoint a different day. Neither
    House, during the session, shall, without the consent of the
    other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place
    than that in which the two branches are sitting.

    Sec. 4. _And be it further enacted_, That the laws in force in
    the said Territory, at the commencement of this act, and not
    inconsistent with the provisions thereof, shall continue in
    force, until altered, modified, or repealed by the Legislature.

    Sec. 5. _And be it further enacted_, That the second paragraph
    of the said ordinance, which regulates the descent and
    distribution of estates; and also the sixth article of compact
    which is annexed to and makes part of said ordinance, are
    hereby declared not to extend to, but are excluded from all
    operation within the said Territory of Orleans.

    Sec. 6. _And be it further enacted_, That the Governor,
    Secretary, and Judges, to be appointed by virtue of this
    act, shall be severally allowed the same compensation which
    is now allowed to the Governor, Secretary, and Judges, of
    the Territory of Orleans. And all the additional officers
    authorized by this act shall respectively receive the same
    compensations for their services, as are by law established
    for similar offices in the Mississippi Territory, to be paid
    quarterly out of the revenues of import and tonnage, accruing
    within the said Territory of Orleans.

    Sec. 7. _And be it further enacted_, That whenever it shall
    be ascertained by an actual census or enumeration of the
    inhabitants of the Territory of Orleans, taken by proper
    authority, that the number of inhabitants included therein
    shall amount to at least ---- thousand souls, which shall be
    determined by adding to the whole number of free persons,
    including those bound to service for a term of years, and
    excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons,
    the inhabitants of the said Territory, upon application to
    Congress for that purpose, and upon producing satisfactory
    proof that the number of souls included therein, ascertained
    as aforesaid, does actually amount to at least ---- thousand,
    shall thereupon be authorized to form for themselves a
    constitution and State government, and be admitted into the
    Union upon the footing of the original States, in all respects
    whatever, conformably to the provisions of the third article
    of the Treaty concluded at Paris, on the 30th of April,
    1803, between the United States and the French Republic:
    _Provided_, That the constitution so to be established, shall
    be republican, and not inconsistent with the Constitution of
    the United States, nor inconsistent with the ordinance of
    the late Congress, passed the 13th day of July, 1787, so far
    as the same is made applicable to the Territorial government
    hereby authorized to be established: _Provided, however_,
    That Congress shall be at liberty, at any time prior to the
    admission of the inhabitants of the said Territory to the
    rights of a separate State, to alter the boundaries thereof as
    they may judge proper: except only, that no alteration shall be
    made which shall procrastinate the period for the admission of
    the inhabitants thereof to the rights of a State Government,
    according to the provision of this act.

    Sec. 8. _And be it further enacted_, That so much of an act
    entitled, “An act erecting Louisiana into two Territories,
    and providing for the temporary government thereof,” as is
    repugnant with this act, shall, from and after the ---- day of
    ---- next, be repealed.


WEDNESDAY, January 30.

_Army Uniform._

The PRESIDENT laid before the Senate the petition of Andrew Jackson,
Major General, and sundry other militia officers and other citizens
of the State of Tennessee, praying Congress to amend the articles and
rules for the future government of the army, in respect to certain parts
of their dress and uniform; and, on the question, Shall this petition
be referred to the committee appointed on the 25th instant, who have
under consideration the bill, entitled “An act for establishing rules
and articles for the government of the armies of the United States?” it
passed in the affirmative--yeas 16, nays 15, as follows:

    Yeas.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Bayard, Bradley,
    Cocke, Condit, Franklin, Hillhouse, Maclay, Mitchill, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Stone, and Worthington.

    Nays.--Messrs. Breckenridge, Brown, Dayton, Giles, Howland,
    Jackson, Logan, Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York,
    Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Sumter, White, and Wright.


THURSDAY, January 31.

JOHN GAILLARD, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
South Carolina, in the room of Pierce Butler, resigned, took his seat
in the Senate, and the oath prescribed was administered to him by the
PRESIDENT.[14]


TUESDAY, February 12.

_Opening and Counting Votes for President and Vice President._

_Resolved_, That the Senate will be ready to receive the House of
Representatives in the Senate Chamber, on Wednesday the 13th instant,
February, at noon, for the purpose of being present at the opening and
counting the votes for PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
That one person be appointed a teller on the part of the Senate, to
make a list of the votes for President and Vice President of the United
States, as they shall be declared, and that the result shall be delivered
to the President of the Senate, who shall announce the state of the vote,
which shall be entered on the Journals, and, if it shall appear that a
choice hath been made agreeably to the constitution, such entry on the
Journals shall be deemed a sufficient declaration thereof.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary do carry this resolution to the House of
Representatives.


WEDNESDAY, February 13.

_Counting of Electoral Votes for President and Vice President._

About twelve o’clock the Senators took their seats; and immediately after
the SPEAKER and members of the House of Representatives entered; the
SPEAKER and Clerk occupying seats on the floor on the right side of the
PRESIDENT of the Senate, and the members of the House being seated in
front.

Mr. SAMUEL SMITH, teller on the part of the Senate, and Mr. JOSEPH CLAY,
and Mr. ROGER GRISWOLD, tellers on the part of the House, took seats at
a table placed in front of the Chair, in the area between the Senate and
House.

The Secretary of the Senate read the resolutions of the two Houses,
previously agreed to.

The PRESIDENT (Mr. BURR) stated that, pursuant to law, there had been
transmitted to him several packets, which, from the endorsements upon
them, appeared to be the votes of the Electors of a President and Vice
President; that the returns forwarded by the mail, as well as the
duplicates sent by special messengers, had been received by him in due
time. You will now proceed, gentlemen, said he, to count the votes as
the constitution and laws direct; adding that, perceiving no cause
for preference in the order of opening the returns, he would pursue a
geographical arrangement, beginning with the Northern States.

The PRESIDENT then proceeded to break the seals of the respective
returns, handing each return, and its accompanying duplicate, as the
seals of each were broken, to the tellers through, the Secretary; Mr. S.
SMITH reading aloud the returns, and the attestations of the appointment
of the Electors, and Mr. J. CLAY and Mr. R. GRISWOLD comparing them with
the duplicate return lying before them.

According to which enumeration, the following appeared to be the result.

    ------------------+----------------------+-----------------
                      |   President.         |   V. Pres’dt
                      +-----------+----------+---------+-------
    STATES.           |    Th.    |  C. C.   |  Geo.   |Rufus
                      |Jefferson. |Pinckney. |Clinton. |King.
    ------------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------
    New Hampshire     |     7     |     -    |     7   |
    Massachusetts     |    19     |     -    |    19   |
    [A]Rhode Island   |     4     |     -    |     4   |
    Connecticut       |     -     |     -    |     -   |   9
    Vermont           |     6     |     -    |     6   |
    New York          |    19     |     -    |    19   |
    New Jersey        |     8     |     -    |     8   |
    Pennsylvania      |    20     |     -    |    20   |
    Delaware          |     -     |     3    |     -   |   3
    Maryland          |     9     |     2    |     9   |   2
    Virginia          |    24     |     -    |    24   |
    North Carolina    |    14     |     -    |    14   |
    South Carolina    |    10     |     -    |    10   |
    [B]Georgia        |     6     |     -    |     6   |
    Tennessee         |     5     |     -    |     5   |
    Kentucky          |     8     |     -    |     8   |
    [C]Ohio           |     3     |     -    |     3   |
    ------------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------
    Total             |  162      |    14    |   162   |  14
    ------------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------

    [A] In this return, after stating the whole number of votes given
    for Thomas Jefferson and George Clinton, each Elector certifies
    distinctly his vote for Thomas Jefferson as President, and for
    George Clinton, as Vice President.

    [B] The return certifies the votes to have been given as stated in
    an enclosed paper.

    [C] In this return, the votes are not certified to have been given
    by ballot, but agreeably to law.

After the returns had been all examined, without any objection having
been made to receiving any of the votes, Mr. S. SMITH, on behalf of the
tellers, communicated to the PRESIDENT the foregoing result, which was
read from the Chair; when, the VICE PRESIDENT said, upon this report it
becomes my duty to declare, agreeably to the constitution, that THOMAS
JEFFERSON is elected President of the United States, for the term of
four years from the third day of March next, and that GEORGE CLINTON is
elected Vice President of the United States, for the term of four years
from the third day of March next.

[Previous to the above proceedings, a short debate arose in the Senate on
the keeping of the doors open or shut during the counting of the votes.
Mr. WRIGHT submitted a motion for their being kept open, which, after
some opposition, was agreed to.]


SATURDAY, February 16.

_Absent Members._

A motion was made,

    “That a call of the Senate take place every morning at the
    hour to which the Senate is adjourned, and that absent members
    be not permitted to take their seats until a satisfactory
    excuse be made, or the opinion of the Senate be had thereon.”


WEDNESDAY, February 20.

_Tripolitan War._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I communicate, for the information of Congress, a letter of
    September 18th, from Commodore Preble, giving a detailed
    account of the transactions of the vessels under his command,
    from July the 9th, to the 10th of September last past.

    The energy and judgment displayed by this excellent officer,
    through the whole course of the service lately confided to
    him, and the zeal and valor of his officers and men, in the
    several enterprises executed by them, cannot fail to give high
    satisfaction to Congress and their country, of whom they have
    deserved well.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    FEBRUARY 20, 1805.


FRIDAY, February 22.

The bill freeing from postage all letters and packets to and from AARON
BURR, was read the second time.


SATURDAY, February 23.

Mr. LOGAN gave notice that he should, on Monday next, ask leave to bring
in a bill to prohibit the granting clearances to vessels bound to St.
Domingo.


MONDAY, February 25.

_Commodore Preble._

Mr. JACKSON laid on the table a motion expressive of the high sense
Congress entertain of the gallant and meritorious services of Commodore
Edward Preble, and the officers, seamen, and marines, under his command;
and the motion was read; and it was agreed that it be referred to a
select committee.


WEDNESDAY, February 27.

_Franking Privilege to Aaron Burr._

The Senate resumed the second reading of the bill freeing from postage
all letters and packets to and from AARON BURR; and, on the question,
Shall this bill pass to the third reading? it was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 18, nays 9, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Franklin, Gaillard, Giles, Jackson,
    Mitchill, Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of Ohio, Smith of
    Vermont, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Ellery, Hillhouse, Howland, Logan, Olcott,
    Pickering, Plumer, Sumter, and Worthington.[15]


THURSDAY, February 28.

The VICE PRESIDENT being indisposed, the Senate proceeded to the choice
of a President _pro tempore_ as the constitution provides, and the Hon.
JOSEPH ANDERSON was elected.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States,
and acquaint him that, the VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate have
elected the Hon. JOSEPH ANDERSON President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary make a like communication to the House of
Representatives.

The following Messages were received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I now lay before Congress a statement of the militia of the
    United States, according to the returns last received from the
    several States. It will be perceived that some of these are not
    recent dates, and that from the States of Maryland, Delaware,
    and Tennessee, no returns are stated. As far as appears from
    our records, none were ever rendered from either of these
    States.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    FEBRUARY 28, 1805.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    I now render to Congress the account of the fund established by
    the act of May 1st, 1802, for defraying the contingent charges
    of Government. No occasion having arisen for making use of any
    part of the balance of $18,560, unexpended on the 31st day of
    December, 1803, when the last account was rendered by Message,
    that balance has been carried to the credit of the surplus fund.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    FEBRUARY 28, 1805.

The messages and documents therein referred to were severally read, and
ordered to lie for consideration.

_Franking Privilege to Col. Burr._

The bill freeing from postage all letters and packets to and from
AARON BURR was read the third time; on motion to postpone the further
consideration thereof until the first Monday in December next, it passed
in the negative--yeas 12, nays 18, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Ellery, Franklin, Hillhouse, Howland,
    Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Stone, and Sumter.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Gaillard, Jackson, Mitchill, Moore,
    Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of
    Vermont, Worthington, and Wright.

On the question, Shall this bill pass? it was determined in the
affirmative--yeas 18, nays 13, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Cocke, Condit, Dayton, Gaillard, Jackson, Mitchill, Moore,
    Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of
    Vermont, White, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Baldwin, Ellery, Franklin, Hillhouse, Howland,
    Logan, Maclay, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Stone, Sumter, and
    Worthington.

So it was _Resolved_, that this bill do pass, that it be engrossed, and
that the title thereof be “An act freeing from postage all letters and
packets to and from Aaron Burr.”


SATURDAY, March 2.

_Resignation of Vice President Burr._

BURR’S ADDRESS.

The VICE PRESIDENT took an affectionate leave of the Senate, in substance
as follows:

    “Mr. BURR began by saying, that he had intended to pass the day
    with them, but the increase of a slight indisposition (sore
    throat) had determined him then to take leave of them. He
    touched lightly on some of the rules and orders of the House,
    and recommended, in one or two points, alterations, of which he
    briefly explained the reasons and principles.

    “He said he was sensible he must at times have wounded the
    feelings of individual members. He had ever avoided entering
    into explanations at the time, because a moment of irritation
    was not a moment for explanation; because his position (being
    in the chair) rendered it impossible to enter into explanations
    without obvious danger of consequences which might hazard the
    dignity of the Senate, or prove disagreeable and injurious in
    more than one point of view; that he had, therefore, preferred
    to leave to their reflections his justification; that, on his
    part, he had no injuries to complain of; if any had been done
    or attempted, he was ignorant of the authors; and if he had
    ever heard, he had forgotten, for, he thanked God, he had no
    memory for injuries.

    “He doubted not but that they had found occasion to observe,
    that to be prompt was not therefore to be precipitate; and that
    to act without delay was not always to act without reflection;
    that error was often to be preferred to indecision; that his
    errors, whatever they might have been, were those of rule and
    principle, and not of caprice; that it could not be deemed
    arrogance in him to say that, in his official conduct, he had
    known no party, no cause, no friend; that if, in the opinion
    of any, the discipline which had been established approached
    to rigor, they would at least admit that it was uniform and
    indiscriminate.

    “He further remarked, that the ignorant and unthinking affected
    to treat as unnecessary and fastidious a rigid attention
    to rules and decorum; but he thought nothing trivial which
    touched, however remotely, the dignity of that body; and he
    appealed to their experience for the justice of this sentiment,
    and urged them in language the most impressive, and in a manner
    the most commanding, to avoid the smallest relaxation of the
    habits which he had endeavored, to inculcate and establish.

    “But he challenged their attention to considerations more
    momentous than any which regarded merely their personal honor
    and character--the preservation of law, of liberty, and the
    constitution. This House, said he, is a sanctuary; a citadel
    of law, of order, and of liberty; and it is here--it is here,
    in this exalted refuge; here, if any where, will resistance be
    made to the storms of political frenzy and the silent arts of
    corruption; and if the constitution be destined ever to perish
    by the sacrilegious hands of the demagogue or the usurper,
    which God avert, its expiring agonies will be witnessed on this
    floor.

    “He then adverted to those affecting sentiments which attended
    a final separation--a dissolution, perhaps for ever, of those
    associations which he hoped had been mutually satisfactory. He
    consoled himself, however, and them, with the reflection, that,
    though they separated, they would be engaged in the common
    cause of disseminating principles of freedom and social order.
    He should always regard the proceedings of that body with
    interest and with solicitude. He should feel for their honor
    and the national honor so intimately connected with it, and
    took his leave with expressions of personal respect, and with
    prayers, and wishes,” &c.[16]

Whereupon, the Senate proceeded to the choice of a President _pro
tempore_, as the constitution provides; and the Honorable JOSEPH ANDERSON
was elected.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States,
and acquaint him that, the VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate have
elected the Honorable JOSEPH ANDERSON President of the Senate _pro
tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary notify the same to the House of
Representatives.

_Resolved unanimously_, That the thanks of the Senate be presented to
AARON BURR, in testimony of the impartiality, dignity, and ability, with
which he has presided over their deliberations, and of their entire
approbation of his conduct in discharge of the arduous and important
duties assigned him as President of the Senate.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. SMITH of Maryland, and WHITE, be a committee to
communicate to him this resolution.


SUNDAY, March 3.

_Reply of Vice President Burr to the Vote of Thanks._

Mr. SMITH of Maryland, from the committee appointed for that purpose,
reported that they had waited on the VICE PRESIDENT, agreeably to the
resolution of yesterday, to which he made the following reply:

    _To the Senate of the United States_:

    GENTLEMEN: Next to the satisfaction derived from the
    consciousness of having discharged my duty, is that which
    arises from the favorable opinion of those who have been the
    constant witnesses of my official conduct; and the value of
    this flattering mark of their esteem is greatly enhanced by the
    promptitude and unanimity with which it is offered.

    I pray you to accept my respectful acknowledgments, and the
    assurance of my inviolable attachment to the interests and
    dignity of the Senate.

                                                           A. BURR.

    MARCH 3, 1805.

_Adjournment._

On motion,

_Resolved_, That Messrs. ADAMS, and SMITH of Maryland, be a committee
on the part of the Senate, with such as the House of Representatives may
join, to wait on the President of the United States, and notify him that,
unless he may have any further communications to make to the two Houses
of Congress, they are ready to adjourn.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary acquaint the House of Representatives
therewith, and desire the appointment of a committee on their part.

Mr. ADAMS, from the committee, reported that they had waited upon the
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, who informed them that he had no further
communications to make to the two Houses of Congress.

The Secretary was then directed to inform the House of Representatives
that the Senate, having finished the business before them, are about to
adjourn. Whereupon, the Senate adjourned.


MARCH 4, 1805.

_Inaugural Speech._

On Monday, at 12 o’clock, THOMAS JEFFERSON, President of the United
States, took the oath of office, and delivered the following Inaugural
Speech in the Senate Chamber, in the presence of the members of the two
Houses, and a large concourse of citizens:

    PROCEEDING, fellow-citizens, to that qualification which
    the constitution requires before my entrance on the
    charge conferred on me, it is my duty to express the deep
    sense I entertain of this new proof of confidence from my
    fellow-citizens at large, and the zeal with which it inspires
    me so to conduct myself as may best satisfy their just
    expectations.

    On taking this station, on a former occasion, I declared the
    principles on which I believed it my duty to administer the
    affairs of our commonwealth. My conscience tells me I have, on
    every occasion, acted up to that declaration, according to its
    obvious import, and to the understanding of every candid mind.

    In the transaction of your foreign affairs, we have endeavored
    to cultivate the friendship of all nations, and especially
    of those with which we have the most important relations. We
    have done them justice on all occasions; favor, where favor
    was lawful, and cherished mutual interests and intercourse on
    fair and equal terms. We are firmly convinced, and we act on
    that conviction, that with nations, as with individuals, our
    interests, soundly calculated, will ever be found inseparable
    from our moral duties; and history-bears witness to the fact,
    that a just nation is trusted on its word, when recourse is had
    to armaments and wars to bridle others.

    At home, fellow-citizens, you best know whether we have done
    well or ill. The suppression of unnecessary offices, of useless
    establishments and expenses, enabled us to discontinue our
    internal taxes. These, covering our land with officers,[17]
    and opening our doors to their intrusions, had already begun
    that process of domiciliary vexation, which, once entered,
    is scarcely to be restrained from reaching, successively,
    every article of property and produce. If, among these taxes,
    some minor ones fell, which had not been inconvenient, it was
    because their amount would not have paid the officers who
    collected them; and because, if they had any merit, the State
    authorities might adopt them instead of others less approved.

    The remaining revenue, on the consumption of foreign articles,
    is paid chiefly by those who can afford to add foreign luxuries
    to domestic comforts. Being collected on our seaboard and
    frontiers only, and incorporated with the transactions of our
    mercantile citizens, it may be the pleasure and the pride of an
    American to ask, what farmer, what mechanic, what laborer, ever
    sees a tax-gatherer of the United States? These contributions
    enable us to support the current expenses of the Government;
    to fulfil contracts with foreign nations; to extinguish the
    native right of soil within our limits; to extend those limits;
    and to apply such a surplus to our public debts, as places,
    at a short day, their final redemption; and that redemption,
    once effected, the revenue thereby liberated may, by a just
    repartition of it among the States, and a corresponding
    amendment of the constitution, be applied, _in time of peace_,
    to rivers, canals, roads, arts, manufactures, education, and
    other great objects, within each State.[18] _In time of war_,
    if injustice by ourselves, or others, must sometimes produce
    war, increased, as the same revenue will be, by increased
    population and consumption, and aided by other resources
    reserved for that crisis, it may meet, within the year, all
    the expenses of the year, without encroaching on the rights
    of future generations, by burdening them with the debts of
    the past. War will then be but a suspension of useful works;
    and a return to a state of peace, a return to the progress of
    improvement.

    I have said, fellow-citizens, that the income reserved had
    enabled us to extend our limits; but that extension may
    possibly pay for itself before we are called on; and, in the
    mean time, may keep down the accruing interest: in all events,
    it will replace the advances we shall have made. I know that
    the acquisition of Louisiana has been disapproved by some, from
    a candid apprehension that the enlargement of our territory
    would endanger its union. But who can limit the extent to
    which the federative principle may operate effectively? The
    larger our association, the less will it be shaken by local
    passions: and, in any view, is it not better that the opposite
    bank of the Mississippi should be settled by our own brethren
    and children, than by strangers of another family? With which
    should we be most likely to live in harmony and friendly
    intercourse?

    In matters of religion, I have considered that its free
    exercise is placed by the constitution independent of the
    powers of the General Government. I have therefore undertaken,
    on no occasion, to prescribe the religious exercises suited to
    it; but have left them, as the constitution found them, under
    the direction and discipline of the Church or State authorities
    acknowledged by the several religious societies.

    The aboriginal inhabitants of these countries I have regarded
    with the commiseration their history inspires. Endowed with the
    faculties and the rights of men, breathing an ardent love of
    liberty and independence, and occupying a country which left
    them no desire but to be undisturbed, the stream of overflowing
    population from other regions directed itself on these shores.
    Without power to divert, or habits to contend against it, they
    have been overwhelmed by the current, or driven before it. Now
    reduced within limits too narrow for the hunter state, humanity
    enjoins us to teach them agriculture and the domestic arts; to
    encourage them to that industry which alone can enable them to
    maintain their place in existence; and to prepare them in time
    for that state of society which, to bodily comforts, adds the
    improvement of the mind and morals. We have therefore liberally
    furnished them with the implements of husbandry and household
    use; we have placed among them instructors in the arts of
    first necessity; and they are covered with the ægis of the law
    against aggressors from among ourselves.

    But the endeavors to enlighten them on the fate which awaits
    their present course of life, to induce them to exercise
    their reason, follow its dictates, and change their pursuits
    with the change of circumstances, have powerful obstacles to
    encounter. They are combated by the habits of their bodies,
    prejudices of their minds, ignorance, pride, and the influence
    of interested and crafty individuals among them, who feel
    themselves something in the present order of things, and fear
    to become nothing in any other. These persons inculcate a
    sanctimonious reverence for the customs of their ancestors;
    that whatsoever they did, must be done through all time; that
    reason is a false guide, and to advance under its counsel in
    their physical, moral, or political condition, is perilous
    innovation; that their duty is to remain as their Creator made
    them; ignorance being safety, and knowledge full of danger.
    In short, my friends, among them, also, is seen the action
    and counteraction of good sense and of bigotry. They, too,
    have their anti-philosophists, who find an interest in keeping
    things in their present state; who dread reformation, and exert
    all their faculties to maintain the ascendency of habit over
    the duty of improving our reason, and obeying its mandates.

    In giving these outlines, I do not mean, fellow-citizens, to
    arrogate to myself the merit of the measures--that is due, in
    the first place, to the reflecting character of our citizens
    at large, who, by the weight of public opinion, influence
    and strengthen the public measures. It is due to the sound
    discretion with which they select from among themselves those
    to whom they confide the legislative duties. It is due to
    the zeal and wisdom of the characters thus selected, who lay
    the foundations of public happiness in wholesome laws, the
    execution of which alone remains for others; and it is due
    to the able and faithful auxiliaries, whose patriotism has
    associated them with me in the executive functions.

    During this course of administration, and in order to disturb
    it, the artillery of the press has been levelled against us,
    charged with whatsoever its licentiousness could devise or
    dare. These abuses of an institution, so important to freedom
    and science, are deeply to be regretted, inasmuch as they tend
    to lessen its usefulness, and to sap its safety. They might,
    indeed, have been corrected by the wholesome punishments
    reserved to, and provided by, the laws of the several States
    against falsehood and defamation; but public duties, more
    urgent, press on the time of public servants, and the offenders
    have therefore been left to find their punishment in the public
    indignation.

    Nor was it uninteresting to the world, that an experiment
    should be fairly and fully made, whether freedom of discussion,
    unaided by power, is not sufficient for the propagation and
    protection of truth; Whether a Government, conducting itself in
    the true spirit of its constitution, with zeal and purity, and
    doing no act which it would be unwilling the whole world should
    witness, can be written down by falsehood and defamation.
    The experiment has been tried. You have witnessed the scene.
    Our fellow-citizens looked on cool and collected. They saw
    the latent source from which these outrages proceeded. They
    gathered around their public functionaries; and when the
    constitution called them to the decision by suffrage, they
    pronounced their verdict honorable to those who had served
    them, and consolatory to the friend of man, who believes that
    he may be trusted with the control of his own affairs.

    No inference is here intended, that the laws provided by the
    States against false and defamatory publications, should not
    be enforced. He who has time, renders a service to public
    morals and public tranquillity, in reforming these abuses by
    the salutary coercions of the law. But the experiment is noted
    to prove, that, since truth and reason have maintained their
    ground against false opinions, in league with false facts, the
    press, confined to truth, needs no other legal restraint. The
    public judgment will correct false reasonings and opinions, on
    a full hearing of all parties; and no other definite line can
    be drawn between the inestimable liberty of the press, and its
    demoralizing licentiousness. If there be still improprieties
    which this rule would not restrain, its supplement must be
    sought in the censorship of public opinion.

    Contemplating the union of sentiment now manifested so
    generally, as auguring harmony and happiness to our future
    course, I offer to our country sincere congratulations. With
    those, too, not yet rallied to the same point, the disposition
    to do so is gaining strength. Facts are piercing through the
    veil drawn over them: and our doubting brethren will at length
    see that the mass of their fellow-citizens, with whom they
    cannot yet resolve to act, as to principles and measures, think
    as they think, and desire what they desire: that our wish, as
    well as theirs, is, that the public efforts may be directed
    honestly to the public good; that peace be cultivated; civil
    and religious liberty unassailed; law and order preserved;
    equality of rights maintained; and that state of property,
    equal or unequal, which results to every man from his own
    industry, or that of his father. When satisfied of these
    views, it is not in human nature that they should not approve
    and support them. In the mean time, let us cherish them with
    patient affection; let us do them justice, and more than
    justice, in all competitions of interest; and we need not doubt
    that truth, reason, and their own interests, will at length
    prevail; will gather them into the fold of their country, and
    will complete that entire union of opinion which gives to a
    nation the blessing of harmony, and the benefit of all its
    strength.

    I shall now enter on the duties to which my fellow-citizens
    have again called me, and shall proceed in the spirit of
    those principles which they have approved. I fear not that
    any motives of interest may lead me astray. I am sensible of
    no passion which could seduce me, knowingly, from the path of
    justice; but the weaknesses of human nature, and the limits
    of my own understanding, will produce errors of judgment,
    sometimes injurious to your interests. I shall need, therefore,
    all the indulgence which I have heretofore experienced from my
    constituents. The want of it will certainly not lessen with
    increasing years. I shall need, too, the favor of that Being
    in whose hands we are; who led our fathers, as Israel of old,
    from their native land, and planted them in a country flowing
    with all the necessaries and comforts of life; who has covered
    our infancy with His providence, and our riper years with His
    wisdom and power; and to whose goodness I ask you to join in
    supplications with me, that He will so enlighten the minds
    of your servants, guide their councils, and prosper their
    measures, that, whatsoever they do, shall result in your good,
    and shall secure to you the peace, friendship, and approbation
    of all nations.

After which, the Chief Justice of the United States administered to him
the oath of office prescribed by the constitution; and the oath was, in
like manner, administered to GEORGE CLINTON, Vice President of the United
States; after which, the PRESIDENT and VICE PRESIDENT retired.




Trial of Judge Chase.


TRIAL OF SAMUEL CHASE, AN ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE
UNITED STATES, IMPEACHED BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES FOR HIGH CRIMES
AND MISDEMEANORS, BEFORE THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES.

[TAKEN IN SHORT-HAND BY SAMUEL H. SMITH AND THOMAS LLOYD.]

This trial was one of the events of the day, greatly exciting party
passions, and taking a scope which gives it historic interest, both for
the persons concerned, and the matters involved. The account of it is
greatly abridged here, but it is believed all is still retained which is
necessary to the full knowledge of the case, and to a just conception of
the skill, learning, eloquence and ability with which the trial (both
the prosecution and the defence) was conducted. The formal charges are
omitted, as being sufficiently shown in the pleadings; the testimony of
witnesses limited to their principal statements; and the speeches only
given in their essential parts.

    [The following report of the trial of SAMUEL CHASE has been
    drawn up with the greatest care. To guard against misconception
    or omission, two individuals, one of whom is a professional
    stenographer, were constantly engaged during the whole course
    of the trial; and the arguments of the managers and counsel
    have in most instances, and whenever it was attainable, been
    revised by them. It is with some satisfaction that the editor
    of this impression is enabled, under these circumstances,
    to submit to the public a tract, whose fidelity and
    comprehensiveness, he hopes will amply reward the interest so
    deeply excited by the progress and issue of this important
    trial.--_Editor National Intelligencer._]

MEASURES PRELIMINARY TO THE TRIAL.

On the fifth day of January 1804, Mr. J. RANDOLPH, a member of the House
of Representatives of the United States, rose and addressed that body to
the following effect:

He observed “That no people were more fully impressed with the importance
of preserving unpolluted the fountain of justice than the citizens of
these States. With this view the Constitution of the United States, and
of many of the States also, had rendered the magistrates who decided
judicially between the State and the offending citizens, and between man
and man, more independent than those of any other country in the world,
in the hope that every inducement, whether of intimidation or seduction,
which should cause them to swerve from the duty assigned to them, might
be removed. But such was the frailty of human nature, that there was
no precaution by which our integrity and honor could be preserved, in
case we were deficient in that duty which we owed to ourselves. In
consequence, sir,” said Mr. Randolph, “of this unfortunate condition
of man, we have been obliged, but yesterday, to prefer an accusation
against a judge of the United States, who has been found wanting in his
duty to himself and his country. At the last session of Congress, a
gentleman from Pennsylvania did, in his place, (on a bill to amend the
judicial system of the United States,) state certain facts in relation
to the official conduct of an eminent judicial character, which I then
thought, and still think, the House bound to notice. But the lateness of
the session (for we had, if I mistake not, scarce a fortnight remaining)
precluding all possibility of bringing the subject to any efficient
result, I did not then think proper to take any steps in the business.
Finding my attention, however, thus drawn to a consideration of the
character of the officer in question, I made it my business, considering
it my duty, as well to myself as those whom I represent, to investigate
the charges then made, and the official character of the judge, in
general. The result having convinced me that there exists ground of
impeachment against this officer, I demand an inquiry into his conduct,
and therefore submit to the House the following resolution:

    “_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire into
    the official conduct of SAMUEL CHASE, one of the Associate
    Judges of the Supreme Court of the United States, and to report
    their opinion, whether the said SAMUEL CHASE hath so acted in
    his judicial capacity as to require the interposition of the
    constitutional power of this House.”

A short debate immediately arose on this motion, which was advocated by
Messrs. J. RANDOLPH, SMILIE, and J. CLAY; and opposed by Mr. ELLIOT.
Several members supported a motion to postpone it until the ensuing day,
which was superseded by an adjournment of the House.

The House, on the next day, resumed the consideration of Mr. RANDOLPH’s
motion, which was supported by Mr. SMILIE, and, on the motion of Mr.
LEIB, so amended as to embrace an inquiry into the official conduct of
Richard Peters, district judge for the District of Pennsylvania. On the
motion, thus amended, further debate arose, which occupied the greater
part of this and the ensuing day. It was supported by Messrs. FINDLAY,
JACKSON, NICHOLSON, HOLLAND, J. RANDOLPH, EUSTIS, EARLY, SMILIE, and
EPPES; and opposed by Messrs. LOWNDES, R. GRISWOLD, ELLIOT, DENNIS,
GRIFFIN, THATCHER, HUGER, and DANA. Some ineffectual attempts were
made to amend the resolution, when the final question was taken on the
resolution, as amended, in the following words:

    “_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire into the
    official conduct of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices
    of the Supreme Court of the United States, and of Richard
    Peters, district judge of the district of Pennsylvania, and to
    report their opinion, whether the said Samuel Chase and Richard
    Peters, or either of them, have so acted in their judicial
    capacity, as to require the interposition of the constitutional
    power of this House:”

And resolved in the affirmative--yeas 81, nays 40.

Whereupon, Messrs. J. RANDOLPH, NICHOLSON, J. CLAY, EARLY, R. GRISWOLD,
HUGER, and BOYLE, were appointed a committee pursuant to the foregoing
resolution.

On the 10th of January, the committee were authorized by the House to
send for persons, papers, and records; and on the 30th day of the same
month they were authorized to cause to be printed such documents and
papers as they might deem necessary, previous to their presentation to
the House.

On the 6th day of March, Mr. RANDOLPH, in the name of the committee, made
a report, “That in consequence of the evidence collected by them, in
virtue of the powers with which they have been invested by the House, and
which is hereunto subjoined, they are of opinion, 1st. That Samuel Chase,
Esq., an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors.

“2d. That Richard Peters, district judge of the district of Pennsylvania,
has not so acted in his judicial capacity as to require the interposition
of the constitutional power of this House.”

This report, accompanied by a great mass of printed documents, embracing
various depositions taken before the committee, as well as at a distance,
was made the order of the day for the Monday following.

On that day the House took up the report, and after a short debate
concurred in the first resolution by the following vote--yeas 73, nays
32, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Isaac Anderson, John Archer,
    David Bard, George Michael Bedinger, William Blackledge,
    Walter Bowie, Adam Boyd, John Boyle, Robert Brown, Joseph
    Bryan, William Butler, Levi Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph
    Clay, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, Jacob
    Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, John Dawson, William Dickson,
    John B. Earle, Peter Early, James Elliot, William Findlay, John
    Fowler, James Gillespie, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew Gregg, Samuel
    Hammond, James Holland, David Holmes, Walter Jones, William
    Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, Matthew Lyon, Andrew
    McCord, William McCreery, David Meriwether, Andrew Moore,
    Nicholas R. Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Anthony New, Thomas Newton,
    jun., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, John Patterson, John
    Randolph, Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John
    Rhea of Tennessee, Jacob Richards, Cæsar A. Rodney, Thomas
    Sammons, Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan, John
    Smilie, Henry Southard, Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John
    Stewart, David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, John
    Trigg, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Marmaduke Williams,
    Richard Wynn, and Joseph Winston.

    NAYS.--Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton, John Campbell, William
    Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett, Manasseh
    Cutler, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, Thomas Dwight, Thomas
    Griffin, Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings,
    William Helms, Benjamin Huger, Joseph Lewis, jun., Henry W.
    Livingston, Thomas Lowndes, Nahum Mitchell, Thomas Plater,
    Samuel D. Purviance, John Cotton Smith, John Smith of Virginia,
    William Stedman, James Stevenson, Samuel Taggart, Samuel
    Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Peleg
    Wadsworth, and Lemuel Williams.

The second resolution was agreed to unanimously.

Whereupon, it was ordered, that Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH and Mr. EARLY be
appointed a committee to go to the Senate, at the bar thereof, in the
name of the House of Representatives, and of all the people of the United
States, to impeach Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the
Supreme Court of the United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors; and
acquaint the Senate that the House of Representatives will, in due time,
exhibit particular articles of impeachment against him, and make good the
same. It was also ordered, that the committee do demand, that the Senate
take order for the appearance of the said Samuel Chase, to answer to the
said impeachment.

On the 13th of March, Messrs. J. RANDOLPH, NICHOLSON, J. CLAY, EARLY,
and BOYLE, were appointed a committee to prepare and report articles of
impeachment against Samuel Chase, and invested with power to send for
persons, papers, and records.

On the 14th, a message was received from the Senate, notifying the House,
that they would take proper order on the impeachment, of which due notice
should be given to the House.

On the 26th, Mr. RANDOLPH, from the committee appointed for that
purpose, reported articles of impeachment against Samuel Chase. No order
was taken on the report during the remainder of the session, which
terminated the next day.

At the ensuing session of Congress, on the 6th of November, 1804, on the
motion of Mr. J. RANDOLPH, the articles of impeachment were referred to
Messrs. J. RANDOLPH, J. CLAY, EARLY, BOYLE, and J. RHEA of Tennessee.

On the 30th of November, Mr. RANDOLPH reported articles of impeachment
against Samuel Chase, in substance not dissimilar from those reported at
the last session, with the addition of two new articles.

This report was made the order for the 3d of December. On that and the
ensuing day the House took the articles into consideration, to all of
which they agreed, according to the following votes:

                    Yeas.     Nays.
    Art. 1           83        34
         2           83        35
         3           84        34
         4           84        34
         5           72        45
         6           73        42
         7           73        42
         8 1st sec.  74        32
         8 2nd sec.  78        32

On the 5th, the House proceeded to the choice, by ballot, of seven
managers to conduct the impeachment; and on counting the votes, Messrs.
J. RANDOLPH, RODNEY, NICHOLSON, EARLY, BOYLE, NELSON, and G. W. CAMPBELL,
appeared to be elected.

On a subsequent day, Mr. NELSON having declined his appointment, on
account of absence, Mr. CLARK was chosen in his place.

The following resolution was then adopted:

    _Resolved_, That the articles agreed to by this House be
    exhibited in the name of themselves, and of all the people
    of the United States, against Samuel Chase, in maintenance
    of their impeachment against him, for high crimes and
    misdemeanors, be carried to the Senate by the managers
    appointed to conduct the said impeachment.

The Senate having appointed the 7th of December for receiving the
articles of impeachment, the managers repaired on that day, at 1 o’clock,
to the Senate Chamber. Having taken seats assigned them within the bar,
and the Sergeant-at-Arms having proclaimed silence, Mr. J. RANDOLPH read
the foregoing articles: whereupon the President of the Senate informed
the managers that the Senate would take proper order on the subject of
the impeachment, of which due notice should be given to the House of
Representatives. The managers delivered the articles of impeachment at
the table and withdrew.

On the 10th of December, the Senate, sitting as a High Court of
Impeachments, adopted the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the Secretary be directed to issue a
    summons to Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of
    the Supreme Court of the United States, to answer certain
    articles of impeachment exhibited against him by the House
    of Representatives on Friday last: That the said summons be
    returnable the 2d day of January, and he served at least
    fifteen days before the return day thereof.

On the 24th and 31st of December, the Senate adopted the following rules
of proceeding, to be observed in cases of impeachment.

    1. Whensoever the Senate shall receive notice from the House of
    Representatives, that managers are appointed on their part, to
    conduct an impeachment against any person, and are directed to
    carry such articles to the Senate, the Secretary of the Senate
    shall immediately inform the House of Representatives, that
    the Senate is ready to receive the managers for the purpose of
    exhibiting such articles of impeachment, agreeably to the said
    notice.

    2. When the managers of an impeachment shall be introduced to
    the bar of the Senate, and shall have signified that they are
    ready to exhibit articles of impeachment against any person,
    the President of the Senate shall direct the Sergeant-at-Arms
    to make proclamation; who shall, after making proclamation,
    repeat the following words: “All persons are commanded to keep
    silence, on pain of imprisonment, while the grand inquest of
    the nation is exhibiting to the Senate of the United States,
    articles of impeachment against ---- ----;” after which the
    articles shall be exhibited, and then the President of the
    Senate shall inform the managers, that the Senate will take
    proper order on the subject of the impeachment, of which due
    notice shall be given to the House of Representatives.

    3. A summons shall issue, directed to the person impeached, in
    the form following:

    _The United States of America, ss._

    The Senate of the United States, to ----, greeting:

    Whereas, the House of Representatives of the United States of
    America, did, on the ---- day of ----, exhibit to the Senate
    articles of impeachment against you, the said ----, in the
    words following, viz: [here recite the articles] and did demand
    that you the said ---- should be put to answer the accusations
    as set forth in said articles; and that such proceedings,
    examinations, trials, and judgments, might be thereupon had,
    as are agreeable to law and justice: You, the said ----, are
    therefore hereby summoned, to be, and appear before the Senate
    of the United States of America, at their Chamber in the City
    of Washington, on the ---- day of ----, then and there to
    answer to the said articles of impeachment, and then and there
    to abide by, obey, and perform such orders and judgments as
    the Senate of the United States shall make in the premises,
    according to the Constitution and laws of the United States.
    Hereof you are not to fail.

    Witness, ----, Vice President of the United States of America,
    and President of the Senate thereof, at the City of Washington,
    this ---- day of ----, in the year of our Lord ----, and of the
    Independence of the United States, the ----.

Which summons shall be signed by the Secretary of the Senate, and sealed
with their seal, and served by the Sergeant-at-Arms to the Senate, or by
such other person as the Senate shall specially appoint for that purpose;
who shall serve the same, pursuant to the directions given in the form
next following:

4. A precept shall be endorsed on said writ of summons, in the form
following, viz:

    _United States of America, ss._

    The Senate of the United States, to ----, greeting:

    You are hereby commanded to deliver to, and leave with ----,
    if to be found, a true and attested copy of the within writ of
    summons, together with a like copy of this precept, showing
    him both; or in case he cannot with convenience be found, you
    are to leave true and attested copies of the said summons and
    precept, at his usual place of residence, and in whichsoever
    way you perform the service, let it be done at least ---- days
    before the appearance day mentioned in said writ of summons.
    Fail not, and make return of this writ of summons and precept,
    with your proceedings thereon endorsed, on or before the
    appearance day mentioned in said writ of summons.

    Witness, ----, Vice President of the United States of America,
    and President of the Senate thereof, at the City of Washington,
    this ---- day of ----, in the year of our Lord ----, and of the
    Independence of the United States, the ----.

Which precept shall be signed by the Secretary of the Senate, and sealed
with their seal.

5. Subpœnas shall be issued by the Secretary of the Senate, upon
the application of the managers of the impeachment, or of the party
impeached, or his counsel, in the following form, to wit:

    To ----, greeting:

    You, and each of you, are hereby commanded to appear before the
    Senate of the United States, on the ---- day of ----, at the
    Senate Chamber, in the City of Washington, then and there to
    testify your knowledge in the cause which is before the Senate,
    in which the House of Representatives have impeached ----. Fail
    not.

    Witness, ----, Vice President of the United States of America,
    and President of the Senate thereof, at the City of Washington,
    this ---- day of ----, in the year of our Lord ----, and of the
    Independence of the United States, the ----.

Which shall be signed by the Secretary of the Senate, and sealed with
their seal.

Which subpœnas shall be directed, in every case, to the Marshal of the
district, where such witnesses respectively reside, to serve and return.

6. The form of direction to the Marshal, for the service of the subpœna,
shall be as follows:

    The Senate of the United States of America, to the Marshal of
    the district of ----:

    You are hereby commanded to serve and return the within
    subpœna, according to law.

    Dated at Washington, this ---- day of ----, in the year of our
    Lord ----, and of the Independence of the United States, the
    ----.

                                         _Secretary of the Senate._

7. The President of the Senate shall direct all necessary preparations in
the Senate Chamber, and all the forms of proceeding, while the Senate are
sitting for the purpose of trying an impeachment, and all forms during
the trial, not otherwise specially provided for by the Senate.

8. He shall also be authorized to direct the employment of the Marshal
of the District of Columbia, or any other person or persons, during the
trial, to discharge such duties as may be prescribed by him.

9. At twelve o’clock of the day appointed for the return of the summons
against the person impeached, the legislative and executive business
of the Senate shall be suspended and the Secretary of the Senate shall
administer an oath to the returning officer, in the form following, viz:
“I, ----, do solemnly swear, that the return made and subscribed by me,
upon the process issued on the ---- day of ----, by the Senate of the
United States, against ----, is truly made, and that I have performed
said services as therein described. So help me God.” Which oath shall be
entered at large on the records.

10. The person impeached shall then be called to appear, and answer the
articles of impeachment exhibited against him. If he appears, or any
person for him, the appearance shall be recorded, stating particularly,
if by himself, or if by agent or attorney; naming the person appearing,
and the capacity in which he appears. If he does not appear, either
personally, or by agent or attorney, the same shall be recorded.

11. At twelve o’clock of the day appointed for the trial of an
impeachment, the Legislative and Executive business of the Senate shall
be postponed. The Secretary shall then administer the following oath or
affirmation to the President:

“You solemnly swear, or affirm, that in all things appertaining to the
trial of the impeachment of ----, you will do impartial justice according
to the Constitution and laws of the United States.”

12. And the President shall administer the said oath or affirmation to
each Senator present.

The Secretary shall then give notice to the House of Representatives,
that the Senate is ready to proceed upon the impeachment of ----, in the
Senate Chamber, which Chamber is prepared with accommodations for the
reception of the House of Representatives.

13. Counsel for the parties shall be admitted to appear, and be heard
upon an impeachment.

14. All motions made by the parties, or their counsel, shall be addressed
to the President of the Senate, and if he shall require it, shall
be committed to writing, and read at the Secretary’s table; and all
decisions shall be had by yeas and nays, and without debate, which shall
be entered on the records.

15. Witnesses shall be sworn in the following form, to wit: “You ---- do
swear, (or affirm, as the case may be,) that the evidence you shall give
in the case now depending between the United States and ----, shall be
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So help you God.”
Which oath shall be administered by the Secretary.

16. Witnesses shall be examined by the party producing them, and then
cross-examined in the usual form.

17. If a Senator is called as a witness, he shall be sworn, and give his
testimony standing in his place.

18. If a Senator wishes a question to be put to a witness, it shall be
reduced to writing and put by the President.

19. At all times, whilst the Senate is sitting upon the trial of an
impeachment, the doors of the Senate Chamber shall be kept open.


HIGH COURT OF IMPEACHMENTS.

WEDNESDAY, January 2, 1805.

The Court having been opened by proclamation,

The return made by the Sergeant-at-Arms was read, as follows:

    “I, James Mathers, Sergeant-at-Arms to the Senate of the United
    States, in obedience to the within summons to me directed, did
    proceed to the residence of the within named Samuel Chase, on
    the 12th day of December, 1804, and did then and there leave a
    true copy of the said writ of summons, together with a true
    copy of the articles of impeachment annexed, with him the said
    Samuel Chase.

                                                   “JAMES MATHERS.”

After which the Secretary administered to him the oath as follows:

    “You, James Mathers, Sergeant-at-Arms to the Senate of the
    United States, do solemnly swear, that the return made and
    subscribed by you, upon the process issued on the 10th day of
    December last, by the Senate of the United States, against
    Samuel Chase, one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme
    Court, is truly made, and that you have performed said services
    as therein described. So help you God.”

SAMUEL CHASE, having been solemnly called, appeared.

The PRESIDENT of the Senate (Mr. BURR) informed Mr. CHASE, that having
been summoned to answer to the articles of impeachment exhibited against
him by the House of Representatives, the Senate were ready to receive any
answer he had to make to them.

Mr. CHASE requested the indulgence of a chair,[19] which was immediately
furnished.

After being seated for a short time, Mr. CHASE rose, and commenced the
following address to the Senate, which he read from a paper that he held
in his hand:

“Mr. President: I appear, in obedience to a summons from this honorable
Court, to answer articles of impeachment exhibited against me, by the
honorable the House of Representatives of the United States.

“To these articles, a copy of which was delivered to me with the summons,
I say that I have committed no crime or misdemeanor whatsoever, for which
I am subject to impeachment according to the Constitution of the United
States. I deny, with a few exceptions, the acts with which I am charged;
I shall contend, that all acts admitted to have been done by me were
_legal_; and I deny, in every instance, the _improper_ intentions with
which the acts charged are alleged to have been done, and in which their
supposed criminality altogether consists.”

The PRESIDENT reminded Mr. CHASE that this was the day appointed to
receive any answer he might make to the articles of impeachment.

Mr. CHASE said his purpose was to request the allowance of further time
to put in his answer.

The PRESIDENT desired him to proceed.

Mr. CHASE proceeded in his address; and having finished it, was desired
by the PRESIDENT, if he had any motion to make, to reduce it to writing,
and hand it to the Secretary.

Whereupon, Mr. CHASE submitted the following motion:

    “I solicit this honorable Court to allow me until the first day
    of the next session, to put in my answer, and to prepare for my
    trial.”

The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Chase, that, the Court would take time to
consider his motion.[20]

The Senate withdrew to a private apartment, where debate arose on the
question, whether it was not incumbent on the Senators to take the
oath required by the constitution, before they took into consideration
the motion of Mr. Chase, which issued in the adoption of the following
resolution:

    _Resolved_, That, on the meeting of the Senate, to-morrow,
    before they proceed to any business on the articles of
    impeachment before them, and before any decision of any
    question, the oath prescribed by the rules, shall be
    administered to the President and members of the Senate.

On the ensuing day, previously to the entrance of the Senate into the
public room, considerable debate took place on the motion of Mr. Chase,
without any decision being made.


THURSDAY, January 3.

The Court was opened by proclamation about two o’clock.

The oath prescribed was administered to the President by the Secretary.

The PRESIDENT administered the oath prescribed to the following members:

Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Bradley, Breckenridge, Brown, Condit,
Dayton, Ellery, Franklin, Giles, Hillhouse, Howland, Jackson, Mitchill,
Moore, Olcott, Pickering, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of
Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Sumter, Tracy, White, Worthington, and Wright.

And the affirmation was administered to Messrs. Logan, Maclay, and Plumer.

The PRESIDENT stated that he had received a letter from the defendant,
enclosing an affidavit that further time was necessary for him to prepare
for trial; which affidavit was read, as follows:

    _City of Washington, ss_:

    Samuel Chase made oath on the Holy Evangels of Almighty God,
    that it is not in his power to obtain information respecting
    the facts alleged in the articles of impeachment to have
    taken place in the city of Philadelphia in the trial of John
    Fries; or of the facts alleged to have taken place in the city
    of Richmond, in the trial of James T. Callender, in time to
    prepare and put in his answer, and to proceed to trial, with
    any probability that the same could be finished on or before
    the fifth day of March next. And further, that it is not in his
    power to procure information of the names of the witnesses,
    whom he thinks it may be proper and necessary for him to
    summon, in time to obtain their attendance, if his answer could
    be prepared in time sufficient for the finishing of the said
    trial, before the said fifth day of March next; and the said
    Samuel Chase further made oath, that he believes it will not be
    in his power to obtain the advice of counsel, to prepare his
    answer, and to give him their assistance on the trial, which he
    thinks necessary, if the said trial should take place during
    the present session of Congress; and that he verily believes,
    if he had, at this time full information of facts, and of the
    witnesses proper for him to summon, and if he had also the
    assistance of counsel, that he could not prepare the answer he
    thinks he ought to put in, and be ready for his trial, within
    the space of four or five weeks from this time. And further,
    that his application to the honorable the Senate, for time
    to obtain the information of facts, in order to prepare his
    answer, and for time to procure the attendance of necessary
    witnesses, and to prepare for his defence in the trial, and to
    obtain the advice and assistance of counsel, is not made for
    the purpose of delay, but only for the purpose of obtaining a
    full hearing of the articles of impeachment against him, in
    their real merits.

                                                      SAMUEL CHASE.

    Sworn to, this third day of January, 1805, before

                                                   SAMUEL HAMILTON.

Whereupon the following motion was made by Mr. BRADLEY:

    “_Ordered_, That Samuel Chase file his answer, with the
    Secretary of the Senate, to the several articles of impeachment
    exhibited against him, by the House of Representatives, on or
    before the ---- day of ----.”

On motion, by Mr. BRECKENRIDGE, to fill the blank with the words “the
fourth day of February next,” the yeas and nays being taken, it passed in
the affirmative--yeas 22, nays 8, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Breckenridge, Brown,
    Condit, Ellery, Franklin, Giles, Howland, Jackson, Logan,
    Maclay, Mitchill, Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York,
    Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Sumter, Worthington, and
    Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Bradley, Dayton, Hillhouse, Olcott, Pickering,
    Plumer, Tracy, and White.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary notify the House of Representatives, and
Samuel Chase, thereof.

[Between this day, and that assigned for receiving the answer of Mr.
Chase, the Senate Chamber was fitted up in a style of appropriate
elegance. Benches, covered with crimson, on each side, and in a line
with the chair of the President, were assigned to the members of the
Senate. On the right and in front of the chair, a box was assigned to the
Managers, and on the left a similar box to Mr. Chase and his counsel, and
chairs allotted to such friends as he might introduce. The residue of
the floor was occupied with chairs for the accommodation of the members
of the House of Representatives; and with boxes for the reception of the
foreign Ministers, and civil and military officers of the United States.
On the right and left of the chair, at the termination of the benches
of the members of the Court, boxes were assigned to stenographers.
The permanent gallery was allotted to the indiscriminate admission of
spectators. Below this gallery, and above the floor of the House, a
new gallery was raised, and fitted up with peculiar elegance, intended
primarily for the exclusive accommodation of ladies. But this feature
of the arrangement, made by the Vice President, was at an early period
of the trial abandoned, it having been found impracticable to separate
the sexes! At the termination of this gallery, on each side, boxes
were specially assigned to ladies attached to the families of public
characters. The preservation of order was devolved on the Marshal of the
District of Columbia, who was assisted by a number of deputies.]


TRIAL OF SAMUEL CHASE.

MONDAY, February 4, 1805.

About a quarter before ten o’clock the Court was opened by proclamation,
all the members of the Senate, thirty-four, attending.

The Chamber of the Senate, which is very extensive, was soon filled with
spectators, a large portion of whom consisted of ladies, who continued,
with little intermission, to attend during the whole course of the trial.

The oath prescribed was administered to Mr. BAYARD, Mr. COCKE, Mr.
GAILLARD, and Mr. STONE, members of the Court, who were not present when
it was before administered.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary give notice to the House of Representatives
that the Senate are in their public chamber, and are ready to proceed
on the trial of Samuel Chase; and that seats are provided for the
accommodation of the members.

In a few minutes the Managers, viz: Messrs. J. RANDOLPH, RODNEY,
NICHOLSON, BOYLE, G. W. CAMPBELL, EARLY, and CLARK, accompanied by the
House of Representatives in Committee of the Whole, entered and took
their seats.

SAMUEL CHASE being called to make answer to the articles of impeachment,
exhibited against him by the House of Representatives, appeared, attended
by Messrs. HARPER, MARTIN, and HOPKINSON, his counsel; to whom seats were
assigned.

The PRESIDENT, after stating to Mr. CHASE the indulgence of time which
had been allowed, inquired if he was prepared to give in his answer?

Mr. CHASE said he had prepared it, as well as circumstances would permit;
and submitted the following motion:

    “Samuel Chase moves for permission to read his answer, by
    himself and his counsel, at the bar of this honorable Court.”

The PRESIDENT asked him if it was the answer on which he meant to rely?
to which he replied in the affirmative.

The motion being agreed to by a vote of the Senate, Mr. CHASE commenced
the reading of his answer, (in which he was assisted by Messrs. HARPER
and HOPKINSON,) as follows:[21]

This respondent, in his proper person, comes into the said Court, and
protesting that there is no high crime or misdemeanor particularly
alleged in the said articles of impeachment, to which he is, or can be
bound by law to make answer; and saving to himself now, and at all
times hereafter, all benefit of exception to the insufficiency of the
said articles, and each of them, and to the defects therein appearing in
point of law, or otherwise; and protesting also, that he ought not to be
injured in any manner, by any words, or by any want of form in this his
answer; he submits the following facts and observations by way of answer
to the said articles.

The first article relates to his supposed misconduct in the trial of
John Fries, for treason, before the circuit court of the United States
at Philadelphia, in April and May, 1800; and alleges that he presided at
that trial, and that, “unmindful of the solemn duties of his office, and
contrary to the sacred obligation by which he stood bound to discharge
them faithfully and impartially, and without respect to persons,” he
did then, “in his judicial capacity, conduct himself in a manner highly
arbitrary, oppressive, and unjust.”

This general accusation, too vague in itself for reply, is supported by
three specific charges of misconduct:

1st. “In delivering an opinion, in writing, on the question of law,
on the construction of which the defence of the accused materially
depended:” which opinion, it is alleged, tended to prejudice the minds of
the jury against the case of the said John Fries, the prisoner, before
counsel had been heard in his favor.

2d. “In restricting the counsel for the said John Fries, from recurring
to such English authorities as they believed apposite; or from citing
certain statutes of the United States which they deemed illustrative of
the positions, upon which they intended to rest the defence of their
client.”

3d. “In debarring the prisoner from his constitutional privilege of
addressing the jury (through his counsel) on the law, as well as on the
fact, which was to determine his guilt or innocence, and at the same
time endeavoring to wrest from the jury their indisputable right to hear
argument, and determine upon the question of law, as well as the question
of fact, involved in the verdict which they were required to give.”

This first article then concludes, that in consequence of this
irregular conduct of this respondent, “the said John Fries was deprived
of the right secured to him by the eighth article amendatory of the
constitution, and was condemned to death, without having been heard by
counsel, in his defence.”

In the year 1794, an insurrection took place in four of the western
counties of Pennsylvania, with a view of resisting, and preventing by
force the execution of these two statutes; and a circuit court of the
United States, held at Philadelphia, for the district of Pennsylvania, in
the month of April, in the year 1795, by William Patterson, Esq., then
one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States,
and the above-mentioned Richard Peters, then district judge of the United
States, for the district of Pennsylvania, two persons, who had been
concerned in the above-named insurrection, namely, Philip Vigol and John
Mitchell, were indicted for treason, of levying war against the United
States, by resisting and preventing by force the execution of the two
last-mentioned acts of Congress; and were, after a full and very solemn
trial, convicted of the indictments and sentenced to death. They were
afterwards pardoned by George Washington, then President of the United
States.

In the first of these trials, that of Vigol, the defence of the prisoner
was conducted by very able counsel, one of whom, William Lewis, Esq.,
is the same person who appeared as counsel for John Fries, in the trial
now under consideration. Neither that learned gentleman, nor his able
colleague, then thought proper to raise the question of law, “whether
resisting and preventing by armed force the execution of a particular law
of the United States, be a ‘levying of war against the United States,’”
according to the true meaning of the constitution? although a decision
of this question in the negative must have acquitted the prisoner. But
in the next trial, that of Mitchell, this question was asked on the part
of the prisoner, and was very fully and ably discussed by his counsel;
and it was solemnly determined by the Court, both the judges concurring,
“that to resist, or prevent by armed force, the execution of a particular
law of the United States, is a levying of war against the United
States, and consequently is treason, within the true meaning of the
constitution.” The decision, according to the best established principles
of our jurisprudence, became a precedent for all courts of equal or
inferior jurisdiction; a precedent which, although not absolutely
obligatory, ought to be viewed with very great respect, especially by the
court in which it was made, and ought never to be departed from, but on
the fullest and clearest conviction of its incorrectness.

On the 9th of July, an act of Congress was passed, providing for a
valuation of lands and dwelling-houses, and an enumeration of slaves
throughout the United States; and directing the appointment of
commissioners and assessors for carrying it into execution; and on the
4th day of July, in the same year, a direct tax was laid by another act
of Congress of that date, on the lands, dwelling-houses, and slaves, so
to be valued and enumerated.

In the months of February and March, A. D. 1799, an insurrection
took place in the counties of Bucks and Northampton, in the State of
Pennsylvania, for the purpose of resisting and preventing by force the
execution of the two last-mentioned acts of Congress, and particularly
that for the valuation of lands and dwelling-houses. John Fries, the
person mentioned in the article of impeachment now under consideration,
was apprehended and committed to prison, as one of the ringleaders of
this insurrection; and at a circuit court of the United States, held
at Philadelphia, in and for the district of Pennsylvania, in the month
of April, A. D. 1799, he was brought to trial for this offence, on an
indictment for treason, by levying war against the United States, before
James Iredell, Esq., then one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme
Court of the United States, who presided in the said court, according
to law, and the above-mentioned Richard Peters, then district judge of
the United States, for the district of Pennsylvania, who sat in the said
circuit court as assistant judge.

In this trial, which was conducted with great solemnity, and occupied
nine days, the prisoner was assisted by William Lewis and Alexander
James Dallas, Esqs., two very able and eminent counsellors; the former
of whom, William Lewis, is the person who assisted, as above mentioned,
in conducting the defence of Vigol, on a similar indictment. These
gentlemen, finding that the facts alleged were fully and undeniably
proved, by a very minute and elaborate examination of witnesses, thought
proper to rest the case of the prisoner on the question of law which had
been determined in the cases of Vigol and Mitchell, above mentioned,
and had then been acquiesced in, but which they thought proper again to
raise. They contended, “that to resist by force of arms a particular law
of the United States, does not amount to levying war against the United
States, within the true meaning of the constitution, and therefore is not
treason, but a riot only.” This question they argued at great length,
and with all the force of their learning and genius; and after a full
discussion at the bar, and the most mature deliberation by the Court,
the learned and excellent judge who then presided, and who was no less
distinguished by his humanity and tenderness towards persons tried before
him, than by his extensive knowledge and great talents as a lawyer,
pronounced the opinion of himself and his colleague, “that to resist, or
prevent by force, the execution of a particular law of the United States,
does amount to levying war against them, within the true meaning of the
constitution, and does, therefore, constitute the crime of treason:”
thereby adding the weight of another and more solemn decision to the
precedent which had been established in the above-mentioned cases of
Vigol and Mitchell.

Under this opinion of the Court on the question of law, the jury, having
no doubt as to the facts, found the said John Fries guilty of treason
on the above-mentioned indictment. But a new trial was granted by the
Court, not by reason of any doubt as to the correctness of the decision
on the question of law, but solely on the ground, as this respondent hath
understood and believes, that one of the jurors of the petit jury, after
he was summoned, but before he was sworn on the trial, had made some
declaration unfavorable to the prisoner.

On the 11th day of April, 1800, and from that day until the 2d day of
May in the same year, a circuit court of the United States was held
at Philadelphia, in and for the district of Pennsylvania, before this
respondent, then one of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of
the United States, and the above-mentioned Richard Peters, then district
judge of the United States for the district of Pennsylvania. At this
court the indictment on which the said John Fries had been convicted as
above mentioned, was quashed _ex officio_ by William Rawle, Esq., then
attorney of the United States for the district of Pennsylvania, and a new
indictment was by him preferred against the said John Fries, for treason
of levying war against the United States, by resisting and preventing by
force in the manner above set forth, the execution of the above-mentioned
acts of Congress, for the valuation of lands and dwelling-houses, and the
enumeration of slaves, and for levying and collecting a direct tax. This
indictment, of which a true copy, marked No. 1, is herewith exhibited
by this respondent, who prays that it may be taken as part of this his
answer, being found by the grand jury on the 16th day of April, 1800,
the said John Fries was on the same day arraigned thereon, and plead
not guilty. William Lewis, and Alexander James Dallas, Esqs., the same
persons who had conducted his defence at his former trial, were again
at his request assigned by the Court as his counsel; and his trial was
appointed to be had on Tuesday the 22d day of the last-mentioned month of
April.

After this indictment was found by the grand jury, this respondent
considered it with great care and deliberation, and finding from the
three overt acts of treason which it charged, that the question of law
arising upon it was the same question which had already been decided
twice in the same court, on solemn argument and deliberation, and once
in that very case, he considered the law as settled by those decisions,
with the correctness of which, on full consideration, he was entirely
satisfied; and by the authority of which he should have deemed himself
bound, even had he regarded the question as doubtful in itself. They are
moreover in perfect conformity with the uniform tenor of decisions in the
courts of England and Great Britain, from the Revolution in 1688 to the
present time, which, in his opinion, added greatly to their weight and
authority.

It was for these reasons that on the 22d day of April, 1800, when the
said John Fries was brought into court, and placed in the prisoners’
box for trial, but before the petit jury were impanelled to try him,
this respondent informed the above-mentioned William Lewis, one of his
counsel, the aforesaid Alexander James Dallas not being then in court,
“that the Court had deliberately considered the indictment against John
Fries for treason, and the three several overt acts of treason stated,
therein: that the crime of treason was defined by the Constitution of
the United States. That as the Federal Legislature had the power to
make, alter, or repeal laws, so the judiciary only had the power, and
it was their duty, to declare, expound and interpret the Constitution
and laws of the United States. That it was the duty of the Court, in
all criminal cases, to state to the petit jury their opinion of the law
arising on the facts; but the petit jury, in all criminal cases, were
to decide both the law and the facts, on a consideration of the whole
case. That there must be some constructive exposition of the terms used
in the constitution, “levying war against the United States.” That the
question, what acts amounted to levying war against the United States,
or the Government thereof, was a question of law, and had been decided
by Judges Patterson and Peters, in the cases of Vigol and Mitchell, and
by Judges Iredell and Peters, in the case of John Fries, prisoner at the
bar, in April 1799. That Judge Peters remained of the same opinion, which
he had twice before delivered, and he, this respondent, on long and great
consideration, concurred in the opinion of Judges Patterson, Iredell, and
Peters. That to prevent unnecessary delay, and to save time on the trial
of John Fries, and to prevent a delay of justice, in the great number of
civil causes depending for trial at that term, the Court had drawn up in
writing their opinion of the law, arising on the overt acts stated in the
indictment against John Fries; and had directed David Caldwell, their
clerk, to make out three copies of their opinion, one to be delivered to
the attorney of the district, one to the counsel for the prisoner, and
one to the petit jury, after they shall have been impanelled and heard
the indictment read to them by the clerk, and after the district attorney
should have stated to them the law on the overt acts alleged in the
indictment, as it appeared to him.”

After these observations, this respondent delivered one of the
above-mentioned copies to, the aforesaid William Lewis, then attending
as one of the prisoner’s counsel; who read part of it, and then laid it
down on the table before him. Some observations were then made on the
subject, by him and the above-mentioned Alexander James Dallas, who had
then come into court; but this respondent doth not now recollect those
observations, and cannot undertake to state them accurately.

As to the second specific charge adduced in support of the first article
of impeachment, which accuses this respondent “of restricting the
counsel for the said Fries from recurring to such English authorities as
they believed apposite, or from citing certain statutes of the United
States, which they deemed illustrative of the positions upon which they
intended to rest the defence of their client,” this respondent admits
that he did, on the above-mentioned trial, express it as his opinion to
the aforesaid counsel for the prisoner, “that the decisions in England,
in cases of indictments for treason at common law, against the person
of the King, ought not to be read to the jury, on trials for treason
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States; because such
decisions could not inform, but might mislead and deceive the jury: that
any decisions on cases of treason, in the courts of England, before the
Revolution of 1688, ought to have very little influence in the courts
of the United States; that he would permit decisions in the courts of
England or of Great Britain, since the said Revolution, to be read
to the court or jury, for the purpose of showing what acts have been
considered by those courts, as a constructive levying of war against the
King of that country, in his legal capacity, but not against his person;
because levying war against _his Government_ was of the same nature as
levying war against _the Government of the United States_: but that such
decisions, nevertheless, were not to be considered as authorities binding
on the courts and juries of this country, but merely in the light of
opinions entitled to great respect, as having been delivered, after full
consideration, by men of great legal learning and ability.”

It is only, then, for the correctness of his motives in delivering these
opinions, that he can now be called to answer; and this correctness ought
to be presumed, unless the contrary appear by some direct proof, or some
violent presumption, arising from his general conduct on the trial, or
from the glaring impropriety of the opinion itself. For he admits that
cases may be supposed, of an opinion delivered by a judge, so palpably
erroneous, unjust, and oppressive, as to preclude the possibility of its
having proceeded from ignorance or mistake.

With respect to the statutes of the United States, which he is charged
with having prevented the prisoner’s counsel from citing on the aforesaid
trial, he denies that he prevented any act of Congress from being cited
either to the Court or jury on the said trial, or declared at any time
that he would not permit the prisoner’s counsel to read to the jury
or to the Court any act of Congress whatever. Nor does he remember or
believe that he expressed on the said trial any disapprobation of the
conduct of the circuit court, before whom the said case was first tried,
in permitting the act of Congress relating to crimes less than treason,
commonly called the _Sedition Act_, to be read to the jury. He admits
indeed that he was then and still is of opinion that the said act of
Congress was wholly irrelevant to the issue, in the trial of John Fries,
and therefore ought not to have been read to the jury, or regarded by
them.

And this respondent further answering saith, that after the
above-mentioned proceedings had taken place in the said trial, it was
postponed until the next day, (Wednesday, April 23, 1800,) when, at the
meeting of the Court, this respondent told both the above-mentioned
counsel for the prisoner, that, “to prevent any misunderstanding of
any thing that had passed the day before, he would inform them, that,
although the Court retained the same opinion of the law, arising on the
overt acts charged in the indictment against Fries, yet the counsel
would be permitted to offer arguments to the Court, for the purpose of
showing them that they were mistaken in the law; and that the Court,
if satisfied that they had erred in opinion, would correct it; and also
that the counsel would be permitted to argue before the petit jury that
the Court were mistaken in the law.” And this respondent added, that the
Court had given no opinion as to the facts in the case, about which both
the counsel had declared that there would be no controversy.

After some observations by the said William Lewis and Alexander James
Dallas, they both declared to the Court, “that they did not any longer
consider themselves as the counsel for John Fries, the prisoner.” This
respondent then asked the said John Fries, whether he wished the Court
to appoint other counsel for his defence? He refused to have other
counsel assigned; in which he acted, as this respondent believes and
charges, by the advice of the said William Lewis and Alexander James
Dallas: whereupon, the Court ordered the trial to be had on the next day,
Thursday, the 24th of April, 1800.

On that day the trial was proceeded in; and before the jurors were sworn,
they were, by the direction of the Court, severally asked on oath,
whether they were in any way related to the prisoner, and whether they
had ever formed or delivered any opinion as to his guilt or innocence, or
that he ought to be punished? Three of them answering in the affirmative,
were withdrawn from the panel. The said John Fries was then informed by
the Court, that he had a right to challenge thirty-five of the jury,
without showing any cause of challenge against them, and as many more as
he could show cause of challenge against. He did accordingly challenge
peremptorily thirty-four of the jury, and the trial proceeded. In the
evening, the Court adjourned till the next day, Friday, the 25th of
April; when, after the district attorney had stated the principal facts
proved by the witnesses, and had applied the law to those facts, this
respondent, with the concurrence of his colleague, the said Richard
Peters, delivered to the jury the charge contained and expressed in
exhibit marked No. 3, and herewith filed, which he prays may be taken as
part of this his answer.

Immediately after the petit jury had delivered their verdict, this
respondent informed the said Fries, from the bench, that if he, or any
person for him, could show any legal ground, or sufficient cause to
arrest the judgment, ample time would be allowed him for that purpose.
But no cause being shown, sentence of death was passed on the said Fries,
on Tuesday, the 2d day of May, 1800, the last day of the term; and he was
afterwards pardoned by John Adams, then President of the United States.

And this respondent further answering saith, that if the two instances of
misconduct, first stated in support of the general charge, contained in
the first article of impeachment, were true as alleged, yet the inference
drawn from them, viz: “that the said Fries was thereby deprived of the
benefit of counsel for his defence,” is not true. He insists that the
said Fries was deprived of the benefit of counsel, not by any misconduct
of this respondent, but by the conduct and advice of the above-mentioned
William Lewis and Alexander James Dallas, who having been, with their
own consent, assigned by the Court as counsel for the prisoner, withdrew
from his defence, and advised him to refuse other counsel when offered
to him by the Court, under pretence that the law had been prejudged,
and their liberty of conducting the defence, according to their own
judgment, improperly restricted by this respondent; but in reality,
because they knew the law and the facts to be against them, and the case
to be desperate, and supposed that their withdrawing themselves under
this pretence, might excite odium against the Court; might give rise to
an opinion that the prisoner had not been fairly tried; and in the event
of a conviction, which from their knowledge of the law and the facts they
knew to be almost certain, might aid the prisoner in an application to
the President for a pardon. That such was the real motive of the said
prisoner’s counsel for depriving their client of legal assistance on his
trial, this respondent is fully persuaded, and expects to make appear,
not only from the circumstances of the case, but from their own frequent
and public declarations.

Finally, this respondent, having thus laid before this honorable Court
a true state of his case, so far as respects the first article of
impeachment, declares, upon the strictest review of his conduct during
the whole trial of John Fries for treason, that he was not on that
occasion unmindful of the solemn duties of his office as judge; that he
faithfully and impartially, and according to the best of his ability and
understanding, discharged those duties towards the said John Fries; and
that he did not in any manner, during the said trial, conduct himself
arbitrarily, unjustly, or oppressively, as he is accused by the honorable
the House of Representatives.

And the said Samuel Chase, for the plea to the said first article
of impeachment, saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime or
misdemeanor, as in and by the said first article is alleged; and this he
prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such manner as law
and justice shall seem to them to require.

The second article of impeachment charges, that this respondent, at the
trial of James Thompson Callender for a libel, in May 1800, did, “with
intent to oppress and procure the conviction of the said Callender,
overrule the objection of John Basset, one of the jury, who wished to be
excused from serving on the said trial, because he had made up his mind
as to the publication from which the words, charged to be libellous in
the indictment, were extracted.”

In answer to this article, this respondent admits that he did, as one of
the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, hold
the circuit court of the United States, for the district of Virginia,
at Richmond, on Thursday, the 22d day of May, in the year 1800, and from
that day, till the 30th of the same month; when Cyrus Griffin, then
district judge of the United States for the district of Virginia, took
his seat in the said court; and that during the residue of that session
of the said court, which continued till the ---- day of June, in the same
year, this respondent and the said Cyrus Griffin held the said court
together. But how far any of the other matters charged in this article,
are founded in truth or law, appear from the following statement, which
he submits to this honorable Court, by way of answer to this part of the
accusation.

By an act of Congress passed on the 4th day of May, A. D. 1798, it is
among other things enacted, “That if any person shall write, print,
utter, or publish, or shall knowingly and wittingly assist and aid in
writing, printing, uttering, or publishing, any false, scandalous, and
malicious writing or writings against the President of the United States,
with intent to defame or to bring him into contempt or disrepute, such
person, being thereof convicted, shall be punished by fine, not exceeding
two thousand dollars, and by imprisonment, not exceeding two years;”
and “that if any person shall be prosecuted under this act, it shall
be lawful for him to give in evidence in his defence, the truth of the
matter contained in the publication charged as a libel; and the jury
shall have a right to determine the law and the fact, under the direction
of the Court, as in other cases,” as in and by the said act, commonly
called the _sedition law_, to which this respondent begs leave to refer
this honorable Court, will more fully appear.

At the meeting of the last above-mentioned circuit court, this
respondent, as required by the duties of his office, delivered a charge
to the grand jury, in which, according to his constant practice, and to
his duty as a judge, he gave in charge to them several acts of Congress
for the punishment of offences, and among them, the above-mentioned
act, called the sedition law; and directed the jury to make particular
inquiry concerning any breaches of these statutes or any of them, within
the district of Virginia. On the 24th day of May, 1800, the said jury
found an indictment against one James Thompson Callender, for printing
and publishing, against the form of the said act of Congress, a false,
scandalous, and malicious libel, called “The Prospect before Us,” against
John Adams, then President of the United States, in his official conduct
as President; as appears by an official copy of the said indictment,
marked exhibit No. 4, which this respondent begs leave to make part of
this his answer.

On Wednesday, the 28th day of the same month, May 1800, Philip Norbonne
Nicholas, Esq., now attorney-general of the State of Virginia, and
George Hay, Esq., now district attorney of the United States, for the
district of Virginia, appeared in the said circuit court as counsel for
the said Callender; and on Thursday the 3d of June following, his trial
commenced, before this respondent, and the said Cyrus Griffin, who then
sat as assistant judge. The petit jurors being called over, eight of them
appeared, namely, Robert Gamble, Bernard Mackham, John Barrell, William
Austin, William Richardson, Thomas Tinsley, Matthew Harvey, and John
Basset, who, as they came to the book to be sworn, were severally asked
on oath, by direction of the Court, “whether they had ever formed or
delivered any opinion respecting the subject-matter then to be tried, or
concerning the charges contained in the indictment?” They all answered in
the negative, and were sworn in chief to try the issue. The counsel for
the said Callender declaring that it was unnecessary to put this question
to the other four jurymen, William Mayo, James Hayes, Henry S. Shore, and
John Prior, they also were immediately sworn in chief. No challenge was
made by the said Callender or his counsel, to any of these jurors; but
the said counsel declared, that they would rely on the answer that would
be given by the said jurors to the question thus put by order of the
Court.

After the above-mentioned John Basset, whom this respondent supposes and
admits to be the person mentioned in the article of impeachment now under
consideration, had thus answered in the negative to the question put to
him by order of the Court, as above mentioned, which this respondent
states to be the legal and proper question to be put to jurors on such
occasions, he expressed to the Court his wish to be excused from serving
on the said trial, because he had made up his mind, or had formed
his opinion, “that the publication, called ‘The Prospect before Us,’
from which the words charged in the indictment as libellous were said
to be extracted, but which he had never seen, was, according to the
representation of it, which he had received, within the Sedition law.”
But the Court did not consider this declaration by the said John Basset
as a sufficient reason for withdrawing him from the jury, and accordingly
directed him to be sworn in chief.

In this opinion and decision, as in all the others delivered during the
trial in question, this respondent concurred with his colleague, the
afore-mentioned Cyrus Griffin, in whom none of these opinions have been
considered as criminal. He contends that the opinion itself was legal and
correct; and he denies that he concurred in it, under the influence of
any “spirit of persecution and injustice,” or with any “intent to oppress
and procure the conviction of the prisoner,” as is most untruly alleged
by the second article of impeachment. His reasons were correct and legal.
He will submit them with confidence to this honorable Court; which,
although it cannot condemn him for an incorrect opinion, proceeding from
an honest error in judgment, and ought not to take on itself the power
of inquiring into the correctness of his decisions, but merely that of
examining the purity of his motives; will, nevertheless, weigh his
reasons, for the purpose of judging how far they are of sufficient force
to justify a belief that they might have appeared satisfactory to him.
If they might have so appeared, if the opinion which he founded on them
be not so palpably and glaringly wrong, as to carry with it internal
evidence of corrupt motives, he cannot in delivering it have committed an
offence.

The juror in the present case had expressed no opinion. He had formed
no opinion as to the facts. He had never seen the “Prospect before
Us,” and, therefore, could have no fixed or certain opinion about its
nature or contents. They had been reported to him, and he had formed
an opinion that if they were such as reported, the book was within the
scope and operation of a law for the punishment of “false, scandalous and
malicious libels, against the President in his official capacity, written
or published with intent to defame him.” And who is there, that having
either seen the book or heard of it, had not necessarily formed the same
opinion?

But this juror had formed no opinion about the guilt or innocence of the
party accused; which depended on four facts wholly distinct from the
opinion which he had formed. First, whether the contents of the book
were really such as had been represented to him? Secondly, whether they
should, on the trial, be proved to be true? Thirdly, whether the party
accused was really the author or publisher of this book? And fourthly,
whether he wrote or published it “with intent to defame the President,
or to bring him into contempt or disrepute, or to excite against him the
hatred of the good people of the United States?” On all these questions,
the mind of the juror was perfectly at large, notwithstanding the opinion
which he had formed. He might, consistently with that opinion, determine
them all in the negative; and it was on them that the issue between the
United States and James Thompson Callender depended. Consequently, this
juror, notwithstanding the opinion which he had thus formed, did stand
indifferent as to the matter in issue, in the legal and proper sense,
and in the only sense in which such indifference can ever exist; and
therefore his having formed that opinion, was not such an excuse as could
have justified the Court in discharging him from the jury.

And the said Samuel Chase, for plea to the said second article of
impeachment, saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime or
misdemeanor, as in and by the said second article is alleged against him;
and this he prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such
manner as law and justice shall seem to them to require.

The third article of impeachment alleges that this respondent “with
intent to oppress and procure the conviction of the prisoner, did not
permit the evidence of John Taylor, a material witness in behalf of the
said Callender, to be given in, on pretence that the said witness could
not prove the truth of the whole of one of the charges contained in the
indictment, although the said charge embraced more than one fact.”

In answer to this charge, this respondent begs leave to submit the
following facts and observations:

The indictment against James Thompson Callender, which has been already
mentioned, and of which a copy is exhibited with this answer, consisted
of two distinct and separate counts, each of which contained twenty
distinct and independent charges, or sets of words. Each of those sets
of words was charged as a libel against John Adams, as President of the
United States, and the twelfth charge embraced the following words: “He
(meaning President Adams) was a professed aristocrat; he proved faithful
and serviceable to the British interest.” The defence set up was confined
to this charge, and was rested upon the truth of the words. To the other
nineteen charges no defence of any kind was attempted or spoken of,
except such as might arise from the supposed unconstitutionality of the
sedition law; which, if solid, applied to the twelfth charge as well as
to the other nineteen. It was to prove the truth of these words that John
Taylor, the person mentioned in the article of impeachment now under
consideration, was offered as a witness. It can hardly be necessary to
remind this honorable Court, that when an indictment for a libel contains
several distinct charges, founded on distinct sets of words, the party
accused, who in such cases is called the “traverser,” must be convicted,
unless he makes a sufficient defence against every charge. His innocence
on one, does not prove him innocent on the others. If the sedition
law should be considered as unconstitutional, the whole indictment,
including this twelfth charge, must fall to the ground, whether the
words in question were proved to be true or not. If the law should be
considered as constitutional, then the traverser, whether the words in
the twelfth charge were proved to be true or not, must be convicted on
the other nineteen charges, against which no defence was offered. This
conviction on nineteen charges would put the traverser as completely in
the power of the Court, by which the amount of the fine and the term of
the imprisonment were to be fixed, as a conviction upon all the twenty
charges. The imprisonment could not exceed two years, nor the fine be
more than two thousand dollars. If, then, this respondent were desirous
of procuring the conviction of the traverser, he was sure of his object
without rejecting the testimony of John Taylor. If his temper towards
the traverser were so vindictive as to make him feel anxious to obtain
an opportunity and excuse for inflicting on him the whole extent of
punishment permitted by the law, still a conviction on nineteen charges
afforded this opportunity and excuse as fully as a conviction on twenty
charges. One slander more or less, in such a publication as the “Prospect
before Us,” could surely be of no moment. To attain this object,
therefore, it was not necessary to reject the testimony of John Taylor.

That the Court did not feel this vindictive spirit is clearly evinced
by the moderation of the punishment, which actually was inflicted on the
traverser, after he was convicted of the whole twenty charges. Instead of
two thousand dollars, he was fined only two hundred, and was sentenced to
only nine months’ imprisonment, instead of two years. And this respondent
avers that he never felt or expressed a wish to go further; but that
in this decision, as well as in every other given in the course of the
trial, he fully and freely concurred with his colleague, Judge Griffin.

In the case under consideration, no proof was offered as to the
whole matter contained in the twelfth article. No witness except the
above-mentioned John Taylor was produced or mentioned. When a witness is
offered to a court and jury, it is the right and duty of the court to
require a statement of the matters intended to be proved by him. This is
the invariable practice of all our courts, and was done most properly
by this respondent and his colleague, on the occasion in question. From
the statement given by the traverser’s counsel of what they expected to
prove by the said witness, it appeared that his testimony could have no
possible application to any part of the indictment, except the twelfth
charge above mentioned, and but a very weak and imperfect application
even to that part. The Court, therefore, as it was their right and duty,
requested that the questions intended to be put to the witness should be
reduced to writing, and submitted to their inspection, so as to enable
them to judge more accurately, how far those questions were proper and
admissible. This being done, the questions were of the following tenor
and effect:

1st. “Did you ever hear Mr. Adams express any sentiments favorable to
monarchy, or ‘aristocracy,’ and what were they?”

2d. “Did you ever hear Mr. Adams, while Vice President, express his
disapprobation of the funding system?”

3d. “Do you know whether Mr. Adams did not, in the year 1794, vote
against the sequestration of British debts, and also against the bill for
suspending intercourse with Great Britain?”

The second question, it is manifest, had nothing to do with the charge;
for Mr. Adams’ approbation or disapprobation of the funding system could
not have the most remote tendency to prove that he was an aristocrat, or
had proved faithful and serviceable to the British interest. The third
question was in reality as far as the second from any connection with
the matter in issue, although its irrelevancy is not quite so apparent.
Mr. Adams’s having voted against the two measures alluded to in that
question, if he did in fact vote against them, could by no means prove
that he was “faithful and serviceable to the British interest,” in any
sense, much less with those improper and criminal views, with which the
publication in question certainly meant to charge him. The fact, if true,
was _no_ evidence to support such an inference, therefore the fact was
immaterial; and as it is the province and duty of the Court, in such
circumstances, to decide on the materiality of facts offered in evidence,
it follows clearly that it was the right and duty of the Court, in this
instance, to reject the third question; an affirmative answer to which
could have proved nothing in support of the defence.

For these reasons this respondent did concur with his colleague, the said
Cyrus Griffin, in rejecting the three above-mentioned questions; but not
any other testimony that the said John Taylor might have been able to
give.

And for plea to the said third article of impeachment, the said Samuel
Chase saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime or misdemeanor, as
in and by the said third article is alleged against him: this he prays
may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such manner as law and
justice shall seem to them to require.

The fourth article of impeachment alleges, that during the whole course
of the trial of James Thompson Callender, above mentioned, the conduct
of this respondent was marked by “manifest injustice, partiality,
and intemperance;” and five particular instances of the “injustice,
partiality, and intemperance,” are adduced.

The first consists, “in compelling the prisoner’s counsel to reduce to
writing and submit to the inspection of the Court, for their admission or
rejection, all questions which the said counsel meant to propound to the
above-mentioned John Taylor, the witness.”

This respondent, in answer to this part of the article now under
consideration, admits that the Court, consisting of himself and the
above-mentioned Cyrus Griffin, did require the counsel for the traverser,
on the trial of James Thompson Callender, above mentioned, to reduce to
writing the questions which they intended to put to the said witness.
But he denies that it is more his act than the act of his colleague,
who fully concurred in this measure. The measure, as he apprehends and
insists, was legal and proper; his reasons for adopting it, and he
presumes those of his colleague, he will submit to this honorable Court,
in order to show that if he, in common with his colleague, committed an
error, it was an error into which the best and wisest men might have
honestly fallen.

The next circumstance stated by the article now under consideration,
as an instance and proof of “manifest injustice, partiality, and
intemperance” in this respondent, is his refusal to postpone the trial of
the said James Thompson Callender, “although an affidavit was regularly
filed, stating the absence of material witnesses on behalf of the
accused, and although it was manifest that, with the utmost diligence,
the attendance of such witnesses could not have been procured at that
term.”

This respondent, in answer to this part of the charge, admits that, in
the above-mentioned trial, the traverser’s counsel did move the court,
while this respondent sat in it alone, for a continuance of the trial
until the next term; not merely a postponement of the trial, as the
expressions used in this part of the article would seem to import;
and did file, as the groundwork of their motion, an affidavit of the
traverser, a true and official copy of which (marked exhibit No. 5) this
respondent herewith exhibits, and begs leave to make part of this answer;
but he denies that any sufficient ground for a continuance until the next
term was disclosed by this affidavit, as he trusts will clearly appear
from the following facts and observations:

The trial of an indictment at the term when it is found by the grand
jury, is a matter of course, which the prosecutor can claim as a right,
unless legal cause can be shown for a continuance. The prosecutor may
consent to a continuance, but if he withholds his consent, the Court
cannot grant a continuance without legal cause. Of the sufficiency and
legality of this cause, as of every other question of law, the Court must
judge; but it must decide on this, as on every other point, according to
the fixed and known rules of law.

One of the legal grounds, and the principal one on which such a
continuance may be granted, is the absence of competent and _material_
witnesses, whom the party cannot produce at the present term, but has a
_reasonable ground_ for expecting to be able to produce at the next term.
Analogous to this, is the inability to procure, at the present term,
legal and _material_ written testimony, which the party has a _reasonable
expectation_ of being able to procure at the next term.

Public justice will not permit the trial of offenders to be delayed,
on light or unfounded pretences. To wait for testimony which the party
really wished for, but did not expect to be able to produce within some
definite period, would certainly be a very light pretence; and to make
him the judge, how far there was reasonable expectation of obtaining the
testimony within the proper time, would put it in his power to delay the
trial on the most unfounded pretences. Hence the rule, that there must be
reasonable ground of expectation, in the judgment of the Court, that the
testimony may be obtained within the proper time.

It is therefore a settled and most necessary rule, that every application
for a continuance, on the ground of obtaining testimony, must be
supported by an affidavit, disclosing sufficient matter to satisfy
the Court, that the testimony wanted “is competent and material,” and
that there is “reasonable expectation of procuring it within the time
prescribed.” From a comparison of the affidavit in question with the
indictment, it will soon appear how far the traverser in this case
brought himself within this rule.

The absent witnesses, mentioned in the affidavit, are William Gardner,
of Portsmouth in New Hampshire; Tench Coxe, of Philadelphia, in
Pennsylvania; Judge Bee, of some place in South Carolina; Timothy
Pickering, lately of Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, but of what place
at that time the deponent did not know; William B. Giles, of Amelia
County, in the State of Virginia; Stevens Thompson Mason, whose place
of residence is not mentioned in the affidavit, but was known to be in
Loudon County, in the State of Virginia; and General Blackburn, of Bath
County, in the said State. The affidavit also states, that the traverser
wished to procure, as material to his defence, authentic copies of
certain answers made by the President of the United States, Mr. Adams, to
addresses from various persons; and also, a book entitled “an Essay on
Canon and Feudal Law,” or entitled in words to that purport, which was
ascribed to the President, and which the traverser believed to have been
written by him; and also, evidence to prove that the President was in
fact the author of that book.

It is not stated, that the traverser had any reasonable ground to expect,
or did expect, to procure this book or evidence, or these authentic
copies, or the attendance of any one of these witnesses, at the next
term. Nor does he attempt to show in what manner the book, or the copies
of answers to addresses, were material, so as to enable the Court to
form a judgment on that point. Here, then, the affidavit was clearly
defective. His believing the book and copies to be material, was of no
weight, unless he showed to the Court sufficient grounds for entertaining
the same opinion. Moreover, he does not state where he supposes that
this book, and those authentic copies, may be found; so as to enable the
Court to judge, how far a reasonable expectation of obtaining them might
be entertained. On the ground of this book and these copies, therefore,
there was no pretence for a continuance. As to the witnesses, it is
manifest, that from their very distant and dispersed situation, there
existed no ground of reasonable expectation that their attendance could
be procured at the _next_ term, or at any subsequent time. Indeed, the
idea of postponing the trial of an indictment till witnesses could be
convened at Richmond, from South Carolina, New Hampshire, and the western
extremities of Virginia, is too chimerical to be seriously entertained.
Accordingly, the traverser, though in his affidavit he stated them to
be material, and declared that he could not procure their attendance at
that term, could not venture to declare, on oath, that he expected to
procure it at the next, or at any other time; much less that he had any
reasonable ground for such an expectation. On this ground, therefore, the
affidavit was clearly insufficient; and it was consequently the duty of
the Court to reject such application.

But the testimony of these witnesses, as stated in the affidavit, was
wholly immaterial; and, therefore, their absence was no ground for
a continuance, had there been reasonable ground for expecting their
attendance at the next term.

William Gardner and Tench Coxe were to prove that Mr. Adams had turned
them out of office, for their political opinions or conduct. This
applied to that part of the publication which constituted the matter of
the third charge in the indictment, in these words, “the same system of
persecution extended all over the continent. Every person holding an
office, must either quit it, or think and vote exactly with Mr. Adams.”
Judge Bee was to prove, that Mr. Adams had advised and requested him
by letter, in the year 1799, to deliver Thomas Nash, otherwise called
Jonathan Robbins, to the British Consul, in Charleston. This might
have had some application to the matter of the seventh charge; which
alleged that “the hands of Mr. Adams were reeking with the blood of the
poor, friendless Connecticut sailor.” Timothy Pickering was to prove
that Mr. Adams, while President, and Congress was in session, was many
weeks in possession of important despatches from the American Minister
in France, without communicating them to Congress. This testimony was
utterly immaterial; because, admitting the fact to be so, Mr. Adams was
not bound, in any respect, to communicate those despatches to Congress,
unless, in his discretion, he should think it necessary; and also,
because the fact, if true, had no relation to any part of the indictment.
There are, indeed, three charges, on which it might at first sight seem
to have some slight bearing. These are the eighth, the words furnishing
the matter of which are, “every feature in the administration of Mr.
Adams forms a distinct and additional evidence that he was determined,
at all events, to embroil this country with France;” the fourteenth,
the words stated in which allege, that “by sending these Ambassadors
to Paris, Mr. Adams and his British faction designed to do nothing but
mischief;” and the eighteenth, the matter of which states, “that in the
midst of such a scene of profligacy and usury, the President persisted
as long as he durst, in making his utmost efforts for provoking a French
war.” To no other charge in the indictment had the evidence of Timothy
Pickering, as stated in the affidavit, the remotest affinity. And surely,
it will not be pretended by any man, who shall compare this evidence with
the three charges above mentioned, that the fact intended to be proved
by it, furnished any evidence proper to go to a jury, in support of
either of those charges; that “every feature of his administration formed
a distinct and additional evidence of a determination, at all events,
to embroil this country with France,” that “in sending Ambassadors to
Paris, he intended nothing but mischief,” that “in the midst of a scene
of profligacy and usury, he persisted, as long as he durst, in making
his utmost effort for provoking a French war,” are charges, which surely
cannot be supported or justified, by the circumstance of his “keeping
in his possession, for several weeks, while Congress was in session,
despatches from the American Minister in France, without communicating
them to Congress,” which he was not bound to do, and which it was his
duty not to do, if he supposed that the communication, at an earlier
period, would be injurious to the public interest. The testimony of
William B. Giles and Stevens Thompson Mason was to prove that Mr. Adams
had uttered in their hearing certain sentiments favorable to aristocratic
or monarchical principles of Government.

This had no application except to a part of the twelfth charge; which
has been already shown to be wholly immaterial if taken separately, and
wholly incapable of a separate justification, if considered as part of
an entire charge. And, lastly, it was to be proved by General Blackburn,
that in his answer to an address, Mr. Adams avowed, “that there was a
party in Virginia which deserved to be humbled into dust and ashes,
before the indignant frowns of their injured, insulted, and offended
country.” There were but two charges in the indictment to which this
fact, if true, had the most distant resemblance. These are the fifteenth
and sixteenth, the words forming the matter of which, call Mr. Adams “an
hoary-headed libeller of the Governor of Virginia, who with all the fury,
but without the propriety or sublimity of Homer’s Achilles, bawled out,
to arms, then, to arms!” and “who, floating on the bladder of popularity,
threatened to make Richmond the centre point of a bonfire.” It would be
an abuse of the patience of this honorable Court, to occupy any part
of its time in proving that the fact intended to be proved by General
Blackburn, could not in the slightest degree support or justify such
charges as these.

To the third charge adduced in support of the article now under
consideration, the charge of using “unusual, rude, and contemptuous
expressions towards the prisoner’s counsel,” and of “falsely insinuating
that they wished to excite the public fears and indignation, and to
produce that insubordination to law to which the conduct of this
respondent did manifestly tend,” he cannot answer otherwise than by a
general denial. A charge so vague, admits not of precise or particular
refutation. He denies that there was any thing unusual or intentionally
rude or contemptuous in his conduct or his expressions towards the
prisoner’s counsel; that he made any false insinuation whatever
against them, or that his own conduct tended in any manner to produce
insubordination to law. On the contrary, it was his wish and intention to
treat the counsel with the respect due to their situation and functions,
and with the decorum due to his own character. He thought it his duty
to restrain such of their attempts as he considered improper, and to
overrule motions made by them, which he considered as unfounded in law;
but this it was his wish to accomplish in the manner least likely to
offend, from which every consideration concurred in dissuading him. He
did indeed think at that time, and still remains under the impression,
that the conduct of the traverser’s counsel, whether from intention or
not he will not undertake to say, was disrespectful, irritating, and
highly incorrect. That conduct which he viewed in this light, might have
produced some irritation in a temper naturally quick and warm, and that
this irritation might, notwithstanding his endeavors to suppress it, have
appeared in his manner and in his expressions, he thinks not improbable;
for he has had occasions for feeling and lamenting the want of sufficient
caution and self-command, in things of this nature. But he confidently
affirms, that his conduct in this particular was free from intentional
impropriety; and this respondent denies, that any part of his conduct
was such as ought to have induced the traverser’s counsel to “abandon
the cause of their client,” nor does he believe that any such cause did
induce them to take that step. On the contrary, he believes that it was
taken by them under the influence of passion, for some motive into which
this respondent forbears at this time to inquire. And this respondent
admits that the said traverser was convicted, and condemned to fine and
imprisonment, but not by reason of the abandonment of his defence by his
counsel; but because the charges against him were clearly proved, and no
defence was made or attempted against far the greater number of them.

The fourth charge in support of this article attributes to this
respondent “repeated and vexatious interruptions of the said counsel,
which at length induced them to abandon the cause of their client, who
was therefore convicted, and condemned to fine and imprisonment.” To this
charge, also, it is impossible to give any other answer but a general
denial. He avers that he never interrupted the traverser’s counsel
vexatiously, or except when he considered it his duty to do so.

Lastly, this respondent is charged, under this article, with an “indecent
solicitude, manifested by him, for the conviction of the accused,
unbecoming even a public prosecutor, but highly disgraceful to the
character of a judge, as it was subversive of justice.” This is another
charge of which it is impossible to give a precise refutation, and to a
general denial of which this respondent must therefore confine himself.
He denies that he felt any solicitude whatever for the conviction of the
traverser; other than the general wish natural to every friend of truth,
decorum, and virtue, that persons guilty of such offences as that of
which the traverser stood indicted, should be brought to punishment for
the sake of example.

And the said respondent for plea to the said fourth article of
impeachment, saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime and
misdemeanor, as in and by the said fourth article is alleged against him,
and this he prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such
manner as law and justice shall seem to require.

The fifth article of impeachment charges this respondent with having
awarded “a capias against the body of the said James Thompson Callender,
indicted for an offence _not capital_, whereupon the said Callender was
arrested and committed to _close_ custody, contrary to law in that case
made and provided.”

This charge is rested, 1st, on the act of Congress of September 24, 1789,
entitled “An act to establish the judicial courts of the United States,”
by which it is enacted “that for any crime or offence against the United
States, the offender may be arrested, imprisoned, or bailed, agreeably
to the usual mode of process, in the State where such offender may be
found.” And, 2dly, on a law of the State of Virginia, which is said to
provide “that upon _presentment_ by any grand jury, of an offence _not
capital_, the Court shall order the clerk to issue a _summons_ against
the person or persons so offending, to appear and answer such presentment
at the _next_ court.” It is contended, in support of this charge, that
the act of Congress above mentioned made the State law the rule of
proceeding, and that the State law was violated by issuing a capias
against Callender, instead of a summons.

It will also appear, as this respondent believes, by a reference to the
laws and practice of Virginia, into which he has made all the inquiries
which circumstances and the shortness of time allowed him for preparing
his answer would permit, that all the cases in which a summons is
considered as the only proper process, are cases of petty offences,
which, on the presentment of a grand jury, are to be tried by the court
in a summary way, without the intervention of a petit jury. Therefore
these provisions had no application to the case of Callender, which
could be no otherwise proceeded on than by indictment, and trial on the
indictment by a petit jury.

And the said respondent, for plea to the said fifth article of
impeachment, saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime and
misdemeanor, as in and by the said fifth article is alleged against him;
and this he prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such
manner as law and justice shall seem to them to require.

The sixth article of impeachment alleges that this respondent, “with
intent to oppress and procure the conviction of the said James Thompson
Callender, did, at the court aforesaid, rule and adjudge the said
Callender to trial during the term at which he, the said Callender,
was presented and indicted, contrary to the law in that case made and
provided.”

This charge also is founded, 1st, on the act of Congress of September
24, 1789, above mentioned, which enacts, section 34, “that the laws of
the several States, except where the Constitution, treaties, or statutes
of the United States shall otherwise provide, shall be regarded as the
rules of decision, in trials at _common law_, in the courts of the United
States, in cases where they apply;” and, 2dly, on a law of the State of
Virginia, which is supposed to provide, “that in cases not capital, the
offender shall not be held to answer any presentment of a grand jury,
until the court next preceding that during which such presentment shall
have been made.” This law, it is contended, is made the role of decision
by the above-mentioned act of Congress, and was violated by the refusal
to continue the case of Callender till the next term.

In answer to this charge this respondent declares, that he was at the
time of making the above-mentioned decision wholly ignorant of any such
law of Virginia as that in question; that no such law was adduced or
mentioned by the counsel of Callender, in support of their motion for
a continuance; neither when they first made it, before this respondent
sitting alone, nor when they renewed it, after Judge Griffin had taken
his seat in court; that no such law was mentioned by Judge Griffin, who
concurred in overruling the motion for a continuance and ordering on the
trial; which he could not have done had he known that such a law existed,
or considered it as applicable to the case; and that this respondent
never heard of any such law until the articles of impeachment now under
consideration were reported, in the course of the present session of
Congress, by a committee of the House of Representatives.

And for plea to the said sixth article of impeachment, the said Samuel
Chase saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime or misdemeanor, as
in and by the said-article is alleged against him; and this he prays may
be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such manner as law and justice
shall seem to them to require.

The seventh article of impeachment relates to some conduct of this
respondent in his judicial capacity, at a circuit court of the United
States held at Newcastle, in the State of Delaware, in June, 1800. The
statement of this conduct, made in the article, is altogether erroneous;
but if it were true, this respondent denies that it contains any matter
for which he is liable to impeachment.

These charges amount in substance to this: that the respondent refused to
discharge a grand jury, on their request, which is every day’s practice,
and which he was bound to do, if he believed that the due administration
of justice required their longer attendance; that he directed the
attention of the grand jury to an offence against a statute of the United
States, which, he had been informed, was committed in the district; and
that he desired the District Attorney to aid the grand jury in their
inquiries concerning the existence and nature of this offence. By these
three acts, each of which it was his duty to perform, he is alleged “to
have degraded his high judicial functions, and tended to impair the
public confidence in, and respect for, the tribunals of justice, so
essential to the public welfare.”

That this honorable Court may be able to form correctly its judgment
concerning the transaction mentioned in this article, this respondent
submits the following statement of it, which he avers to be true, and
expects to prove:

On the 27th day of June, 1800, this respondent, as one Of the Associate
Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, presided in the
circuit court of the United States, then held at Newcastle, in and for
the district of Delaware, and was assisted by Gunning Bedford, Esq., then
district judge of the United States for that district. At the opening
of the court on that day, this respondent, according to his duty and
his uniform practice, delivered a charge to the grand jury, in which he
gave in charge to them several statutes of the United States, and, among
others, an act of Congress, passed July 14th, 1798, entitled “An act in
addition to the act for the punishment of certain crimes against the
United States,” and commonly called the “sedition law.” He directed them
to inquire concerning any breaches of those statutes, and especially of
that commonly called the sedition law, within the district of Delaware.

On the same day, before the usual hour of adjournment, the grand jury
came into court, and informed the Court that they had found no indictment
or presentment, and had no business before them, for which reason they
wished to be discharged. This respondent replied, that it was earlier
than the usual hour of discharging a grand jury; and that business might
occur during the sitting of the court. He also asked them if they had
no information of publications within the district, that came under the
sedition law, and added, that he had been informed that there was a paper
called the _Mirror_, published at Wilmington which contained libellous
charges against the Government and President of the United States: that
he had not seen that paper, but it was their duty to inquire into the
subject; and if they had not turned their attention to it, the attorney
for the district would be pleased to examine a file of that paper, and
if he found any thing that came within the sedition law, would lay it
before them. This is the substance of what the respondent said to the
grand jury on that occasion, and, he believes, nearly his words; on the
morning of the _next day_ they came into court and declared that they had
no presentments or indictments to make, on which they were immediately
discharged. The whole time, therefore, for which they were detained, was
twenty-four hours, far less than is generally required of grand juries.

And for plea to the said seventh article of impeachment, the said Samuel
Chase saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime or misdemeanor, as
in and by the said seventh article is alleged against him, and this he
prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such manner as law
and justice shall seem to them to require.

The eighth article of impeachment charges that this respondent,
“disregarding the duties and dignity of his official character, did,
at a circuit court for the district of Maryland, held at Baltimore, in
the month of May, 1803, pervert his official right and duty to address
the grand jury then and there assembled, on the matters coming within
the province of the said jury, for the purpose of delivering to the
said grand jury an intemperate and inflammatory political harangue,
with intent to excite the fears and resentment of the said grand jury,
and of the good people of Maryland, against their State government
and constitution,” and also that this respondent, “under pretence of
exercising his judicial right to address the grand jury as aforesaid,
did endeavor to excite the odium of the said grand jury, and of the good
people of Maryland, against the Government of the United States, by
delivering opinions which were, at that time and as delivered by him,
highly indecent, extra-judicial, and tending to prostitute the high
judicial character with which he was invested to the low purpose of an
electioneering partisan.”

In answer to this charge this respondent admits that he did, as one
of the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States,
preside in a circuit court held at Baltimore in and for the district of
Maryland, in May, 1803, and did then deliver a charge to the grand jury,
and express in the conclusion of it some opinions as to certain public
measures, both of the Government of Maryland and of that of the United
States. But he denies that, in thus acting, he disregarded the duties and
dignity of his judicial character, perverted his official right and duty
to address the grand jury, or had any intention to excite the fears or
resentment of any person whatever against the Government and Constitution
of the United States or of Maryland. He denies that the sentiments
which he thus expressed were “intemperate and inflammatory,” either in
themselves or in the manner of delivering; that he did endeavor to excite
the odium of any person whatever against the Government of the United
States, or did deliver any opinions which were in any respect indecent,
or which had any tendency to prostitute his judicial character to any low
or improper purpose. He denies that he did any thing that was unusual,
improper, or unbecoming in a judge, or expressed any opinions, but such
as a friend to his country and a firm supporter of the Governments, both
of the State of Maryland and of the United States, might entertain. For
the truth of what he here says, he appeals confidently to the charge
itself: which was read from a written paper now in his possession ready
to be produced. A true copy of all such parts of this paper as relate
to the subject matter of this article of impeachment, is contained in
the exhibit marked No. 8, which he prays leave to make part of this his
answer.

Admitting these opinions to have been incorrect and unfounded, this
respondent denies that there was any law which forbids him to express
them in a charge to a grand jury, and he contends that there can be no
offence without the breach of some law. The very essence of despotism
consists in punishing acts which, at the time when they were done, were
forbidden by no law. Admitting the expression of political opinions by
a judge, in his charge to a grand jury, to be improper and dangerous,
there are many improper and very dangerous acts, which not being
forbidden by law, cannot be punished. Hence the necessity of new penal
laws, which are from time to time enacted for the prevention of acts not
before forbidden, but found by experience to be of dangerous tendency.
It has been the practice in this country, ever since the beginning of
the Revolution which separated us from Great Britain, for the judges
to express from the bench, by way of charge to the grand jury, and to
enforce to the utmost of their ability such political opinions as they
thought correct and useful. There have been instances in which the
Legislative bodies of this country have recommended this practice to the
judges; and it was adopted by the judges of the Supreme Court of the
United States as soon as the present Judicial system was established.

Nor can the incorrectness of the political opinions thus expressed have
any influence in deciding on the guilt or innocence of a judge’s conduct
in expressing them. For if he should be considered as guilty or innocent,
according to the supposed correctness or incorrectness of the opinion
thus expressed by him, it would follow that error in political opinion,
however honestly entertained, might be a crime; and that a party in
power might, under this pretext, destroy any judge who might happen, in
a charge to a grand jury, to say something capable of being construed by
them into a political opinion adverse to their own system.

And the said Samuel Chase, for plea to the said eighth article of
impeachment, saith, that he is not guilty of any high crime and
misdemeanor, as in and by the said eighth article is alleged against him,
and this he prays may be inquired of by this honorable Court, in such
manner as law and justice shall seem to them to require.

This respondent has now laid before this honorable Court, as well as the
time allowed him would permit, all the circumstances of the case, with an
humble trust in Providence, and a consciousness that he has discharged
all his _official_ duties with justice and impartiality, to the best of
his knowledge and abilities; and that intentionally he hath committed no
crime or misdemeanor, or any violation of the constitution or laws of
his country. Confiding in the impartiality, independence, and integrity
of his judges, and that they will patiently hear, and conscientiously
determine this case, without being influenced by the spirit of party, by
popular prejudice, or political motives, he cheerfully submits himself to
their decision.

He is satisfied that every member of this tribunal will observe the
principles of humanity and justice, and will presume him innocent until
his guilt shall be established by legal and creditable witnesses, and
will be governed in his decision by the moral and Christian rule of
rendering that justice to this respondent which he would wish to receive.

This respondent now stands not merely before an earthly tribunal, but
also before that awful Being whose presence fills all space, and whose
all-seeing eye more especially surveys the temples of justice and
religion. In a little time, his accusers, his judges, and himself, must
appear at the bar of Omnipotence, where the secrets of all hearts shall
be disclosed, and every human being shall answer for his deeds done in
the body, and shall be compelled to give evidence against himself, in the
presence of an assembled universe. To his Omnipotent Judge, at that awful
hour, he now appeals for the rectitude and purity of his conduct, as to
all the matters of which he is this day accused.

Mr. RANDOLPH, on behalf of the Managers, requested time to consult the
House of Representatives, and likewise to be furnished with a copy of the
answer of Judge Chase, for the purpose of making a replication to it.

The PRESIDENT said the Senate would take the request into consideration,
and make known to the House of Representatives such order as should be
taken thereon.

Whereupon the Senate, at the suggestion of the PRESIDENT, retired to
their legislative apartment.

On Wednesday, the 6th instant, the House of Representatives received
a copy of the foregoing answer, which was referred to the Managers.
On the same day, Mr. RANDOLPH reported a replication to the answer,
which was immediately taken into consideration. Several motions were
made and rejected, after a short debate, to soften the style; when the
replication, as reported, was adopted--yeas 77, nays 34. Whereupon, it
was resolved that the Managers be instructed to proceed to maintain the
said replication at the bar of the Senate, at such time as shall be
appointed by the Senate.


THURSDAY, February 7.

The Court was opened about two o’clock.

_Present_: The Managers, and Mr. HOPKINSON, of the counsel for Mr. Chase.

Mr. RANDOLPH, on behalf of the Managers, read the replication of the
House of Representatives, to the answer of Samuel Chase, as follows:

    Replication by the House of Representatives of the United
    States, to the answer of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate
    Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, to the
    Articles of Impeachment exhibited against him by the said House
    of Representatives.

    The House of Representatives of the United States have
    considered the answer of Samuel Chase, one of the Associate
    Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, to the
    Articles of Impeachment against him, by them exhibited, in the
    name of themselves and of all the people of the United States,
    and observe,

    That the said Samuel Chase hath endeavored to cover the
    high crimes and misdemeanors laid to his charge, by evasive
    insinuations and misrepresentation of facts; that the said
    answer does give a gloss and coloring utterly false and untrue,
    to the various criminal matters contained in the said Articles;
    that the said Samuel Chase did, in fact, commit the numerous
    acts of oppression, persecution, and injustice, of which he
    stands accused; and the House of Representatives, in full
    confidence of the truth and justice of their accusation, and
    of the necessity of bringing the said Samuel Chase to a speedy
    and exemplary punishment, and not doubting that the Senate will
    use all becoming diligence to do justice to the proceedings
    of the House of Representatives, and to vindicate the honor
    of the nation, do aver their charge against the said Samuel
    Chase to be true, and that the said Samuel Chase is guilty
    in such manner as he stands impeached; and that the House of
    Representatives will be ready to prove their charges against
    him, at such convenient time and place as shall be appointed
    for that purpose.

    Signed by order, and in behalf of, the said House.

                                            NATH. MACON, _Speaker_,

    Attest:

                                             JOHN BECKLEY, _Clerk_.

Mr. HOPKINSON requested a copy of the replication, which, the PRESIDENT
replied, would be furnished by the Secretary.

Mr. BRECKENRIDGE moved a resolution to the following effect:

That the Secretary be directed to inform the House of Representatives
that the Senate will, to-morrow, at twelve o’clock, proceed with the
trial of Samuel Chase; which was agreed to without one dissenting voice,
34 members voting for it.

Whereupon, the Senate withdrew to their legislative apartment.


FRIDAY, February 8.

The Court opened precisely at twelve o’clock.

_Present_: The Managers, and the House of Representatives, in Committee
of the Whole; and Mr. Chase, attended by his counsel, Messrs. MARTIN,
HARPER, HOPKINSON, and KEY.

The crier having, agreeably to a prescribed form, notified all those
concerned to come forward and make good the charges exhibited against
Samuel Chase,

Mr. RANDOLPH, the leading Manager, requested that the witnesses on the
part of the prosecution might be called, to ascertain who were present.

They were accordingly called, to the number of twenty-four.

_Present_: Alexander James Dallas, William Lewis, William Rawle, William
S. Biddle, Edward Tilghman, George Reed, John Montgomery, John Stephen,
John Thompson Mason, Samuel H. Smith, John Taylor, George Hay, William
Wirt, and John Heath.

_Absent_: James Lea, John Crow, Risdon Bishop, Aquila Hall, Philip
Stewart, Thomas Hall, Philip N. Nicholas, John Harvie, Meriwether Jones,
and James Pleasants.

Mr. RANDOLPH observed that various considerations, which it was
unnecessary to detail, induced him, on behalf of the Managers, to move a
postponement of the trial till to-morrow, when they hoped to be prepared
to proceed with it.

Mr. HARPER said that, on behalf of Judge Chase, he would not object to
the motion.

The PRESIDENT informed the Managers that the Senate acceded to their
request, and added, that the Senate would attend to-morrow at twelve
o’clock, for the purpose of proceeding with the trial.

At the request of Mr. HARPER, the witnesses on the part of Judge Chase
were called over, to the number of forty.

_Present_: John A. Chevalier, David M. Randolph, John Marshall, John
Basset, Samuel P. Moore, William C. Frazier, David Robertson, Edward
Tilghman, Wm. Meredith, Jared Ingersoll, Samuel Ewing, James Winchester,
Walter Dorsey, James P. Boyd, Nicholas Brice, John Purviance, William M.
Mechin, Thomas Chase, William H. Winder, William Gwynn, William Rawle,
William J. Govane, Gunning Bedford, Nicholas Vandyke, John Hall, jun.,
Archibald Hamilton, and Thomas Carpenter.

_Absent_: William Marshall, Edmund Randolph, Robert Gamble, Philip Moore,
Cornelius Comegys, John Stewart, and Edward J. Coale.

_Not found_: John Hopkins, Philip Gooch, William Minor, and Samuel
Wheeler.

_Sick_: Cyrus Griffin. _Dead_: J. C. Barrett.

Whereupon the Court rose.


SATURDAY, February 9.

The Court was opened precisely at 12 o’clock.

_Present_: The Managers, attended by the House of Representatives in
Committee of the Whole; and Judge Chase, attended by his counsel, as
mentioned in the proceedings of yesterday.

At a quarter after 12 o’clock, Mr. RANDOLPH, on behalf of the Managers,
opened the impeachment, as follows:

Mr. President: It becomes my duty to open this cause on behalf of the
prosecution. From this duty, however incompetent I feel myself to its
performance at all times, and more especially at this time, as well from
the very short period which has been allowed us to consider the long
and elaborate plea of the respondent, as from the severe pressure of
disease, it does not become me to shrink. The station in which I have
been placed calls for the discharge of an important public trust at my
hands. It shall be performed to the best of my ability, inadequate as I
know that ability to be. When I speak of the short period which has been
allowed us, I hope not to be understood as expressing, on our part, any
dissatisfaction at the course which has been pursued, or any wish to
prolong the time which has been allotted for trial. We are sensible of a
disposition in this honorable Court to grant us every indulgence which we
ought to ask, and when their attention is called to the precipitate hurry
of our preparation, it is only to offer, on behalf of an individual,
perhaps a weak apology for the weak defence which he is about to make of
the cause confided to his care. A desire for the furtherance of justice
and the avoidance of delay, but, above all, an unshaken conviction that
we stand on impregnable ground, induce us on this short notice to declare
that we are ready to substantiate our accusation, to prove that the
respondent is guilty in such manner as he stands impeached.

It is a painful but indispensable task which we are called upon to
perform: to establish the guilt of a great officer of Government, of a
man, who, if he had made a just use of those faculties which God and
nature bestowed upon him, would have been the ornament and benefactor
of his country, would have rendered her services as eminent and useful
as he has inflicted upon her outrages and wrongs deep and deadly. A
character endowed by nature with some of her best attributes, cultivated
by education, placed by his country in a conspicuous station, invested
with authority whose righteous exercise would have rendered him a terror
to the wicked, whilst it endeared him to the wise and good: such a
character, presented to the nation in the light in which he now stands,
and in which his misdeeds have made it our duty to bring him forward,
forms one of the saddest spectacles which can be offered to the public
eye. Base is that heart which could triumph over him.

I will now proceed to state the principal points on which we mean to
rely, and which we expect to establish by the clearest evidence. In doing
this I shall be necessarily led to notice many of the leading statements
of the respondent’s answer. We will begin with the first article. [Here
Mr. R. read that article.] The answer to the first of these charges is
by evasive insinuation and misrepresentation, by an attempt to wrest the
accusation from its true bearing, the manner and time of delivering the
opinion, and the intent with which it was delivered, to the correctness
of the opinion itself, which is not the point in issue. And here permit
me to remark, that if the Managers of this impeachment were governed only
by their own conviction of the course which they ought, necessarily, to
pursue, and not by the high sense of duty which they owe to their eminent
employers, they would have felt themselves justified in resting their
accusation on the admissions of the respondent himself. It is not for
the opinion itself, that the respondent is impeached; it is for a daring
inroad upon the criminal jurisprudence of his country, by delivering
that opinion at a time and in a manner (in writing) before unknown and
unheard of. The criminal intent is to be inferred from the boldness of
the innovation itself, as well as from other overt acts charged in this
article. The admission of the respondent ought to secure his conviction
on this charge. He acknowledges he did deliver an opinion, _in writing_,
on the question of law, (which it was the right and duty of the jury
to determine, as well as the fact,) _before_ counsel had been heard
in defence of John Fries, the prisoner. I must beg the assistance of
one of the gentlemen with whom I am associated, to read this part
of the answer. [Mr. Clark accordingly read the reply of Mr. Chase to
this charge.] We charge the respondent with a gross departure from the
forms, and a flagrant outrage upon the substance of criminal justice,
in delivering a written, prejudicated opinion on the case of Fries,
tending to bias the minds of the jury against him before counsel had been
heard in his defence. The respondent (page 33, of the answer) admits
the fact, for he knew that we are prepared to prove it. But he artfully
endeavors to shift the argument from the real point in contest, to the
soundness of the opinion itself, which, however questionable, (and of
its incorrectness I entertain no doubt,) it is not our object at this
time to examine. For the truth of this opinion and, as it would seem,
for the propriety of this proceeding, the respondent takes shelter under
precedent. He tells you, sir, this doctrine had been repeatedly decided
on solemn argument and deliberation, twice in the same court, and once
in that very case. What is this, but a confession, that he himself hath
been the first man to venture on so daring an innovation on the forms
of our criminal jurisprudence? To justify himself for having given a
written opinion _before_ counsel had been heard for the prisoner, he
resorts to the example set by his predecessors, who had delivered the
customary verbal opinion, after solemn arguments and deliberation. And
what do these repeated arguments and solemn deliberations prove, but
that none of his predecessors ever arrogated to themselves the monstrous
privilege of breaking in upon those sacred institutions, which guard
the life and liberty of the citizen from the rude inroads of powerful
injustice? The learned and eminent judges, to whose example he appeals,
for justification, decided _after_, and not _before_ a hearing. They
exercised the acknowledged privilege of the bench in giving an opinion
to the jury on the question of law, after it had been fully argued by
counsel on both sides. They never attempted, by previous and written
decisions, to wrest from the jury their undeniable right of deciding
upon the law as well as the fact, necessarily involved in a general
verdict, to usurp the decision to themselves, or to prejudice the minds
of the jurors against the defence. I beg this honorable Court never
to lose sight of the circumstance, that this was a _criminal_ trial,
for a _capital_ offence, and that the offence charged was _treason_.
The respondent also admits, that the counsel for Fries, not meaning to
contest the truth of the facts charged in the indictment, rested their
defence altogether upon the law, which he declared to have been settled
in the cases of Vigol and Mitchell: a decision which, although it might
be binding on the Court, the jury were not obliged to respect, and which
the counsel had a right to controvert before them, the sole judges, in
a case of that nature, both of the _law_ and _fact_. I do not deny the
right of the Court to explain their sense of the law to the jury, after
counsel have been heard; but I do deny that the jury are bound by such
exposition. If they verily believe that the overt acts charged in the
indictment did not amount to treason, they could not without a surrender
of their consciences into the hands of the Court, without a flagrant
violation of all that is dear and sacred to man, bring in a verdict of
guilty. I repeat that in such a case the jury are not only the sole
judges of the law, but that where their verdict is favorable to the
prisoner, they are the judges without appeal. In civil cases, indeed,
the verdict may be set aside and a new trial granted; but in a criminal
prosecution, the verdict, if not guilty, is final and conclusive. It is
only when the finding of the jury is unfavorable to the prisoner, that
the humane provisions of our law, always jealous of oppression when the
life or liberty of the citizen is at stake, permits the verdict to be set
aside, and a new trial granted to the unhappy culprit. When I concede
the right of the Court to explain the law to the jury in a criminal,
and especially in a capital case, I am penetrated with a conviction
that it ought to be done, if at all, with great caution and delicacy. I
must beg leave to take, before this honorable Court, what appears, to
my unlettered judgment, to be a strong and obvious distinction. There
is, in my mind, a material difference between a naked definition of
law, the application of which is left to the jury, and the application
by the Court of such definition to the particular case upon which the
jury are called upon to find a general verdict. Surely, there is a wide
and evident distinction between an abstract opinion upon a point of
law, and an opinion applied to the facts admitted by the party accused,
or proven against him. But it is alleged, on behalf of the respondent,
that the law in this case was settled, and upon this he rests his
defence. Will it be pretended by any man that the law of treason is
better established than the law of murder? What is treason, as defined
by the constitution? Levying war against the United States, or adhering
to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. What is murder? Killing
with malice aforethought, a definition at least as simple and plain as
the other. And because what constitutes murder has been established and
settled through a long succession of ages and adjudications, has any
judge, for that reason, been ever daring enough to assert that counsel
should be precluded from endeavoring to convince the jury that the overt
acts, charged in the indictment, did not amount to murder? Is a Court
authorized to say, that, because killing with a deliberate malice is
murder, therefore the act of killing, admitted by the prisoner’s counsel,
or established by evidence, was a killing with malice prepense, and did
constitute murder? I venture to say that an instance cannot be adduced,
familiar as the definition of murder is even to the most ignorant,
numerous as have been the convictions for that atrocious crime, where
counsel have been deprived of their unquestionable right to address
the jury on the law, as well as on the fact. Much less can an instance
be produced, in any trial for a capital offence, where they have found
themselves anticipated in the question of law by a written opinion, to be
taken by the jury out of court, as the landmark by which their verdict is
to be directed. I have always understood, that even in a civil case, when
the jury carried out with them a written paper, relating to the matter in
issue, and which was not offered, or permitted to be given in evidence
to them, it was sufficient to vitiate their verdict, and good ground for
a new trial. This written opinion of the Court, delivered previous to a
hearing of the cause, is a novelty to our laws and usages. It would be
reprehensible in any case, but in a criminal prosecution, for a capital
offence, and that offence treason, (where, above all, oppression and
arbitrary proceedings on the part of courts are most to be dreaded and
guarded against,) it cannot be too strongly reprobated or too severely
punished.

What would be said of a judge who in a trial for murder, where the facts
were admitted (or proved) should declare from the bench, that whatever
argument counsel had to offer, in relation to the facts, may be addressed
to the jury, but that they should not attempt to convince the jury that
such facts came not within the law, did not amount to murder, but that
every thing which they had to say upon the question of law, should
be addressed to the Court, and to the Court only. Can you figure to
yourselves a spectacle more horrible?

We are prepared to prove, what the respondent has in part admitted, that
he “restricted the counsel of Fries from citing such English authorities
as they believed apposite, and certain statutes of the United States
which they deemed material to their defence:” that the prisoner was
debarred by him from his constitutional privilege of addressing the jury,
through his counsel, on the law, as well as the fact involved in the
verdict which they were required to give, and that he attempted to wrest
from the jury their undeniable right to hear argument, and, consequently,
to determine upon the question of law which in a criminal case it was
their sole and unquestionable province to decide. These last charges
(except as far as relates to the laws of the United States) are impliedly
admitted by the respondent. He confesses that he would not admit the
prisoner’s counsel to cite certain cases, “because they could not inform
but might deceive and mislead the jury.” Mr. President, it is the noblest
trait in this inestimable trial, that in criminal prosecutions, where
the verdict is general, the jury are the sole judges, and, where they
acquit the prisoner, the judges, without appeal, both of law and fact.
And what is the declaration of the respondent but an admission that
he wished to take from the jury their indisputable privilege to hear
argument and determine upon the law, and to usurp to himself that power
which belongs to them, and to them only? It is one of the most glorious
attributes of jury trial, that in criminal cases (particularly such as
are capital) the prisoner’s counsel may (and they often do) attempt “to
deceive and mislead the jury.” It is essential to the fairness of the
trial, that it should be conducted with perfect freedom. It is congenial
to the generous spirit of our institutions to lean to the side of an
unhappy fellow-creature, put in jeopardy of limb, or life, or liberty.
The free principles of our Governments, individual and federal, teach
us to make every humane allowance in his favor, to grant him, with a
liberality unknown to the narrow and tyrannous maxims of most nations,
every indulgence not inconsistent with the due administration of justice.
Hence, a greater latitude is permitted to the prosecutor. The jury, upon
whose verdict the event is staked, are presumed to be men capable of
understanding what they are called upon to decide, and the Attorney for
the State a gentleman learned in his profession, capable of detecting and
exposing the attempts of the opposite counsel to mislead and deceive.
There is, moreover, the Court, to which, in cases of difficulty, recourse
might be had. But what, indeed, is the difficulty arising from the law
in criminal cases, for the most part? What is to hinder an honest jury
from deciding, especially after the aid of an able discussion, whether
such an act was killing with malice prepense, or such other overt acts
set forth in an indictment, constituted a levying war against the United
States; and to what purpose has treason been defined by the constitution
itself, if overbearing, arbitrary judges are permitted to establish among
us the odious and dangerous doctrine of constructive treason? The acts of
Congress which had been referred to on the former trial, but which the
respondent said he would not suffer to be cited again, tended to show
that the offence committed by Fries did not amount to treason; that it
was a misdemeanor only, already provided for by law, and punishable with
fine and imprisonment. The respondent indeed denies this part of the
charge, but he justifies it even (as he says) if it be proved upon him.
And are the laws of our own country (as well as foreign authorities) not
to be suffered to be read in our courts, in justification of a man whose
life is put in jeopardy?

I now proceed to the second article--the case of Basset, whose
objection to serve on Callender’s jury was overruled by the judge who
stands arraigned before this honorable Court. In the 30th page of the
respondent’s answer it is stated, that a new trial was granted to Fries,
“upon the ground (as this respondent understood and believes) that one
of the jurors, after he was summoned, but before he was sworn, had made
some declaration unfavorable to the prisoner.” It will be remembered that
both the trials of Fries preceded that of Callender. Upon what principle,
then, could the respondent declare Basset a good juryman, when he was
apprised of the previous decision in the case of Fries, by his brother
judge, whom he professes to hold in such high reverence, and by whose
decision, on his own principles, he must have held himself bound. For
surely the same exception to a juryman which would furnish ground for
a new trial, ought to be a cause of setting aside such juror, if it be
taken previous to his being sworn.

From the respondent’s own showing it appears, that the question put to
the jurymen generally, and to Basset among others, was, whether they “had
formed _and_ delivered any opinion upon the subject-matter then to be
tried, or concerning the charges contained in the indictment.” And here
let me refer the Court to the question which the respondent put to the
jurors in the case of Fries. It was, “whether they had ever formed _or_
delivered any opinion as to his guilt, or innocence, or that he ought to
be punished?” How is this departure from the respondent’s own practice,
this inconsistency with himself, to be reconciled? In the one case the
question is put in the disjunctive; “have you formed _or_ delivered?” In
the other, it is in the conjunctive, “formed _and_ delivered;” besides
other material difference in the terms and import of the two questions.
Wherefore, I repeat, this contradiction of himself? But, Mr. President,
we shall be prepared to prove that the words “_subject-matter then to be
tried_,” were not comprised in the question propounded to Basset, or to
any of the other jurors. The question was, as will be shown in evidence,
“have you ever formed _and_ delivered any opinion _concerning the charges
contained in the indictment_?” And it is remarkable that the whole
argument of the respondent upon this point goes to justify the question
which was _actually_ put, and which he probably expected we should
prove that he did put, rather than that which he himself declares to
have been propounded by him. Such a question must necessarily have been
answered in the negative. Basset could never have seen the indictment:
and although his mind might have been made up on the _book_, whatever
opinion he might have formed and delivered as to the guilt of Callender,
or however desirous he might have been of procuring his conviction and
punishment, still, not having seen the indictment, he could not divine
what passages of the book were made the subject of charges, and, by the
criterion established by the judge, he was a good juror. But if the
juror’s mind was thus prejudiced against the book and the writer, was he,
merely because he had not seen the indictment, competent to pass between
him and his country on the charges contained in it, and extracted out
of the book? And even if the question had been such as the respondent
states, yet being put in the conjunctive, the most inveterate foe of the
traverser who was artful, or cautious enough to forbear the expression of
his enmity, would thereby have been admitted as competent to pass between
the traverser and his country in a criminal prosecution.

The third article relates to the rejection of John Taylor’s testimony.
This fact also is admitted, and an attempt is made to justify it, on
the ground of its “_irrelevancy_” on the pretext that the witness
could not prove the whole of a particular charge. By recurring to “The
Prospect before Us,” a book, which, with all its celebrity, I never saw
till yesterday, I find this charge consists of two distinct sentences.
Taken separately the respondent asserts that they mean nothing; taken
together, a great deal. And because the respondent undertook to determine
(without any authority as far as I can learn) that Colonel Taylor could
not prove the whole, that is both sentences, he rejected his evidence
entirely, for “_irrelevancy_.” Might not his testimony have been relevant
to that of some other witness, on the same, or on another charge? I
appeal to the learning and good sense of this honorable Court, whether
it is not an unheard of practice (until the present instance) in a
criminal prosecution, to declare testimony inadmissible because it is not
expected to go to the entire exculpation of the prisoner? Does it not
daily occur in our courts, that a party accused, making out a part of
his defence by one witness and establishing other facts by the evidence
of other persons; does it not daily occur that the testimony of various
witnesses sometimes to the same, and sometimes to different facts, does
so _relieve_ and support the whole case, as to leave no doubt of the
innocence or guilt of the accused, in the minds of the jury, who, it must
never be forgotten, are, in such cases, the sole judges both of the law
and the fact? Suppose, for instance, that the testimony of two witnesses
would establish all the facts, but that each of those facts are not known
by either of them. According to this doctrine the evidence of both might
be declared inadmissible, and a man whose innocence, if the testimony in
his favor were not rejected, might be clearly proved to the satisfaction
of the jury, may thus be subjected by the verdict of that very jury to
an ignominious death. Shall principles so palpably cruel and unjust be
tolerated in this free country? I am free to declare that the decision of
Mr. Chase, in rejecting Colonel Taylor’s testimony, was contrary to the
known and established rules of evidence, and this I trust will be shown
by my learned associates, to the full satisfaction of this honorable
Court, if indeed they can require further satisfaction on a point so
clear and indisputable. But this honorable Court will be astonished when
they are told (and the declaration will be supported by undeniable proof)
that at this very time neither the traverser, his counsel, nor the Court,
knew the extent to which Colonel Taylor’s evidence would go. They were
apprised, indeed, that he would show that Mr. Adams was an aristocrat,
and that he had proved serviceable to the British interest, in the
sense conveyed by the book; but they little dreamed that his evidence,
if permitted to have been given in, would have thrown great light upon
many other of the charges. There is one ground of defence taken by the
respondent, which, I did suppose, a gentleman of his discernment would
have sedulously avoided: that although the traverser had justified
nineteen out of twenty of the charges contained in the indictment, if he
could not prove the truth of the twentieth, it was of little moment, as
he was, “thereby, put into the power of the Court.” Gracious God! sir,
what inference is to be drawn from this horrible insinuation?

In justification of the charges contained in the fourth article, the
respondent, unable to deny the fact, confesses that he did require “the
questions intended to be put to the witness to be reduced to writing,
and submitted to the Court,” in the first instance, as we shall prove,
and before they had been verbally propounded. And this requisition, he
contends, it was “the right and duty of the Court” to make. It would not
become me, elsewhere, or on any other occasion, to dispute the authority
of the respondent, on legal questions, but I do aver that such is _not_
the _law_, at least in the State in which that trial was held, nor do
I believe that it is law any where. I speak of the United States. Sir,
in the famous case of Logwood, whereat the Chief Justice of the United
States presided, I was present, being one of the grand jury who found a
true bill against him. It must be conceded that the Government was as
deeply interested in arresting the career of this dangerous and atrocious
criminal, who had aimed his blow against the property of every man in
society, as it could be in bringing to punishment a weak and worthless
scribbler. And yet, although much testimony was offered by the prisoner,
which did by no means go to his entire exculpation; although much of that
testimony was of a very questionable nature, none of it was declared
_inadmissible_; it was suffered to go to the jury, who were left to
judge of its weight and credibility; nor were any interrogatories to the
witnesses required to be reduced to writing. And I will go farther, and
say that it never has been done before or since Callender’s trial, in
any court of Virginia, and I believe I might add in the United States,
whether State or Federal. No, sir, the enlightened man who presided in
Logwood’s case knew that, although the basest and vilest of criminals,
he was entitled to _justice_, equally with the most honorable member of
society. He did not avail himself of the previous and great discoveries,
in criminal law, of this respondent; he admitted the prisoner’s testimony
to go to the jury; he never thought it _his right_ or _his duty_ to
require questions to be reduced to writing; he gave the accused a _fair
trial_, according to law and usage, without any innovation or departure
from the established rules of criminal jurisprudence in this country.

The respondent also acknowledges his refusal to postpone the trial
of Callender, although an affidavit was regularly filed, stating the
absence of material witnesses on his behalf; and here again the ground
of his defence is, in my estimation, good cause for his conviction. The
dispersed situation of the witnesses, which he alleges to have been the
motive of his refusal, is, to my mind, one of the most unanswerable
reasons for granting a postponement. The other three charges contained
in this article will be supported by unquestionable evidence: the rude
and contemptuous expressions of the judge to the prisoner’s counsel; his
repeated and vexatious interruptions of them; his indecent solicitude
and predetermined resolution to effect the conviction of the accused.
This predetermination we shall prove to have been expressed by him long
before, as well as on his journey to Richmond, and whilst the prosecution
was pending; besides the proofs which the trial itself afforded.

The fifth article is for the respondent’s having “awarded a capias
against the body of James Thompson Callender, indicted for an offence
not capital, whereupon the said Callender was arrested and committed to
close custody, contrary to law in such case made and provided:” that is,
contrary to the act of Assembly of Virginia, recognized (by the act of
Congress passed in 1789, for the establishment of the judicial courts
of the United States) as the rule of decision in the federal courts, to
be held in that State, until other provision be made. The defence of
the respondent embraces several points: That the act of Virginia was
passed posterior to the act of Congress, viz: in 1792, and could not be
intended by the latter to be a rule of decision. Fortunately, there is no
necessity to question, which we might well do, the truth of his position.
It may be necessary to inform some of the members of this honorable
Court, that, about twelve or thirteen years ago, the laws of Virginia
underwent a revision; all those relating to a particular subject being
condensed into one, and the whole code thereby rendered less cumbrous and
perplexed. Hence, many of our laws, to a casual and superficial observer,
would appear to take their date so late as the year 1792, although their
provisions were, long before, in force. The twenty-eighth section of this
very act, on which we rely, the Court will perceive to have been enacted
in 1788, one year _preceding_ the act of Congress. (Virg. laws, chap.
74, sec. 28, page 106, note b. Pleasants’ edition.) [Here Mr. Randolph
read the act referred to.] “Upon presentment made by a grand jury of an
offence not capital, the Court shall order the clerk to issue a summons,
or other proper process, against the person so presented, to appear and
answer such presentment at the next court,” &c. But the respondent,
aware, no doubt, of this fact, asserts that the act not being adduced,
he was not bound to know of its existence, and that he ought not to be
censured for the omissions of the traverser’s counsel, whose duty it was
to have cited it on behalf of their client; and this objection, with the
preceding ones, which I have endeavored to answer, will equally apply
to the sixth article. Sir, when the counsel for the traverser were told
by the judge at the outset, when they referred to a provision of this
very law, “that such may be your local State laws here in Virginia, but
that to suppose them as applying to the courts of the United States, is
a _wild notion_,” would it not, indeed, have been a _wild experiment_ in
them to cite the same law with a view of influencing the opinion of a
man, who had scornfully scouted the idea that he was to be governed by it?

Unwilling, however, to rest himself now on the ground which he then took,
the respondent justifies himself by declaring that he complied, although
ignorantly, with this law, by issuing that _other proper process_, of
which it speaks, that is, a capias. But that other process must be of the
nature of a summons, notifying the party to appear at the _next term_;
and will any man pretend to say, that a capias taking him into close
custody and obliging him to appear, not at the next, but at the existing
term, is such process as that law describes? Sir, not only the law, but
the uniform practice under it, as we are prepared to show by evidence,
declares the capias not to be the proper process. But it is said that
this would be nothing more than notice to the party accused to abscond,
and therefore _ought not_ to be law. Sir, we are not talking about what
ought to have been the law; that is no concern of ours; the question is,
what _was_ the law? But the impolicy of this mode of proceeding is far
from being ascertained. It is a relief to the innocent who may be in a
state of accusation. It saves the expense of imprisoning the guilty,
and if they should prefer voluntary exile to standing a trial, is it so
very clear that the State is thereby more injured than by holding them
to punishment, after which they would remain in her bosom to perpetrate
new offences? Remember, this proceeding is against petty offenders, not
felons. It does not apply to capital cases; to felonies, then capital,
for which our law has since commuted the punishment of death, into that
of imprisonment at hard labor.

For further defence against the sixth article, the respondent takes
shelter under this position: That the provision of the law of the United
States establishing the judicial courts relates only to rights acquired
under _State_ laws, which come into question on the trial, and not to
forms of process _before_ the trial, and can have no application to
offences created by statute, which cannot, with propriety, be termed
trials at “_common law_.” We are prepared to show that the words “trials
at common law,” are used in that statute, not in their most restricted
sense, but to contradistinguish a certain description of cases from those
arising in equity, or under maritime or civil law.

I will pass over the seventh article of impeachment, as well because I am
nearly exhausted, as being content to leave it on the ground where the
respondent himself has placed it. It would be impossible for us to put
it in a stronger light than has been thrown upon it by his own admission.

The eighth and last article remains to be considered--[article read.]
I ask this honorable Court whether the prostitution of the bench of
justice, to the purposes of an hustings, is to be tolerated? We have
nothing to do with the politics of the _man_. Let him speak, and write,
and publish, as he pleases. This is his right in common with his
fellow-citizens. The press is free. If he must electioneer and abuse
the government under which he lives, I know no law to prevent or punish
him, provided he seeks the wonted theatres for his exhibition. But shall
a judge declaim on these topics from his seat of office? Shall he not
put off the political partisan when he ascends the tribune? or shall we
have the pure stream of public justice polluted with the venom of party
virulence? In short, does it follow that a judge carries all the rights
of a private citizen with him upon the bench, and that he may there
do every act which, as a freeman, he may do elsewhere, without being
questioned for his conduct?

But, sir, we are told that this high Court is not a court of errors and
appeals, but a court of impeachment, and that however incorrectly the
respondent may have conducted himself, proof must be adduced of criminal
intent, of wilful error, to constitute guilt. The _quo animo_ is to be
inferred from the facts themselves; there is no other mode by which, in
any case, it can be determined, and even the respondent admits that there
are acts of a nature so flagrant that guilt must be inferred from them,
if the party be of sound mind. But this concession is qualified by the
monstrous pretension that an act to be impeachable must be indictable.
Where? In the federal courts? There, not even robbery and murder are
indictable, except in a few places under our exclusive jurisdiction. It
is not an indictable offence under the laws of the United States for
a judge to go on the bench in a state of intoxication--it may not be
in all the State courts; and it is indictable nowhere for him to omit
to do his duty, to refuse to hold a court. But who can doubt that both
are impeachable offences, and ought to subject the offender to removal
from office? But in this long and disgusting catalogue of crimes and
misdemeanors, (which he has in a great measure confessed,) the respondent
tells you he had accomplices, and that what was guilt in him could not
be innocence in them. I must beg the Court to consider the facts alleged
against the respondent in all their accumulated atrocity; not to take
them, each in an insulated point of view, but as a chain of evidence
indissolubly linked together, and establishing the indisputable proof of
his guilt. Call to mind his high standing and character, and his superior
age and rank, and then ask yourselves whether he stands justified in a
long course of oppression and injustice, because men of weak intellect
and yet feebler temper--men of far inferior standing to the respondent,
have tamely acquiesced in such acts of violence and outrage? He is
charged with various acts of injustice, with a series of misconduct so
connected in time, and place, and circumstance, as to leave no doubt, on
my mind at least, of intentional ill. Can this be justified, because his
several associates have at several times and occasions barely yielded
a faint compliance, which perhaps they dared not withhold? Can they
be considered as equally culpable with him whose accumulated crimes
are to be divided amongst them, who had given at best but a negative
sanction to them? But, sir, would the establishment of their guilt prove
his innocence? At most, it would only prove that they too ought to be
punished. Wherever we behold the respondent sitting in judgment, there
do we behold violence and injustice. Before _him_ the counsel are always
contumacious. The most accomplished advocates of the different States,
whose demeanor to his brethren is uniformly conciliating and temperate,
are to _him_, and him only, obstinate, perverse, rude, and irritating.
Contumacy has been found to exist only where he presided.

I have endeavored, Mr. President, in a manner, I am sensible, very lame
and inadequate, to discharge the duty incumbent on me; to enumerate the
principal points upon which we shall rely, and to repel some of the
prominent objections advanced by the respondent. Whilst we confidently
expect his conviction, it is from the strength of our cause, and not from
any art or skill in conducting it. It requires so little support that
(thank Heaven) it cannot be injured by any weakness of mine. We shall
bring forward, in proof, such a specimen of judicial tyranny, as, I trust
in God, will never be again exhibited in our country.

The respondent hath closed his defence by an appeal to the great Searcher
of Hearts for the purity of his motives. For his sake, I rejoice that,
by the timely exercise of that mercy which, for wise purposes, has
been reposed in the Executive, this appeal is not drowned by the blood
of an innocent man crying aloud for vengeance; that the mute agony of
widowed despair, and the wailing voice of the orphan, do not plead to
Heaven for justice on the oppressor’s head. But for that intervention,
self-accusation before that dread tribunal would have been needless. On
that awful day the blood of a poor, ignorant, friendless, unlettered
German, murdered under the semblance and color of law, sent without pity
to the scaffold, would have risen in judgment at the Throne of Grace,
against the unhappy man arraigned at your bar. But the President of the
United States by a well-timed act, at once of justice and mercy, (and
mercy, like charity, covereth a multitude of sins,) wrested the victim
from his grasp, and saved him from the countless horrors of remorse, by
not suffering the pure ermine of justice to be dyed in the innocent blood
of John Fries.

The Managers proceeded to the examination of witnesses in support of the
prosecution.


_William Lewis, affirmed._

Mr. Dallas, Mr. W. Ewing, and I were counsel for John Fries, at his
request, and I believe by the assignment of the Court, on his trial in
the year 1799. It was conducted, I believe, in the usual manner, and we
were certainly allowed all the privileges that were customary on such
occasions. The trial was had before Judges Iredell and Peters. He was
convicted, and a new trial was ordered, because one of the jurors had
manifested a prejudice against the people in general concerned in the
insurrection, and against Fries in particular. This trial took place
partly in April and partly in May, 1799. At October session following,
Mr. Dallas and I attended at Norristown, expecting the trial would again
take place; but it did not. The proceedings on the first indictment were
quashed by the District Attorney, and a new bill was found at April
term, 1800, at which Judges Chase and Peters presided. Mr. Dallas and I
appeared again as the counsel of Fries, at his request, and I believe we
were assigned by the Court, but of this I am not certain. On the morning
of a certain day, which I do not now recollect, I entered the court room
when the judges were on the bench, and, if I recollect rightly, the
prisoner was in the bar; but if he was not then there, I feel very sure
that he soon was. The list of petit jurors was called over, and many of
them answered.

Almost immediately after the jurors were called over, Judge Chase began
to speak. At this time Mr. Dallas had not come into court. Judge Chase
said, he understood, or had been informed, that on the former trial or
trials, for it was impossible for me to know whether he alluded to the
case of Fries only, or of him and others, there had been a great waste
of time in making long speeches on topics which had nothing to do with
the business, and in reading common law cases on treason, as well as on
treason under the statute of Edward the Third, and also certain statutes
of the United States, respecting the resisting of process, and other
offences less than treason. He also said, that to prevent this in future,
he or they, I do not precisely recollect which, had considered the law,
had made up their minds, and had reduced their opinion to writing on the
subject, and would not suffer these cases to be read again; and in order
that the counsel (but whether for the prisoner, or the counsel on both
sides, I cannot say) might govern themselves conformably, he had ordered
three copies of that opinion to be made out, one to be delivered to the
prisoner’s counsel, one to the counsel in support of the prosecution,
and the other, as soon as the case was fully opened, or gone through, I
cannot say which, to be delivered by the clerk of the court to the jury.
I rather think that the expression was, fully gone through.

Judge Chase said, I think on the first day, that they were judges of
the law, and if they did not understand it they were unworthy of their
seats, or unfit to sit there, and that if the prisoner’s counsel had
any thing to say, to show that they had mistaken the law, or that they
were wrong, the counsel must address themselves to the Court for that
purpose, and not to the jury. I made some observations in answer, which
it is impossible for me in all respects particularly to recollect, as
having passed at this time, since some parts of it may perhaps have taken
place in other stages of the business. At this time Mr. Dallas was not
in court. I was struck with what appeared to me to be a great novelty
in the proceedings; and as I was extremely anxious to be of service to
Fries, I was desirous that Mr. Dallas might be present. I think I went
out of the bar to get somebody to go for him, and while I was out of the
bar, he entered the room. I briefly stated to him what had taken place,
or some parts of it; but I believe, not the whole. We came forward, and
we made some remarks, which I am unable to repeat. I was early struck
with the idea, that as the Court had made up their minds, and decided the
question of law, before the jury was sworn, or the witnesses or counsel
heard, it was not likely we should alter that opinion by any thing we
might say, and that we should probably render Fries more service by
withdrawing from his defence, than by engaging in it. We told him so, and
earnestly recommended to him to pursue that course. He appeared greatly
alarmed and extremely agitated, and much at a loss what determination
to come to. We, however, told him that, if he insisted on it, we would
proceed in his defence at every hazard, and contend for what we deemed
our constitutional rights as his counsel, until stopped by the Court; or
we used expressions to this effect. His state of alarm and apprehension
scarcely left him the power to decide for himself. After some time he
acquiesced in our advice; said he had nobody to depend on but us; that
he was sure we would do our best for him, and he would leave us to do
for him as we pleased. Being very anxious for him, we told him we would
call upon him at the jail, and satisfy his mind as to the course which we
wished him to pursue. He finally agreed to our proposal to withdraw; but
as we were apprehensive that the Court might assign him other counsel in
our place, and that our views might be defeated by such an arrangement,
we advised him against accepting any, and I understood that he afterwards
did refuse to accept of any other counsel. I will not assign my reasons
for giving this advice, as it might, perhaps, be improper, unless I am
directed by the Court.

Mr. Martin asked what those reasons were?

The President desired the examination to proceed on the part of the House
of Representatives, and said when that was closed, the witness might be
examined by the counsel for Judge Chase.

Mr. Lewis. It being thus determined that we should withdraw, and that
Fries should not accept any counsel that might be assigned him, I left
the court, expecting to have little or nothing more to say, as we were
no longer counsel for the prisoner. The next morning, soon after the
court was opened, and, I believe, when the prisoner was in the bar,
Judge Chase addressed Mr. Dallas and myself, and probably Mr. Rawle, and
asked us if we were ready to proceed? I answered that I was not, or that
we were not any longer counsel for the prisoner. He asked our reasons
for this; and I began to answer by mentioning what had taken place the
day before; on which he and Judge Peters certainly manifested a strong
disposition that we should proceed in the prisoner’s defence, and that
they would remove every restriction which had been previously imposed. I
was stopped in what I was about to say by Judge Chase telling us to go
on in our own way, and address the jury on the law as well as the facts,
as we thought proper; but, at the same time, he said it would be under
the direction of the Court; and at our own peril, or the risk of our
characters, if we conducted ourselves with impropriety. This had rather a
contrary effect on my mind than that of inducing me to proceed, as I did
not know that there had been any thing in my conduct so indecorous as to
make it necessary to remind me that, if I proceeded, it should be at my
own peril and risk of character; and this expression, therefore, rather
strengthened than lessened the determination which I had taken.

Finding that Mr. Dallas and I were determined not to proceed in the
prisoner’s defence, Judge Chase said, if we intended to embarrass the
Court we should find ourselves mistaken, as they would proceed without
us, and, by the blessing of God, render the prisoner as much justice
as if he had the aid of our counsel or assistance. Both the judges,
therefore, on the second day, even took pains to induce us to proceed in
the defence, with liberty to go through the whole question as well in
relation to the law as the facts; but we absolutely refused, believing
it not likely that any arguments we could urge would change the opinion
of the Court already formed, or destroy its effects, and also believing
that, after what had taken place, the life of Fries, even if he should
be convicted, would be exposed to less jeopardy without our aid than it
would be if we should engage in his defence.


_Alexander J. Dallas, sworn._

Mr. Dallas. I will endeavor to be correct in the statement which it is my
duty to give; and I am sure that I shall be substantially so, though I
cannot promise to place the facts precisely in the order of time in which
they occurred; nor to recite the very words that were used by the several
parties in the course of the transaction.

When the northern rioters were brought to Philadelphia, in the spring
of 1799, some of their friends applied to Mr. Ingersoll and to me to
undertake their defence. Mr. Ingersoll was then Attorney-General of
Pennsylvania; and on consideration, I believe, declined the task. Mr.
Lewis, either before or after this application, was also requested to
act as counsel for the prisoners; and upon his acquiescence, we repaired
to the prison to make the necessary arrangements preparatory to a trial.
Mr. William Ewing had been engaged by several of the rioters, and we
agreed to unite in the defence, as the same general facts in law applied
to all the cases.

In April term, 1799, the first trial of Fries took place. It was
conducted with great propriety throughout, by the Court, and by the
prosecuting officer; and the counsel of the prisoner were permitted to
address the jury at large, on the law and the facts, as well as to cite
every authority which they thought proper. Fries was convicted; but on
a motion made by Mr. Lewis and me, the verdict was set aside, and a new
trial awarded.

The second trial of Fries, upon a new indictment (the first having been
discontinued by Mr. Rawle) occurred in May, 1800. Mr. Lewis and I had
again, at his request, been assigned by the Court to defend him. On the
morning fixed for the trial, I entered the court room some time after
the court had been opened. Fries was standing in the prisoner’s box, the
jurors of the general panel appeared to be in the jury boxes, and the
hall was crowded with citizens. On my entrance, I perceived Mr. Lewis
and Mr. E. Tilghman engaged eagerly in conversation, and the gentlemen
of the bar, generally, seemed to be much agitated. As soon as Mr. Lewis
saw me, he hastened towards me on the outside of the bar, and told me, in
effect, that a “very extraordinary incident had occurred; that Mr. Chase,
after speaking in terms of great disapprobation of the defence at the
former trial, declared that the Court, on mature deliberation, had formed
and reduced to writing, an opinion on the law of treason involved in the
case; and that he should direct one copy to be delivered to the attorney
of the district, another to the prisoner’s counsel, and a third (after
the opening for the prosecution) to the jury, to take out with them.”

Here Mr. Harper rose, and said: Mr. President, surely it is improper that
the witness should repeat what Mr. Lewis told him, not in court, nor when
the judge was present.

Mr. Dallas, turning to Mr. Harper, said: “Sir, I know the rules of
evidence, and I mean to conform to them.” Then turning to the Vice
President, he continued, “If, Mr. President, the counsel’s patience had
lasted for a minute, he would have heard that I repeated Mr. Lewis’s
communication to the Court, and that it was not contradicted. What I have
said was necessary to introduce that fact; and surely, it is strictly
within the rules of evidence.”

Mr. Lewis and I exchanged an opinion on the impropriety of the conduct
of the Court; we determined (as I thought, when first recurring to
my memory for the facts, and as I still think, though I wish not to
speak positively) to withdraw from the defence; and we entered the bar
together. When there, something occurred which called the attention
on our part, and Mr. Lewis informed the Court, in effect “that there
was little dispute about the facts in the cause, and that as the Court
had deliberately prejudged the law, he could not hope to change their
opinion, nor to serve his client; while a submission to such a proceeding
would be degrading to the profession.” It was then, I think, that I
stated to the Court, the information which I had received from Mr. Lewis,
(but certainly it was either then, or, as it has been suggested to me
by a respectable gentleman of the bar, at the opening of the court on
the next day,) and I paused, to give an opportunity for contradiction or
explanation; for, although I had no doubt of Mr. Lewis’s intention to
deliver a correct representation of what had passed, it was possible,
and I might myself have mistaken the import of his communication. I
cannot now state all that Mr. Lewis told me, but I am confident that I
then repeated it all to the Court. No remark being made in consequence
of the pause, I proceeded to state a few comparative observations on the
province and rights of the judge, and the province and rights of the
advocate; and concluded with declining to act any longer as counsel for
the prisoner. The Court was soon afterwards adjourned. These are all
the material occurrences of the first day, which I recollect; except,
perhaps, that soon after I came into court, I heard Mr. Peters remark to
Mr. Chase, “I told you what would be the consequence. I knew they would
take the stud.”

On the next day, the court was opened, Fries was placed in the prisoner’s
box, the jury attended, and the number of spectators was increased.
Silence being proclaimed, Mr. Chase asked, “if the prisoner’s counsel
were ready to proceed on the trial?” and Mr. Lewis and I, successively,
declared, that we no longer considered ourselves as the counsel of Fries.
Mr. Peters then, as well as at other times, expressed a great desire that
we should overlook what had passed; he told us that the papers delivered
the day before had been withdrawn, and that he did not care what range we
took, either on the law, or the fact. Mr. Chase also said: “The papers
are withdrawn, and you may take what course in the defence you please;
but it is at the hazard of your characters.” I thought the expression was
in the nature of a menace; that it was unkind, improper, and unnecessary.
Mr. Lewis observed, in effect: “You have withdrawn the papers; but can
you eradicate from your own minds the opinion which you have formed, or
the effect of your declaration on the attending jurors, a part of whom
must try the prisoner?” Mr. Chase said: “If you think to embarrass the
Court, you will find yourselves mistaken.” He then asked Fries if he
chose to have other counsel assigned? Fries answered, that he did not
know how to act, but that he thought he would leave it to the Court and
the jury. On which, Judge Chase exclaimed, “Then we will be your counsel;
and, by the blessing of God, do you as much justice as those who were
assigned to you.” Mr. Lewis and I had visited Fries in prison during the
preceding afternoon; we had told him our determination to withdraw from
his defence, unless he and his friends wished us to resume it; and we
declared it to be, in our view of the case, his best chance to escape,
as we could entertain no hope of changing the opinion of the Court. He
finally left the matter to us; and I think Mr. Lewis in my hearing, with
my concurrence, advised him not to accept other counsel, if the Court
should offer to assign them. The rest of the facts, as stated by Mr.
Lewis, correspond so precisely with my recollection, that I presume,
after this recognition, it is unnecessary to repeat them. I wish it,
however, to be properly understood that, on the second day, both the
judges were extremely anxious to prevail on us to proceed in the defence;
and, as I understood, withdrew all the restrictions of the preceding
day. We persisted, however, in our determination; because, after what
had happened, we deemed it the best chance to save our client’s life,
and not because we wished, as has been insinuated, to bring the Court
into disgrace or odium. Fries was accordingly tried and convicted without
counsel.

On this course of argument, we could not ascertain the opinion of the
Court, nor how far the case of the Western insurrection would be deemed
to apply, till the charge was pronounced. But, after hearing the charge,
and after a new trial was granted, I confess the whole force of my mind
was bent to show, on the new trial, the strong distinction between the
cases of 1794 and those of 1799; and that even in England, there was no
authority since the Revolution of 1688, for construing the offence of
Fries to be treason, unconnected with the obligation of the judges to
conform to the previous adjudications.

The President. Both you and Mr. Lewis have stated that the jury were
present when the written opinions of the Court were handed to the clerk:
Could they hear what passed on the occasion?

Mr. Dallas. Undoubtedly, sir. I do not mean, however, the jury who tried
Fries, but the general panel of jurors, from whom Fries’s jury might have
been taken.

The Court rose about four o’clock.


MONDAY, February 11.

The Court was opened at 12 o’clock.

_Henry Tilghman, sworn._

I was present at the circuit court of the United States, for the district
of Pennsylvania, held on the 22d day of April, 1800. A very short time
after the opening of the court, (whether the general panel of jurors
had been called over or not, I do not recollect,) Judge Chase declared
that the Court had maturely considered the law arising on the overt
acts charged in the indictment against John Fries; and that they had
reduced their opinion to writing; he mentioned that he understood that
a great deal of time had been consumed on a former trial, and that in
order to save time, a copy of the opinion of the Court would be given to
the attorney of the district; another to the counsel for the prisoner,
and that the jury should have a third to take out with them. I took no
notes of what passed either on the first or second day. Fries was tried
on the third day, and having been appointed, with Mr. Levy, counsel for
Heany and Getman, indicted for treason, and who were actually tried on
the 27th or 28th, I deemed it my duty to attend the trial of Fries, to
take notes of the evidence, the arguments, and the charge of the judge.
I do not recollect that Judge Chase said any more on the first day than
what I have mentioned previous to his throwing a paper or papers on the
table round which the bar usually sit. The moment the paper or papers
were thrown on the table, Judge Chase expressed himself in these words:
“Nevertheless, or notwithstanding this,” (I cannot recollect which
expression he used) “counsel will be heard.” The throwing of the papers
on the table and the address of the judge caused some degree of agitation
at the bar; in a short time after the judge used the last expression, I
looked round and saw Mr. Lewis walking from under the gallery towards
the bar: I stepped towards Mr. Lewis, and met him directly opposite
the entrance into the prisoner’s bar. The prisoner, as well as I can
recollect, not being then in court, but being brought into court some
time that morning, I entered into conversation with Mr. Lewis, and as
well as I can recollect, during that conversation, Mr. Dallas came into
court. Mr. Dallas and Mr. Lewis had some conversation in my hearing,
after which they came forward to the bar; the paper, as well as I can
recollect, was then handed by Mr. Caldwell, the clerk of the court, to
Mr. Lewis. Mr. Lewis cast his eye on the outside of the paper, and looked
down, as if he was considering what to say. He threw the paper from him,
as it appeared to me, without reading it, and the moment he threw the
paper down, said, “My hand shall never be stained by receiving a paper
containing a prejudged opinion, or an opinion made up without hearing
counsel.” I cannot recollect which was the expression, but this was the
substance. I have not the least recollection that any thing passed on
the third day, between the counsel for the prisoner and the Court; for
when Mr. Lewis used these expressions, his face was not turned to the
Court, and he spoke with a considerable degree of warmth; the Court sat
in the south part of the room, and Mr. Lewis (I think) turned his face
full to the westward, when he used these expressions. The paper lay on
the table a considerable time; after which some gentlemen of the bar
took it up, and I for one copied it. Whether I took the whole of it,
and all the authorities cited, I cannot say. The prisoner having been
brought into court, his counsel had a good deal of conversation in my
hearing on the subject of supporting or abandoning his defence; that
conversation appears to me to have been accurately stated by Mr. Lewis
and Mr. Dallas. I do not recollect why the prisoner was not put on his
trial that day, but the Court adjourned between 12 and 1 o’clock. I went
home, and after taking a walk, on returning, I saw the district attorney
on my steps. He asked me whether I would have any objection to delivering
up the copy which I had taken of the opinion of the Court. I said I had
no objection, and gave it to him. That paper was not read on the first,
or any other day by the Court, or any thing stated by the Court, as the
substance of it. On the next morning, to wit, the 23d, the prisoner was
brought into court. The Court asked the prisoner’s counsel if they were
ready to proceed to the trial. Mr. Lewis rose and uttered a few words,
in order to show that they did not mean to proceed with it. Judge Chase
here interrupted Mr. Lewis--the particular expressions of the judge I do
not recollect; the substance of them was, that the counsel were not to
consider themselves bound by the opinion which the Court had reduced to
writing the day before; that the counsel were at liberty on both sides
to combat that opinion. Judge Chase, as well as Judge Peters, appeared
to be very anxious that the counsel should undertake the defence of the
prisoner. Judge Chase said, the cases at common law before the statute
of Edward the Third, ought not to be read to the Court: he mentioned the
case of a man whose stag the king had killed, and who said he wished the
stag’s horns were in the king’s belly; he also mentioned the man who kept
a public house, with the sign of a crown, and said he would make his son
heir to the Crown. He said such cases as these must not, shall not be
cited; and I think he made use of these expressions: “What! cases from
Rome, Turkey and France?” That, the counsel should go into the law, but
must not cite cases that were not law.

He said that he had an opinion in point of law as to every case that
could be brought before the Court, or else he was not fit to sit there.
He said something (but the precise words I do not pretend to recollect)
as to the counsel proceeding according to their consciences; he said that
the gentlemen would proceed at the hazard of their character, and when it
appeared pretty plain that the gentlemen would not proceed in defence of
the prisoner, he said, You may think to put the Court to difficulties;
but if you do, you miss your aim, or words in substance to that effect.
Judge Peters addressed the counsel, and said if an error has been
committed, why may it not be redressed? the paper has been withdrawn--and
I think both the judges concurred in expressing the sentiment that
matters were to be considered as if the paper had never been thrown on
the table. When Judge Peters mentioned that the paper had been withdrawn,
Mr. Lewis answered, The paper, it is true, is withdrawn, but how can the
Court erase from their minds an opinion formed without hearing counsel.
A good deal more passed which I do not recollect, having taken no notes.
Mr. Dallas addressed the Court, but I have no recollection of what he
said. The counsel continued firm in their determination to abandon the
prisoner: the Court took great pains to induce them to act as counsel for
the prisoner, and before Fries was remanded to jail, expressed their hope
that the counsel would think better of it, and appear in his defence. I
recollect nothing more of what happened on the second day. Should any
questions be put to me, they may awaken a recollection of what does not
now occur to me.

On the third day when the prisoner was brought to the bar, he was
asked if he had any counsel, (I think, on the second day, the Court
had mentioned to him that he might have other counsel,) he said no, he
would depend on the Court to be his counsel. Judge Chase said, The Court
will be your counsel, and by the blessing of God, will serve you as
effectually as your counsel could have done. The trial proceeded, and
after the testimony was given and a short statement of the case made by
the district attorney, the judge charged the jury; he told them they
were judges of the law as well as the fact. He stated to them that cases
determined in England, before their Revolution, should not be received by
the Court. I have my notes of the charge; he stated the law very much in
the manner as it was stated by Judge Patterson in the trial of Mitchell,
for whom I was counsel. I cannot undertake to recollect any thing farther
than I have already stated.


_William Rawle, affirmed._

The circuit court of the United States sat in Philadelphia in April,
1800. As the former proceedings in relation to the prisoners indicted
for treason were considered at an end, except from the intervention of
an act of Congress, it appeared to me most regular to quash all the
previous proceedings. I made a motion to this effect, which was granted.
On the same day the Court charged the grand jury, and I sent to them
bills against John Fries, and other persons charged with treason and
other offences. The bill against John Fries was returned on the 16th a
true bill, and he was immediately brought up, arraigned, and pleaded not
guilty. Messrs. Lewis and Dallas appeared as counsel for Fries. Copies
of the indictment, and lists of the jurors and witnesses, were furnished
to Fries as directed by law. The bringing on the trial was postponed
on account of the absence of George Mitchell, whom I deemed to be a
material witness. According to my best recollection it was not intended
that John Fries should be tried on the 22d, the first day alluded to. I
cannot say that John Fries was then at the bar. That circumstance does
not appear on the minutes of the clerk of the court. It was certainly not
my intention that he should have been brought up, but he may possibly
have been brought through mistake. Shortly after the Court met, Judge
Chase observed, that, as much time had been lost on the former trial or
trials, the Court had determined to express their opinion in writing,
on the point of law, that they might not be misunderstood; that they
had therefore committed that opinion to writing, and that the clerk
had made copies of it, one of which should be given to the district
attorney, one to the counsel for the prisoner, and one the jury should
take out with them: as these words were pronounced, several papers (I
think three) were handed down, or thrown down, as it were; my back was
to the Court, and whether this was done by Judge Chase or the clerk, I
know not. I immediately took up the one intended for me and began to
read it, but casting my eyes to the opposite side of the table, I saw
Mr. Lewis with another copy before him, looking at it, apparently, with
great indignation, and then throwing it on the table. I am pretty clear
nothing passed between the Court and the counsel in the course of that
morning. I observed much agitation among the gentlemen of the bar, who
were conversing with each other with apparent warmth; but having at that
time a very great burden of criminal prosecutions on me, my attention
was much engaged, and I did not hear distinctly what was said, nor did I
know, until the Court rose, that there was a probability of the counsel
for John Fries declining to act. I think that twenty-one persons were
that day brought before the Court charged with seditious combinations,
and who submitted to the Court. The Court rose pretty early in the
morning, and intimated that I should not call any witnesses in relation
to the submissions until the trials for treason were over. When the Court
rose I learnt from several gentlemen, that Mr. Lewis and Mr. Dallas were
disgusted with the conduct of the Court, and meant to decline acting as
counsel for Fries, and I have an indistinct recollection that I heard
something of this kind drop from Mr. Dallas himself. I went home, and had
been there but a few minutes, when Judge Chase and Judge Peters came in.
We went into another room, and Judge Peters began by expressing a good
deal of uneasiness, from an apprehension that the gentlemen assigned as
counsel for John Pries would not go on. Judge Chase said he could not
suppose that that would be the consequence. I supported the idea which
Judge Peters had expressed; I told him the gentlemen of the Philadelphia
bar were men of much independence and character, and that unless those
papers were withdrawn, and the business conducted as usual at our bar,
they probably would desist from conducting the defence. My recollection
at this distance of time cannot be very distinct, but I am pretty well
satisfied that Judge Chase expressed his regret that the conduct of the
Court should be so taken, and said, that he did not mean that any thing
which he had done should preclude the counsel from making a defence in
the usual manner. Judge Peters asked if I would consent to go out, and
undertake to recover the papers; I said I had no objection, and both the
judges concurred in requesting me to do so. I recollected seeing Mr.
Edward Tilghman and Mr. Thomas Ross engaged in making copies. I did not
recollect to have seen any others so engaged. I went to their houses and
asked for the copies, which were readily given, and took them to Mr.
Caldwell, clerk of the court. I asked him if he had noticed any others to
have been taken? He said he thought a copy had been taken by Mr. William
Meredith. I desired him to go to him and endeavor to recall it. I did
not know that Mr. Biddle, who was then a student in my office, had taken
a copy in part, or I should have desired him to give it up. From some
circumstances which I do not recollect, I find that I did not hand my own
copy to Mr. Caldwell. I now have it in my possession. The paper was not
read, I think, by any but those who transcribed it, and I entertained
an anxious hope, after what had taken place, that the gentlemen would
proceed with the defence of the prisoner. I shall now take the liberty of
referring to some original notes made by me at the time--from which I can
state what passed the following morning. So far as they go I believe them
accurate, though they may not enable me to relate all that was said. On
the 23d April, John Fries was brought and put to the bar, Messrs. Lewis
and Dallas attending. The Court asked if we were ready to proceed. Mr.
Lewis rose and said: If employed by the prisoner, I should think myself
bound to proceed, but being assigned--he was here interrupted by Judge
Chase, who said, “You are not bound by the opinion delivered yesterday,
you may contest it on both sides.” Mr. Lewis answered: I understood that
the Court had made up their minds, and as the prisoner’s counsel have a
right to make a full defence, and address the jury both on the law and
the fact, it would place me in too degrading a situation, and therefore I
will not proceed. Judge Chase answered with apparent impatience: “You are
at liberty to proceed as you think proper, and address the jury, and lay
down the law as you think proper.” Mr. Lewis answered, with considerable
emphasis, I will never address the court in a criminal case on a question
of law. He then took a pretty extensive view on the propriety of going
into cases decided before the Revolution, and said, if he was precluded
from showing that the judges since the Revolution in England had
considered themselves bound by the decisions before the Revolution, which
ought not to be the doctrine in this country, he must decline acting as
counsel for the prisoner. Judge Chase answered: “Sir, you must do as
you please.” Mr. Dallas then addressed the Court. He contended that the
rights of advocates had been encroached upon by the proceedings of the
day before. He went into a general view of the ground taken by Mr. Lewis,
and concluded with his determination not to proceed as counsel for John
Fries.

Judge Chase then observed, No opinion has been given as to facts in this
case. I would not let the witnesses be examined in the combination cases,
because I would not let the jury hear them before the trial of Fries came
on. As to the law, I knew that the trial before had taken nine days;
that many common law cases were cited, such as wishing a stag’s horns in
the King’s belly, and that of a man’s saying he would make his son heir
to the Crown; such cases ought not, shall not go to the jury. No case
can come before me on which I have not a decided opinion as to the law,
otherwise I should not be fit to preside here. I have always conducted
myself with candor, and I meant, gentlemen, to save you trouble. It is
not respectful, nor is it the duty of counsel, to say they have a right
to offer any thing they please. What! decisions in Rome, France, Turkey?
No lawyer will say that common law cases are law under the statute of
Edward the Third, nor justify those judges who overset the statute of
William, and overrule the necessity of having two witnesses to one overt
act, and to admit hearsay testimony to prove matters of fact. It is the
duty of counsel to lay down the law, but not to read cases that are not
law. Having thus explained the meaning of the Court, you will stand
acquitted or condemned to your own consciences, as you think proper to
act. But, gentlemen, do as you please. The course will be, the district
attorney will open the law, state his case, and produce his witnesses.
You are at liberty to controvert the law as to the matter, but the manner
must be regulated by the Court. Judge Peters said, You are to consider
every thing done yesterday as withdrawn. Mr. Lewis replied, True, sir,
the papers are withdrawn, but the sentiments still remain; I shall not
therefore act.

Mr. Dallas expressed the same determination, which I did not take down.

A pause for a few moments took place, when Judge Chase said, You cannot
put the Court into a difficulty by this conduct, gentlemen; you do not
know me if you think so; and, desiring the persons between him and the
prisoner to stand aside, and addressing himself to John Fries, he asked,
Are you desirous of having other counsel assigned you, or will you go on
to trial without? John Fries, after a pause, said he did not know what
to do; he would leave it to the Court. Under these circumstances I felt
a repugnance to go on with the trial, not wishing to act in a case so
extremely singular. I therefore moved to postpone the trial to the next
day; the Court readily concurred, and Fries was remanded to jail.

On the 24th, Fries was brought to the bar again. Judge Chase asked him
if he had any counsel. He told the Court that he relied on them as his
counsel, and he expressed himself with a degree of firmness and composure
that convinced me that his decision was formed on mature reflection.
Then, Judge Chase answered, By the blessing of God we will be your
counsel, and do you as much justice as those assigned you.


_George Hay, sworn._

The greater part of the evidence I am to deliver relates to what was
said by me as counsel for J. T. Callender, who was indicted for a libel
on the President of the United States, and what was said by _one_ of the
judges; for I do not recollect to have heard the voice of Judge Griffin
at any time during the trial. In order to make this statement as accurate
as possible, as my memory is not strong, it is necessary to resort to
a statement made by myself and the counsel associated with me in the
defence of J. T. Callender, which I now hold in my hand, and every part
of which, according to my best recollection, is correct.

Mr. Harper here interrupted Mr. Hay, and said, The witness may refer to
any thing done by himself at the time the occurrences happened which he
relates. But I submit it to the Court how correct it is to refer to what
was not done by him, or done at the time.

The President asked Mr. Hay whether the notes were taken by him.

Mr. Hay. The statement was made by different persons. Some parts were
made by myself, perhaps the greater part; the rest by Mr. Nicholas and
Mr. Wirt. I believe I shall be able to state from it every material
occurrence which took place at the time.

President. Have you the parts made by yourself separate?

Mr. Hay said he had not.

The President then put the question, whether the witness should be
permitted to use the paper? and, the question being taken by yeas and
nays, passed in the negative--yeas 16, nays 18.

Mr. Randolph asked the witness to state to the Court the circumstances
which took place during the trial of James T. Callender, and particularly
what respected the excuse and testimony of John Basset.

Mr. Hay. I will state as well as I can what fell from the judge, and
which appeared to me to be material. After some previous observations,
the counsel for the traverser claimed for their client his constitutional
right to be tried by an impartial jury. I cannot pretend to relate
precisely either the course of proceeding or the exact words which
were used, since I am deprived of the aid of those notes which I know
to be correct. I shall not, therefore, recite the precise words, but I
shall give the substance of them, and the words themselves as nearly as
possible. According to my best recollection, Judge Chase’s declaration on
that point was, that he would see justice done to the prisoner in that
respect. In order to obtain the object which the counsel for Callender
had in view, we pursued this course. Believing that a majority of the
petit jury, if not all of them, were men decidedly opposed to J. T.
Callender, in political sentiments, and thinking it probable, from the
state of parties at that time, that they had made up their minds, we
wished to ask every juror, before he was sworn, whether he had ever
formed an opinion with respect to the book called “The Prospect before
Us.” According to my best recollection, Judge Chase interfered, and told
us it was not the proper question. He said he would tell us what the
proper question was. He then went on to state that the proper question
was this: “Have you ever formed and delivered an opinion concerning the
charges in this indictment?” Though I have but little dependence on my
memory, in general, yet in this I am certain, that I not only give the
substance, but the identical words used. To this question an answer was
necessarily given in the negative.

When Mr. Basset was called by the marshal, he manifested some repugnance
to serving on the jury. He said, according to my best recollection, that
he was unwilling to serve, because he had made up his mind as to that
book. I do not pretend to say that the words used were precisely those I
state. He may have expressed himself in the words ascribed to him by the
stenographical statement given of the trial. The objection, thus made
by Mr. Basset, was overruled by Judge Chase, who asked him whether he
had ever formed and delivered an opinion concerning the charges in the
indictment. He was sworn to answer this question. Like the other jurors,
he answered in the negative, and the judge ordered him, like the other
jurors, to be sworn on the jury. He was sworn, and did serve.

Mr. Harper. Was the word used by the judge, _and_ or _or_?

Mr. Hay. I am perfectly clear it was _and_, and not _or_.

In the state of things at that time, and seeing the temper that was
manifested on the trial, I would not, and did not, ask the juror a
single question without submitting it to the Court, and soliciting
their permission to ask it. I solicited the leave of the Court to ask a
question. The reply of the judge was this--the difficulty I experience
at this moment in stating the precise words, furnishes the reason I had
for wishing to have recourse to the statement I had in my hand; since I
am denied that indulgence, I will not pretend to state literally what
was said, but I will state the substance. I told the judge I wished
to ask a question. “What,” said the judge, “is the question you want
to put?--state it. If I think it a proper question, or if I choose
it, you may put it. Come, what is your question?” Notwithstanding the
humiliation I felt at being addressed in such a way before a crowded
audience, I asked, “Have you formed (leaving out, “and delivered”) an
opinion concerning the book from which the charges in the indictment are
taken?” The reply of Judge Chase was, “no, sir, No, you shall ask no
such question.” And the question was not asked. This is all I recollect
at this moment respecting Mr. Basset, and the occurrences connected with
that part of the trial.

It was stated by Callender, in his affidavit, that Colonel Taylor, of
Caroline, was a material witness; but of this I am not certain, because
I have not read the affidavit since the trial. In the interval that
elapsed between the day on which the first motion was made, and that
on which the trial took place, Tuesday, Colonel Taylor was summoned.
When he came to town, I know not. I have no recollection of having
seen him until he came into court. I had, therefore, no opportunity of
ascertaining whether it would be in his power to furnish the accused
with the evidence he expected to derive from him. After the witnesses
on the part of the United States had been adduced to prove the fact of
publication, and after the attorney of the United States had opened
the case, and stated the law arising upon the evidence, Colonel Taylor
was offered to the Court as a witness. He was sworn; and, immediately
after, or probably while he was swearing, Mr. Chase asked the counsel of
Callender what they expected to prove by him. If I recollect rightly,
Mr. Nicholas, one of my associates, observed that we did not know
distinctly what could be proved by Colonel Taylor; but that we expected
to prove what would amount to a justification of one of the counts in the
indictment; that we expected to prove that Mr. Adams, the then President
of the United States, had avowed, in conversation with Colonel Taylor,
sentiments hostile to a republican Government; and that he had voted in
the Senate of the United States against the law for sequestering British
property in this country, and against the law for suspending commercial
intercourse between the United States and the Kingdom of Great Britain.
I do not recollect precisely the words which were used by Mr. Nicholas,
in making the observations that accompanied this statement; but I think
he said he hoped that it would be understood that he was not tied down
to these particular points, saying that probably the answers given by
Colonel Taylor might suggest other questions proper to be put. Nor do
I use the precise words in which Judge Chase made an objection; but I
do remember that the objection was made. The principle upon which he
founded his objection was this, that Colonel Taylor’s evidence did not
go to a justification of any one entire charge; and he declared Colonel
Taylor’s evidence to be inadmissible on that ground. The judge was then
asked by Mr. Nicholas whether we might not prove part of a charge by one
witness, and the other part by another. The judge answered him, that he
desired him to understand the law as he had propounded it; and the law
was this: that this could not be done; that Colonel Taylor’s evidence
related to only one part of a charge, and that he could not prove one
part by one evidence, and one part by another. I then observed to the
judge that I thought Colonel Taylor’s evidence admissible even on the
principle laid down by the Court; that I thought his testimony would go
to prove both members of the sentence. The one asserted that Mr. Adams
was an aristocrat, the other, that he had proved faithful and serviceable
to the British interest; and that he could prove that he had heard Mr.
Adams make the remarks already stated; and that he had proved serviceable
to Great Britain in the way mentioned by the author, that is, in giving
the two votes in the Senate, alluded to in the work. The judge did not
say in express terms that the position taken at the bar was wrong, but
he said that the evidence of Colonel Taylor was inadmissible, and that
the counsel knew it to be so; and I believe it was at the same moment of
time he said that our object was to deceive and mislead the populace.
I remember these expressions as well as if I had heard them yesterday.
Finding that the attempt I had made to render a service, not to the man,
but to the cause, instead of affording service to the cause, only brought
on me the obloquy of the Court, I felt myself disgusted, and said no more
on the subject.

I recollect that we were requested by the judge to reduce to writing the
questions that we wished to propound to Colonel Taylor. I thought the
measure so novel and unprecedented that I was not disposed to comply
with this desire. The questions were, however, stated in writing by Mr.
Nicholas, who observed that he hoped we would not be confined in the
examination of the witness to the questions thus stated in writing. If I
mistake not, before the questions were reduced to writing, Mr. Nicholas
made some observations about the mode pursued by the Court in reference
to the attorney for the United States, and that exercised towards the
counsel for the prisoner; that the attorney for the United States had
not been required to state in writing the questions he wished to ask.
When this remark was made to the judge, he said that the attorney for the
United States had stated in the opening of the case all that he expected
to prove; “but though this were done, we were not bound to do it.” My
impression is that that word escaped the judge several times.

Mr. Nicholson. What word?

Mr. Hay. The word “we.”

Mr. Nicholson. Did it refer to the Court as well as the attorney?

Mr. Hay. So, sir, I understood it.

The fourth article relates to the refusal of the judge to postpone the
trial on the affidavit of Callender; on which I can only say that the
affidavit was filed, but whether regularly drawn or not I do not know.
This affidavit, according to my best recollection, stated the absence of
material witnesses.

The next article relates to a subject that it is very unpleasant to me to
make any remarks upon, because I feel myself to be a party concerned. The
judge is charged with--

[Mr. Hay here read the third, fourth, and fifth clauses of the fourth
article.]

There were many expressions used by Judge Chase during the trial which
were uncommon, and which I thought, and still think to be so. With
respect to the asperity with which he censured me, I shall not--

Mr. Harper interrupted the witness, and desired him to state the
expressions, and let the Court judge for themselves.

Mr. Hay. The first expression which made a very strong impression on my
mind, was this: In the course of the argument, urged by me in support of
the motion for a continuance to the next term, I assumed it as a clear
position, that the law of the State of Virginia, which directs that the
jury shall assess the fine, would govern in this case. As soon as I got
to that part of the argument the judge interrupted me, and gave me to
understand that I was mistaken in the law, and added, the assessment of
the fine by the jury may be conformable to your local and State laws,
but when applied to the federal courts, it is a “_wild notion_.” In the
case of Colonel Taylor’s evidence, which I have already stated, the judge
said that we knew the evidence to be inadmissible, though we pressed it
upon the Court, and then the expression followed which has been already
mentioned, that we were endeavoring to mislead and deceive the populace.
At another time he was pleased to observe, Gentlemen, you have all along
been in error in this cause, and you persist in pressing your mistakes
on the Court. On more occasions than one he charged the counsel with
advancing doctrines they knew to be wrong. I endeavored in one part of
the cause to satisfy the Court that the book called the “Prospect before
Us,” could not be given in evidence in support of the indictment, because
the title of the book was not mentioned in the indictment. In support of
my argument, I observed to the Court that if the indictment mentioned the
book from which the charges were formed, and any subsequent prosecution
should afterwards be instituted, the traverser would have nothing more
to do than to produce a copy of the record, and plead in bar of a
subsequent prosecution; but that according to the opinion of the Court,
the situation of the traverser would be more precarious than according to
the doctrines for which I contended; for that the traverser, if he should
plead a former prosecution in bar, would not be able to prove the fact by
comparing the record with the indictment; but must resort to extraneous
evidence to prove that the subsequent prosecution was founded on the
same publication that gave rise to the first. The judge was pleased to
observe, without seeming to understand the distinction that I endeavored
to draw, that I knew the present prosecution could be pleaded in bar. I
certainly did know it, and was endeavoring at that very time to show by
my argument that the better mode of proving the truth of the plea would
be by a copy of the record, rather than by an appeal to parol testimony.
Judge Chase again interrupted me, and said, I knew that this prosecution
might be pleaded in bar.

In the course of the same argument, which I addressed to the judge, for
the purpose of showing the truth of the positions we had stated, I
observed that according to the established doctrine, the words “tenor and
effect,” in an indictment for a libel, bound the party to the literal
recital of the parts charged as libellous. In support of that opinion I
quoted several authorities that satisfied my mind. The judge was pleased
to tell me, I was mistaken in my application of them; but I do not
remember his precise words. He said the words “tenor and effect” did not
oblige the prosecutor to give more than the substance of the paper meant
to be recited. It is contended, said he, that the book ought to be copied
_verbatim et literatim_; I wonder, he continued, _they_ do not contend
for _punctuatim_ too.

Mr. Nicholson. Was this observation addressed to the bar?

Mr. Hay. It appeared to me to be intended for the people; for he looked
round the room when he said, with a sarcastic smile, I wonder they do
not contend for _punctuatim_ too. I recollect also, that when Mr. Wirt,
who was associated with me as counsel for the traverser, was addressing
the Court, he was ordered by Judge Chase to sit down--in this precise
language, _sit down_. The judge also declared that the counsel on the
part of Callender should not address any observations to the jury
concerning the unconstitutionality of the second section of the sedition
law, in respect to prosecutions for libellous publications.

When Mr. Wirt was arguing from a proposition he had laid down, he
said the conclusion which followed was perfectly syllogistical. The
judge bowed to him in a manner I cannot describe, and said, “_A non
sequitur, sir._” I do not remember any other expression used by the judge
calculated to deter the counsel from proceeding in the defence of J. T.
Callender. But I do remember that I was more frequently interrupted by
Judge Chase on that trial, than I have ever been interrupted during the
sixteen years I have practised at the bar. I do not state how often I was
interrupted, because I do not recollect; but I know the interruptions
were frequent, and I believed them to be very unnecessary, not only as
they regarded myself, but the counsel who were associated with me in the
defence.


TUESDAY, February 12.

The Court met at 12 o’clock.

_John Taylor, sworn._

Mr. Randolph. The witness will please to state the circumstances that
passed in the rejection of his testimony, and other circumstances which
have any relation to the conduct of Judge Chase on the trial of Callender?

Mr. Taylor. I was summoned as a witness on that trial on the part of
Callender. I attended and was sworn. On being sworn, Judge Chase inquired
what it was intended to prove by my testimony? I do not recollect the
expressions of Judge Chase, nor do I recollect precisely the answer made
to this inquiry; but Judge Chase desired the counsel for the accused to
reduce their questions to writing. They did so.

I had come into court very near the hour when the Court met, nor had I
previously given any intimation of the testimony I could give either to
Callender or his counsel. I should have added that, after, I think, the
judge had declared the witness could not be examined, he applied to the
district judge for his opinion; who replied in so low a voice that I
could not well tell what he said. But this was after he had given his own
opinion that my testimony could not be received.

Mr. Randolph. Did you observe anything unusual in conducting the trial?

Mr. Taylor. One or more motions were made by the counsel for Callender,
who was interrupted by Judge Chase repeatedly. The words in which these
interruptions were couched, I cannot recollect, though I formed an
opinion of the style and manner of them; the effect of which was to
produce laughter in the audience at the expense of the counsel. If I am
required to declare the character in which I conceived them to be made, I
am ready to do so.

There was here a short pause, when Judge Chase rose and said, he had no
objection to the opinion of the witness being delivered.

Mr. Taylor. I thought the interruptions were in a very high degree
imperative, satirical, and witty.

Mr. Randolph. Did there appear to you any thing unusual in the manner of
the counsel for the accused towards the Court?

Mr. Taylor. I neither discovered the least degree of provocation given
by the counsel, nor perceived any anger expressed by the Court. Judge
Griffin was silent, nor were Judge Chase’s interruptions accompanied by
the indication of any anger, as far as I could perceive.

To an interrogatory made, Mr. Taylor said, the interruptions of the Court
were extremely well calculated to abash and disconcert counsel.

Mr. Harper. You have said you considered the interruptions of the Court
as highly calculated to abash the counsel; did you mean thereby to give
your opinion that they were so intended, or that such was their tendency?

Mr. Taylor. I thought they were so intended, and they had their full
effect. They were followed by a great deal of mirth in the audience. The
audience laughed, but the counsel never laughed at all.


_Philip N. Nicholas, sworn._

In the year 1800, in the month of May, the circuit court of the United
States sat at Richmond. Of this court, Mr. Chase and Mr. Griffin were
the judges. I believe Mr. Chase sat alone for some time--for how long I
do not recollect. Mr. Griffin did not, I believe, take his seat until
the motion to continue the cause was renewed. On the first day of the
court Judge Chase delivered a charge to the grand jury, and called
their attention, in a particular manner, to infractions of the sedition
law. The grand jury returned with a presentment against James Thompson
Callender, for a libel against the President, by the publication of
a work, entitled “The Prospect before Us.” On this presentment, the
attorney for the district filed an indictment, which the grand jury found
a true bill.

Process was immediately issued on the indictment. My impression at the
time, and until very lately, was, that the process issued was a bench
warrant. I have lately heard that it was a _capias_. For several days
it was believed that Callender, who resided at Petersburg, could not
be found; but the marshal at length arrested him, and brought him into
court. Mr. Hay and myself undertook his defence. My motive was, that I
believed the sedition law unconstitutional, and of course oppressive to
any person prosecuted under it.

Mr. Hay and myself had an interview with Callender, in order to ascertain
the grounds on which he expected to make his defence. Callender informed
us that his witnesses were considerably dispersed, and that there were
many documents which it would be necessary for him to obtain, before he
could be prepared for his trial. An affidavit was drawn, stating the
absence of Callender’s witnesses, the want of the documents, and that
the counsel could not be prepared during that term. On this affidavit
was founded the motion to continue the cause. This motion was urged with
great earnestness and zeal, as we were convinced that justice could not
be done if the case was tried during that term. The arguments principally
urged by us were, that the defendant had a constitutional right to
compulsory process for his witnesses, and to counsel, but that these
privileges would be nugatory if the Court would not allow time to summon
the witnesses, and for counsel to prepare for the defence.

The motion to continue the case was overruled, and Judge Chase directed
the jury to be called. When the jury came to the book, I stated to the
Court that I believed there was ground of challenge to the panel in
consequence of one of the jurors, who was returned, having expressed
opinions very hostile to the traverser. Mr. Chase, after looking into
an authority which I quoted, and also into Coke Littleton, said the law
was clear, that our objection did not apply to the panel, but to the
individual juror. He further said, that we must proceed regularly; that
we might either introduce testimony to prove that a particular juror
had expressed an opinion on the case, or we might examine the jurors as
they came to the book. We preferred the latter mode, and Mr. Hay asked
if he might ask a question of the first juror who was sworn. Mr. Chase
said that Mr. Hay must submit the question to his previous inspection,
and that, if he thought it a proper question, it might be asked. Mr.
Hay stated that the question which he wished to ask, was, Have you
ever formed an opinion on the work, entitled “The Prospect before Us,”
from which the charges in the indictment were extracted? Judge Chase
said that the counsel should not ask that question; that the only
proper question was, Have you ever formed and delivered an opinion on
the charge in the indictment? I say, (continued the judge,) formed and
delivered; for it is not only necessary that he should have formed, but
also delivered an opinion, to exclude the juror. The judge propounded
the last-mentioned question to the first juror, and he replied that he
had never seen the indictment, or heard it read. The judge said he was
a good juror, and desired he might be sworn. Mr. Hay requested that the
indictment be read to the juror, that he might be thereby enabled to say
whether he had formed and delivered an opinion on the indictment. The
judge replied, that he had already indulged the counsel as much as he
could, and they ought to be satisfied; he refused to let the indictment
be read to the juror. The clerk then called the jury and swore them, till
he came to John Basset, who in reply to the previous question said, he
never had seen the indictment or heard it read. But Mr. Basset seemed
to have considerable scruples at serving, and said he had formed and
delivered an opinion that the book called “The Prospect before Us,”
came within the sedition law. Judge Chase, however, said he was a good
juror, and he was sworn and served as such. The witnesses on the part of
the prosecution were called and sworn, and, among others, Mr. Rind was
examined to prove the publication of “The Prospect before Us.” Mr. Hay
observed, that no witness who was in any way concerned in the printing
of the “Prospect,” was bound to criminate himself. Mr. Chase admitted
this to be correct, but declared that the witnesses might rest assured
that no person would be prosecuted in consequence of any evidence given
in the case then before the court. Under these circumstances, Mr. Rind
proved that he had printed part of the “Prospect” for Callender, and took
out of his pocket some of the original sheets from which he had printed
parts of the work. Judge Chase himself compared these sheets with the
work as published, and they were found to correspond. After the testimony
on the part of the prosecution was finished, Col. Taylor of Caroline
was called on the part of the traverser, and, after he was sworn, Judge
Chase asked with apparent haste and earnestness of manner, what we
expected to prove by that witness. We said we expected to prove that Mr.
Adams had avowed in the presence of the witness sentiments favorable to
monarchy or aristocracy, and that he had voted in the Senate against
the sequestration of British debts, and the suspension of commercial
intercourse with Great Britain. Judge Chase then said that we must reduce
the questions to writing. This I objected to, and stated that it was
a thing very unusual in our courts; that it had not been required by
the Court of the district attorney, when he examined witnesses against
Callender; that it involved a dangerous principle, and was calculated to
subject every question of fact to the control of the Court; besides, I
added, that I did not know the extent to which Col. Taylor’s evidence
would go; that I wished him to state all he knew, and that very probably
the examination would point out new questions proper to be asked. I then
stated that if the Court insisted on the questions being reduced to
writing, I would comply with their direction, but that I hoped it would
not be considered as precluding us from asking any additional questions.
The questions were then reduced to writing, and are as follows, viz:

1. Did you ever hear Mr. Adams express any sentiments favorable to
monarchy or aristocracy, and what were they?

2. Did you ever hear Mr. Adams, while Vice President, express his
disapprobation of the funding system?

3. Do you know whether Mr. Adams did not, in the year 1794, vote against
the sequestration of British debts, and the suspension of intercourse
with Great Britain?

Judge Chase, after examining the questions, declared Col. Taylor’s
evidence inadmissible. No evidence can be received, said the judge,
which does not go to justify the whole charge; the charge is, that
the President is a professed aristocrat, and has proved faithful and
serviceable to the British interest. Now, you must prove both these
points, or you prove nothing, and as your evidence relates to one only,
it cannot be received; you must prove all or none. These, I believe, were
the precise words of the judge. I think it right here to state that after
Mr. Chase had declared Colonel Taylor’s evidence inadmissible, he said
to the district attorney, that although the questions were improper, he
wished the attorney would consent to let them be asked of the witness.
The attorney said he could not consent. The evidence of Colonel Taylor
being excluded, the attorney for the United States addressed the jury,
and commented at considerable length on the indictment. After that, Mr.
Wirt addressed the jury for the defendant. He premised that the counsel
for the traverser were placed in a very embarrassed situation; that
the prisoner during the same term was presented, indicted, arrested,
arraigned, tried; and that this precipitation precluded the possibility
of obtaining witnesses or making the necessary preparations for arguing
a cause of so much magnitude. Here Judge Chase interrupted Mr. Wirt, and
told him, that he would not suffer any thing to be said which reflected
on the Court. Mr. Wirt said he did not mean to reflect on the Court; his
object was only to apologize to the jury for the lameness of the defence.
Mr. Chase replied that his apology contained the very reflection he
disclaimed, and desired him to go on with the cause. Mr. Wirt then said,
that an act of Assembly had adopted the common law of England as a part
of the laws of Virginia; that an act of Congress had directed the United
States courts sitting in Virginia to conform to the laws of the State in
which such court might happen to sit; that by the common law the jury had
a right to decide on the law as well as the fact. He then said, that
if the jury upon inquiry should find the sedition law unconstitutional,
they would not consider it as law, and if they did, they would violate
their oaths. Here Mr. Chase said to Mr. Wirt, Sit down, sir. Mr. Wirt
endeavored to explain, and said, I am going on, sir, to----No, sir, said
Mr. Chase, you are not going on; I am going on. Judge Chase then read
from a paper, which he held in his hand, an instruction to the counsel
that they should not address the jury on the constitutionality of the act
of Congress, but that arguments might be addressed to the Court to prove
the right of the jury to consider the constitutionality. Mr. Wirt then
addressed the Court. He said he had not considered the case elaborately;
that it appeared to him so clearly that the jury had the right contended
for, that he did not imagine it required any great research to prove it.
He then proceeded to state that it was certainly the right of the jury
to consider of and determine both law and fact. Mr. Chase here remarked
that Mr. Wirt need not give himself trouble on that point; we all know,
said he, that the jury have a right to decide the law. Mr. Wirt then
said, that he supposed it equally clear that the constitution is the
law. Yes, sir, said Mr. Chase, the supreme law. If, then, said Mr. Wirt,
the jury have a right to decide on the law, and if the constitution is
law, it follows syllogistically that they have a right to decide on the
constitutionality of the law in question. A _non sequitur_, sir, said
Judge Chase. Here Mr. Wirt sat down.


_John Thompson Mason, sworn._

Mr. Randolph. It has been contended on the part of the respondent, that
the _quo animo_ determines the guilt or innocence of an action; now,
if the _quo animo_ with which he went down to Richmond to execute the
sedition law, can be shown, it will have an important bearing on his
conduct. I wish, therefore, to ask the witness this question: Did you
ever hear Judge Chase, previous to the trial of Callender, utter any
expression, and, if any, what was it, on the subject of Callender’s
prosecution, or respecting the book called “The Prospect before Us;” did
he say that the counsel of the Virginia bar were afraid to press the
execution of any law, and particularly the sedition law; did he say that
he had a copy of that book, or what did he say? State the circumstances
particularly.

Mr. Mason. The question refers to circumstances of which I have but an
indistinct recollection, and which happened in a way which renders it
extremely unpleasant on my part to relate them. Judge Chase presided
in the circuit court held at Annapolis in the spring of the year 1800;
during the term a man by the name of Saunders was tried for larceny,
and found guilty. After sentence was passed upon him, he was taken out
of court to receive it. The press of the people being very great, the
judges and myself were detained within the room. Judge Winchester,
Judge Chase, and myself had a conversation, altogether of a jocular
complexion. I think it was just after he delivered his valedictory, but
how to connect the circumstances at this time, I do not know. I remember,
however, that he asked me my opinion of the book called “The Prospect
before Us;” I told him I had not seen it, and from the character I had
heard of it, I never wished to see it. He told me, in reply, that Mr.
Luther Martin had sent a copy to him, and had scored the parts that were
libellous, and that he would carry it to Richmond as a proper subject
for prosecution. There was a good deal of conversation besides, but I do
not recollect it. There was one expression, however, that he used, which
just occurs to my memory, and which I will repeat, that before he left
Richmond, he would teach the people to distinguish between the liberty
and the licentiousness of the press. He said that he was as sincere a
friend to the liberty, as he was an enemy to the licentiousness of the
press. There was a sentiment he expressed, which I cannot undertake to
give in his precise words, that if the Commonwealth or its inhabitants
were not too depraved to furnish a jury of good and respectable men, he
would certainly punish Calender. I do not precisely recollect the words:
I never repeated this conversation before, and seldom or ever, after it
occurred, thought of it.


_John Heath, sworn._

During the trial of J. T. Callender, I attended at the court in
Richmond as one of the bar. I had occasion to apply to the Court for
an injunction. The motion not having been decided upon, I went round
to Crouch’s, where Judge Chase lodged, and found him in his chamber
alone, in which I thought myself very fortunate. We then talked over the
application I had made the day before for an injunction; while talking
on it, Mr. David M. Randolph, the then marshal, stepped in with a paper
in his hand. The judge accosted him, and asked him what he had in his
hand? He said that he had the panel of the petit jury summoned for the
trial of Callender. This was after the indictment was found by the grand
jury. After Mr. Randolph had mentioned that it was the panel of the petit
jury that he had in his hand, Judge Chase immediately replied, Have
you any of those creatures called Democrats on the panel? Mr. Randolph
hesitated a moment, and then said that he had not made any discrimination
in summoning the petit jury. Judge Chase said, Look it over, sir, and if
there are any of that description, strike them off. This is all I know of
this affair.

The Court rose at 4 o’clock.


WEDNESDAY, February 13.

The Court was opened at half past 2 o’clock.


_James Triplett, sworn._

Mr. Randolph. I wish to know whether you ever heard previous to, or
during the trial of Callender, any expressions used by the respondent,
Judge Chase, manifesting a hostility toward J. T. Callender, and what
were those expressions?

Mr. Triplett. I recollect to have had a conversation with Judge Chase on
our passage in the stage down to Richmond. A book was handed to me by
him, and I was asked if I had read it? I was asked whether I had seen
him, (Callender?) I told him I had never seen him. There was a story
recited about the arrest of Callender by a warrant of a magistrate, under
the vagrant act of Virginia; I recollect that the judge’s reply was, “It
is a pity you have not hanged the rascal.”

Mr. Randolph. Were there any other expressions of this nature used, after
you got to Richmond?

Mr. Triplett. I did not hear any thing particular; but I think the judge
did say something about the Government of the United States showing
too much lenity towards such renegadoes. I do not recollect any other
conversation passing between us at that time, until after the Court
was sitting, when Judge Chase was the first who informed me of the
presentment being made by the grand jury against Callender. At the same
time, he informed me that he expected I would have the pleasure of seeing
Callender next day before sundown, that the marshal had that day started
after him for Petersburg.

Mr. Randolph. We wish you, as well as your memory serves, to state not
only the substance, but the exact expressions used by the judge.

Mr. Triplett. I will state them as well as my memory serves me. Some time
after this conversation, I met the judge at the place where he boarded;
he said that the marshal had returned without Callender, and used this
expression, “I am afraid we shall not be able to get the damned rascal at
this court.”


_John Basset, sworn for the defence._

At the request of Mr. Harper, and with the consent of the Managers, _John
Basset_, a witness on the part of Judge Chase, was sworn and examined,
in consequence of the peculiar situation of his family requiring his
immediate return home.

Mr. Harper. Relate the circumstances that took place relative to your
being sworn on the jury, on the trial of Callender, and what the
application to the Court was on your behalf?

Mr. Basset. The circuit court of the United States at which James T.
Callender was presented and indicted for a libel, was held on Monday
the second or third of June. I left home in the morning and arrived in
Richmond as early as might be expected. On my arrival I saw David M.
Randolph, who was standing at a corner of a street; perceiving me, he
came towards me; before I alighted from my horse, he informed me that
I had been summoned as a grand juror, and that for not appearing had
been crossed, that it was my duty to go to the court and justify myself
for my absence; that he summoned me on the petit jury for the trial of
Callender, and that my serving in that capacity would be an apology for
my previous absence. I presented myself to the Court, but the trial did
not come on that day. The second day I attended also. I knew very well
that the law under which the traverser was to be tried, was odious to
my fellow-citizens; I knew it was conceived to be a great oppression to
the liberty of the subject, and I believed that great umbrage would be
given to the mass of the people by those who should undertake to execute
that law. I was weak or wicked enough to be among that class of people
called federalists, and I did believe that the law [sedition law] was
constitutional. I felt myself bound, when called on to be a juryman, to
make a declaration of my political sentiments. I made this declaration to
relieve the impression on my own mind, and not in order that it should be
considered that I declined, in consequence of my political opinions, to
serve on Callender’s trial, or in any other case. I thought it possible
that I might be excused; but if I were found by the Court to stand in a
proper relation between my country and the traverser, I would cheerfully
serve. My object was to justify my own conduct to myself and to the whole
world. I made use of these expressions, and I believe I repeat the very
words, but I am well assured that I shall express the force and efficacy
of what I said. I declared to the judge that my politics were federal;
that I had never seen the book called “The Prospect before Us,” but I
had seen in a newspaper some extracts from it; that if the extracts were
correctly taken from the book, and if the traverser was the author or
publisher of that work, it appeared to me that it was a seditious act;
that I had formed and expressed an unequivocal opinion, that the book
was a seditious act; that I had never formed an opinion in respect to
the indictment, for I had neither seen it nor heard it read. The Court
considered me a good juror, and I was sworn accordingly.

Mr. Bayard. What was the general deportment of the judge to the counsel,
and of the counsel to the Court?

Mr. Basset. The different coloring through which the same things are seen
make some men see things differently from others. My own opinion is,
that the judge conducted himself with decision unmixed with severity,
and that he was witty without being sarcastic. It was my impression that
the judge wished the prisoner to have a full hearing, that he might be
acquitted, if innocent, and found guilty, if really guilty. It appeared
to me that the sole point on which the counsel hoped to save their
client was by proving the unconstitutionality of the sedition law, and
it appeared to me that they could not form a reasonable expectation of
acquitting him on any other ground. I believe his counsel believed the
law unconstitutional, and thought they had eloquence and argument enough
to convince the jury of it. I believe they thought the judge deprived
them of their right to address the jury on that point; and that having
the cause very much at heart, they were vastly mortified that the Court
did not permit them to take the course they wished. They appeared to
consider themselves as advocating the cause of an oppressed citizen, and
they felt hurt at not being allowed the mode of defence which in their
opinion the law authorized. In all their arguments they travelled but
a little way before they came to the point that went to prove the law
unconstitutional, and the judge declared, at every such time, that they
had no right to address the jury on that point; that the constitution
had made the Court the sole judges of the law as far as it respected
its constitutionality. From these circumstances, it is my impression
that the altercation between the bar and the Court arose solely from the
sensibility of the counsel to this particular subject, and from being
deprived, as they supposed, of their rights.

The President. What were the particular causes of irritation between the
judge and the counsel?

Mr. Basset. I have stated what I considered the causes. They arose from
the counsel adverting to that particular point, and their so frequently
doing it occasioned the judge to elevate his voice, and to pronounce over
and over again what he conceived to be the law.

The Court rose at 4 o’clock.


THURSDAY, February 14.

The Court was opened at 12 o’clock.


_George Read, sworn._

Mr. Randolph. The witness will please to state what he knows in relation
to certain proceedings at a circuit court of the United States, held at
Newcastle, in the State of Delaware, in the month of June, 1800.

Mr. Read. It is incumbent on me to state that several years have elapsed
since the transactions which I am now about to relate occurred; of course
I cannot pretend to say that the language I shall use to convey the
sentiments delivered by Mr. Chase is precisely according to what occurred
at the time; but the substance of what I relate will be correct. The
transactions to which I presume I am called to testify took place at a
session of the circuit court, held at Newcastle, for Delaware district,
in June, 1800. The Court sat two days, viz: on the 27th and 28th days of
the month. At that court, Samuel Chase, one of the associate justices,
presided, and Gunning Bedford, district judge, was associated with him.
Judge Chase, as usual, delivered a charge to the grand jury, on the
first day of the term. The grand jury, after hearing the charge, retired
to their chamber; after remaining there for some time, they returned
into court, and on being asked whether they had found any bills, or
had any presentments to make, they answered they had found no bills
of indictment, and had no presentments to make. After receiving this
answer, Judge Chase proceeded to observe, as nearly as I can recollect,
addressing himself to the grand jury, that he had been informed, or
heard, that a highly seditious temper had manifested itself in the State
of Delaware among a certain class of people, especially in Newcastle
County, and more especially in the town of Wilmington, where lived a
most seditious printer, unrestrained by any principle of virtue, and
regardless of social order; that the name of this printer was ----; the
judge here paused, and said, perhaps it might be assuming, or taking upon
himself too much to mention the name of this person; but, gentlemen, it
becomes your special duty, and you must inquire diligently into this
matter. Several of the jurors, I believe, made a request to the Court
to dismiss them, and assigned as the reasons for their request, that
some of them were farmers, and, as it was about the time of harvest,
they were anxious to be on their farms. The judge observed that the
business to which he had called their attention was of a very urgent and
pressing nature, and must be attended to; that he could not, therefore,
discharge them before the next day, when further information should
be communicated to them on the subject he had referred to. The judge
then addressing himself to me as the district attorney, asked me, as I
believe is usual on such occasions, whether I had any criminal charges
to submit to the grand jury? I said that none such had yet occurred,
and I believed none were likely to occur during that term. Judge Chase,
continuing his address to me, observed, You might, by prosecuting proper
researches, make some discoveries. Have you not heard of some persons
in this State who have been guilty of libelling the Government, or the
administration of the Government of the United States? I am told, and
the general circulation of the report induces me to believe it, that
there is a certain printer in the town of Wilmington who publishes a most
scandalous newspaper; but it will not do to mention names. Have you not
two printers in that town? I answered that I believed there were. Judge
Chase observed, that one of them was a seditious printer, adding, he
shall be taken notice of, and it is your duty, Mr. Attorney, to examine
unremittingly and minutely into affairs of that nature; times like these
require that this seditious temper or spirit, which pervades too many of
our presses, should be discouraged or repressed. Can you not find a file
of these newspapers between this time and to-morrow morning, and examine
them, and discover whether this printer is not guilty of libelling the
Government of the United States? This, I say, sir, must be done; I think
it is your duty. I observed, as this subject was pressed by the honorable
judge, I believed I was acquainted with the duties of my office, and was
willing to discharge them. I mentioned that I had not in my possession
the papers alluded to by the judge, nor had read them; but that if a
file of them were procured and handed to me, I had no objection to
examine them, and communicate with the grand jury on the subject. The
judge then said he was satisfied, and, turning to the jury, observed,
that he could not discharge them, however inconvenient their stay; they
must attend the ensuing day, at the usual hour. The judge then directed
that a file of the papers should be procured for me. I understood him to
mean the paper called the Mirror of the Times and General Advertiser,
though I do not recollect to have heard the title of the paper mentioned
during the proceedings. A file of those papers was brought to me in the
afternoon, after the adjournment of the Court; by whom they were brought
I do not recollect. I examined them, but in a very cursory manner, as I
was very much interrupted by persons calling upon me. I did not discover
during the course of this examination, any libellous matter coming within
the provisions of the sedition act.

According to what I understood to be the wish of the judge, I sent this
file of papers to the grand jury. Soon after the meeting of the Court on
the second day, and at the request of the grand jury, I attended them
in their room. On entering, the foreman of the jury addressed me, and
directed my attention to a paragraph in a publication contained in the
Mirror of the 21st June, 1800, republished from the Aurora, reflecting,
perhaps in strong and pointed language, on the former conduct of Judge
Chase. He observed that there was a difference of opinion among the
jurors as to the nature of the paragraph--some doubted whether it was
a libel or not, and, if libellous, whether they had a right to present
it to the circuit court. I observed that it was not necessary for
me to be very particular in my opinion of the publication, as I did
not consider it as coming under the sedition law, though it might be
considered as an offence at common law, because Judge Chase had decided
that the circuit court could not take cognizance of cases arising at
common law. I returned into court. After some time, the file was placed
before the judge. Judge Chase asked me what had been done, and whether
the grand jury had made any discoveries of libellous matter? I answered
none, unless it were the paragraph which related to Judge Chase, which
I showed him, observing that it did not appear to me to come under the
sedition law. Judge Chase acquiesced, and the business passed over on his
part in a very polite and affable manner. I do not recollect any thing
further to have passed. I have, however, an indistinct recollection of
a conversation between Judge Chase and myself, in the room of a tavern,
before we went into court, in which I understood him to have made a
general declaration of hostility against seditious printers.


_James Lea, affirmed._

Mr. Rodney. Please relate to the Court the occurrences which took place
at a circuit court of the United States at Newcastle, and whether you
were summoned as a grand juror at that court.

Mr. Lea. I was summoned by the marshal of the district of Delaware as
a grand juror at the circuit court held in the month of June, 1800. I
attended agreeably to that summons, and was qualified as a juror. After
receiving a charge from Judge Chase, we retired into our room, and
remained there for some time. There appearing to be no business for us,
we returned into our box. The usual question was put to us, whether we
had found any bills? We said that we had not. After some time, Judge
Chase addressed the grand jury, and observed that a very seditious
disposition had manifested itself in the State of Delaware, in the
county of Newcastle, and particularly in the town of Wilmington; that
a seditious printer lived in that place, who edited a paper called the
Mirror of the Times and the General Advertiser, who was in the habit of
libelling the Government of the United States, and that his name was
----, he said he would not mention his name, but that it was our duty
to inquire if any seditious publications had been made; that he would
not discharge us that day, nor until we had made the inquiry. Several of
the jurors addressed the judge for leave to return home, stating that
they were farmers, and were extremely anxious to be on their farms,
as it was harvest time. Some conversation passed between Judge Chase
and the attorney for the district, after which he said he would not
discharge us until the next day. We returned the next day into court,
and after sitting some time in our box, we retired to the jury room. A
file of newspapers was produced by some persons, and we examined them. We
found nothing in them of a libellous nature, in our opinion, excepting
something relative to Judge Chase, which some of the jury thought came
under the sedition law. We sent for the attorney of the district to
inform us as to the nature of the paragraph. He told us it did not come
under the sedition law. We went into the jury box, when a conversation
of some length took place between Judge Chase and the attorney of the
district, after which we were discharged.


_John Montgomery, sworn._

Mr. Randolph. The subject on which it is understood you are capable of
giving some information to the Court is the conduct of Judge Chase, at a
circuit court of the United States, held for the district of Maryland at
Baltimore, in May, 1803, or about that time.

Mr. Montgomery. The point, I presume, on which I am called to give
testimony, relates to a charge to a grand jury delivered by Judge Chase,
at a circuit court where he presided, and Judge Winchester was associated
with him. It will not, from the nature of the subject, be expected that
I shall be able to detail, in the precise language of the judge, the
whole of the charge which was delivered in 1803 at the May term. Though
not one of the bar, I was present at the court, and took a chair among
the gentlemen of the bar. After the grand jury were impanelled, Judge
Chase addressed them. He appeared to address them from a written paper
that lay before him. He proceeded in the usual manner to charge the jury
as to the duties expected to be performed by them. After he had thus far
proceeded in his charge, he mentioned, that before the jury retired to
their chamber, he would make some observations, and that they would be
considered as flowing from a wish for the happiness or welfare of the
community. He stated that it was important that the people should be
fully informed, particularly at such a crisis; that falsehood was more
easily disseminated than truth; and that the latter was reluctantly
attended to, when opposed to popular prejudice. I cannot pretend to
state the sentiments delivered by the judge, in the order in which they
were delivered. I can undertake to state, from my recollection, the
substance of those he delivered. To the best of my recollection, the
judge stated that the Administration was weak, relaxed, and inadequate to
the duties devolved on it; and that its acts proceeded not from a view
to promote the general happiness, but from a desire for the continuance
of unfairly-acquired power. The language _unfairly-acquired power_ made
a strong impression on my mind at the time; and when the judge called
the attention of the jury to the observations he was about to make, I
was prepared to expect something extraordinary from him, as I was at
Annapolis when he pronounced the valedictory address which Mr. Mason, in
his testimony, took occasion to mention. The judge stated the violation
of the constitution that had taken place by the act of Congress repealing
the judiciary act of 1800, and the consequent removal of sixteen judges;
that it had made a violent attack on the independence of the Judiciary.
He also found fault with a law passed by the Legislature of Maryland
in 1800, the effect of which was the removal of all the judges on the
county-court establishment. He stated that those acts were a severe blow
against the independence of the Judiciary. He stated, that since the
year 1776, he had been an advocate for a representative or republican
form of government; that it was his wish that freemen should be governed
by representatives chosen by that class of citizens who had a property
in, a common interest with, and an attachment to, the community. The
language might have been in the words of our constitution. He found fault
with the law passed by the Legislature of Maryland, which he styled
“The Universal-suffrage Law.” He stated that that also affected the
independence of the Judiciary, and to the best of my recollection, he
explained his ideas in this manner: that every free, white male citizen,
in the language of the constitution, having the qualification of age
and residence, though he had not a property in, an interest with, and
an attachment to, the community, being suffered to choose those who
constituted the Legislature, and the Judiciary being dependent on the
Legislature for their support and continuance in office, few characters
of integrity and ability, who are competent to discharge the duties of
judges, would be found to accept appointments held by such a tenure. He
stated that these measures were destructive of the happiness and welfare
of the community; that they would have a tendency to sink our Republican
Government into what he called a _Mobocracy_--the worst of all possible
governments. At the close of the judge’s charge, he, in an impressive
manner, called on the jury to pause, to reflect, and when they returned
to their homes, to use their endeavors to prevent these impending evils,
and save their country. He said that the people had been misled by
misrepresentation, falsehood, art, and cunning; that, by correcting these
errors, the threatened evils might be prevented--or words to that effect.


_Samuel H. Smith, sworn._

Mr. Nicholson. Please to state what you know of the charge delivered by
Judge Chase at Baltimore.

Mr. Smith. The charge of Judge Chase having been published, I did not
expect to be called upon to state in detail its general contents;
supposing that the only inquiry made would be on the correspondence of
my recollection with the contents of the published charge. I do not know
that I should be able, under these circumstances, to give a particular
statement, from memory, of its contents. On the evening subsequent to the
delivery of the charge, I committed to paper the most important features
of it, which were published in the National Intelligencer, and which form
part of the printed testimony received by the committee of inquiry. If I
could be indulged with access to it, I should be enabled to state more
correctly my knowledge of the charge.

[Mr. Smith here, with permission, read the following, extracted from the
National Intelligencer of May 20, 1803:--

“After a definition of the offences cognizable by the grand jury, Judge
Chase said he hoped he should be pardoned for making a few additional
observations. He had, he remarked, been uniformly attached to a free
republican government, and had actively participated in our revolutionary
struggle to obtain it. He still remained warmly attached to the
principles of government then established. Since that period, however,
certain opinions had sprung up which threatened with ruin the fair fabric
then raised. It had been contended that all men had equal rights derived
from nature, of which society could not rightfully deprive them. This
he denied. He could conceive of no rights in a state of nature, which
was in fact entirely a creature of the imagination, as there was no
condition of man in which he was not, under some modification, subject
to a particular leader or particular species of government. True liberty
did not, in his opinion, consist in the possession of equal rights, but
in the protection by the law of the person and property of every member
of society, however various the grade in society he filled. Nor did
it consist in the form of government in any country. A monarchy might
be free, and a republic in slavery. Wherever the laws protected the
person and property of every man, there liberty existed, whatever the
government was. Such, said he, is our present situation. But much I fear
that soon, very soon our situation will be changed. The great bulwark
of an independent judiciary has been broken down by the Legislature
of the United States, and a wound inflicted upon the liberties of the
people which nothing but their good sense can cure. Judge Chase here
went into an assertion of the right of the judiciary to decide on the
constitutionality of laws. He then adverted to the proceedings of the
Legislature of Maryland. He commented on the wisdom and patriotism of
those who had framed the constitution of that State. That wisdom and
patriotism had never conceived liberty to consist in every man possessing
equal political rights. To secure property, the right of suffrage
had been limited. The convention had not imagined, according to the
new doctrine, that property would be best protected by those who had
themselves no property. The great rampart established in the limitation
of suffrage was now demolished by the principle of universal suffrage
ingrafted in the constitution. In addition to this, a proposition was
now submitted, whose ratification depended upon the next Legislature and
which, if ratified, would destroy the independence and respectability
of the judiciary, and make the administration of justice dependent
upon legislative discretion. If this shall, in addition to that which
establishes universal suffrage, become part of the constitution, nothing
will remain that will be worth protecting. Instead of being ruled by a
regular and respectable government, we shall be governed by an ignorant
mobocracy. When he reflected on the ruinous effects of these measures,
he could not but blush at the degeneracy of sons, who destroyed the fair
fabric raised by the patriotism of their fathers.”]

President. Did you hear any reflections cast on the Administration?

Mr. Smith. I do not recollect any other beside those contained in the
statement I have read.


_John Stephen, sworn._

I was at Baltimore when the charge was delivered by Judge Chase. My
recollection of its contents is extremely vague. But, with regard to
some of it, it coincides with that of Mr. Montgomery, Mr. Mason, and Mr.
Smith. He spoke of the repeal of the judiciary law, and said that it
was injurious to the independence of the judges. He also mentioned the
general suffrage law as injurious; and said no man ought to be permitted
to vote unless he had a property in, a common interest with, and an
attachment to, the community; that the act violated this principle,
and would be attended with very injurious consequences; he denied the
doctrine of natural rights; and said that they were altogether derived
from convention; and at the end of the charge he exhorted the jury to use
their efforts to prevent the injury likely to result from the temper of
the times. I cannot say whether Judge Chase confined himself to a written
paper or not. He declared that the independence of the judiciary of the
United States had been injured by the repeal of the judiciary system;
and that the bill then pending before the Legislature of Maryland, if
adopted, would have the same effect upon the judiciary of that State.

Mr. Nicholson stated, that all the witnesses present on the part of the
prosecution had been examined; the managers would therefore proceed to
offer certain records; but, as several material witnesses were absent, he
hoped they would not be precluded from calling them, should they attend,
at a future stage of the trial.

Mr. Randolph offered in evidence a copy of the record in the case of J.
T. Callender; also in the case of Fries.

Mr. Randolph then stated that the Managers had submitted all the evidence
they were prepared to adduce. Whereupon the Court rose.


FRIDAY, February 15.

The Court was opened at 10 A. M.

_Present_: The Managers, accompanied by the House of Representatives in
Committee of the Whole: and Judge Chase attended by his counsel.

The evidence being closed on the part of the prosecution,

Mr HARPER, of counsel for the respondent, addressed the Court to this
effect:

Mr. President: We feel so strong a reliance on the justice, impartiality,
and discernment of this honorable Court, that nothing but an anxious
regard for the character and feelings of the honorable gentleman who
is the object of this prosecution, and a solicitude to remove even the
slightest imputation of impropriety or incorrectness that may rest on
his conduct, could induce us to occupy any portion of that time which we
know to be so precious, by the introduction of testimony on his part. We
believe the charges to be utterly unsupported by the testimony adduced on
the part of the prosecution; and had we no other object than a mere legal
acquittal, we should cheerfully rest the case on that testimony. But we
are aware that some part of the honorable judge’s conduct, though not
criminal nor punishable by impeachment, may, if left without explanation,
appear in an unfavorable light. We are prepared with testimony to give
this explanation; to show that, through all the transactions which form
the matter of this prosecution, he has been governed by the purest
motives, and that whatever errors he may have committed, are trivial in
themselves, are imputable to human infirmity alone, and were instantly
corrected by himself. This testimony we request the permission of this
honorable Court to produce. But a consciousness of the strong ground on
which we stand, and a recollection of the very important public business
which now presses on the attention of this honorable Court, in its
legislative capacity, have determined us to waive our right to a general
opening of our case; and to confine ourselves, in this stage of the
cause, to a brief statement of the points to which our testimony will be
directed.

On the first article, which relates to the conduct of Judge Chase in the
trial of John Fries for treason, we shall produce testimony to show,
that the opinion contained in the paper which the judge delivered to
the prisoner’s counsel was not only legal, but had been twice expressly
decided, and once admitted in the same court, and had before that trial
been laid down as a general principle of law, in a charge delivered to a
grand jury in the same court, by one of Judge Chase’s predecessors.

We shall show, said he, by the most indisputable testimony, that the
point of law respecting treason in levying war against the United States,
which was stated in the paper delivered to the counsel of Fries, had
been once informally decided by the same court, in a prior case, and
twice after solemn argument and full discussion, and that one of those
discussions was made in the case of John Fries himself, on an indictment
for the same offence. We shall show that Judge Chase’s predecessor had,
before counsel was heard and before an indictment was found, delivered
the same opinion in a charge to the grand jury. We shall proceed to prove
in a more particular manner the contents of the paper thus delivered to
the counsel. We shall produce the original paper itself; and shall prove
that delivered to the prisoner’s counsel to be a true copy of it; and we
shall conclude, by showing that when the counsel of Fries had refused to
proceed in his defence, and were informed by the judge that they might go
on, and conduct the case as they thought proper, he employed no menacing
expression, and uttered no such words as “proceed at the hazard of your
characters:” but merely informed them that they should be under no other
restriction but that which a regard to their professional character would
impose. That, far from threatening, he did all in his power to soothe;
and instead of restricting, gave the utmost latitude of indulgence.

Proceeding, then, to the second general head of accusation, the conduct
of the respondent relative to the trial of Callender, which furnishes the
matter of the second article, and embraces in the whole five articles,
we shall show that the copy of the “Prospect before Us,” which the
respondent carried with him to Richmond, was marked, not by him, but by
another person, without any view to a prosecution of the author, and
was given to him by that person without any request, on his part, as a
performance which might amuse him on the road.

As to the private conversation at Annapolis, we shall prove that it was a
mere jest between the respondent and the gentleman, who, after treasuring
it up for five years, has this day brought it forward to support an
impeachment; and whose recollection of it we shall show to be far less
accurate than ought to be required of a man, who, after so great a lapse
of time, adduces a private, confidential, and jocular conversation, to
aid a criminal prosecution.

We shall then follow Judge Chase to Richmond, where we shall show that,
far from having formed a corrupt determination to oppress Callender,
he felt solicitous for the escape of that unfortunate wretch; that,
far from entering into a combination with the marshal to pack a jury
for the conviction of Callender, Judge Chase expressed a wish that he
might be tried by men of that political party whose cause his book was
intended to support. We shall prove, by testimony not to be doubted,
that no conversation whatever took place between the judge and the
marshal, relative to striking any person from the panel, much less such
a conversation as has been sworn to by one witness for the prosecution.
We shall show that no panel of the jury actually summoned was formed,
until the opening of the Court on the day when the trial of Callender
was to have commenced; that it was completed in open court, and was
never seen by the judge. And we shall prove that the marshal, not by the
direction of the judge, from whom he was bound to receive no directions
on that subject, but with his entire approbation and according to his
advice, took the utmost pains to select a jury of the most impartial,
considerate, and respectable men; that, in this selection, no attention
was paid to party distinctions; and that if no persons of Callender’s
political opinion actually did serve on the jury, it was because, after
being summoned, they made excuses, which were admitted by the Court, or
refused to attend.

Thus much respecting the conduct of the judge previous to the trial.
Proceeding then to the particular matter of the second article, which
relates to the supposed rejection of John Basset’s application to serve
on the jury, we shall prove, more fully than we have already done, that
the nature of this application has been wholly misunderstood by the
witnesses on the part of the prosecution; that the juror did not offer an
excuse, or apply to be discharged, but merely suggested some scruples of
delicacy, and was willing to serve if those scruples were not sufficient
to constitute a legal disqualification. We shall fully corroborate the
testimony which the juror himself has given on this head, and shall show
clearly that his scruples were not of such a nature as to furnish a legal
or proper ground of objection to his competence as a juror.

As to the refusal of a continuance, which has been so much relied on as
a criminal violation of the law, with intent to oppress the party, we
shall prove, that although no legal grounds for a continuance were shown,
and it was therefore not in the power of the Court to grant it, Judge
Chase did offer to postpone the trial for a month or six weeks, in order
to accommodate Callender and his counsel, and to enable them to prepare;
an offer which they thought proper to reject. And we shall also show,
that when this motion for a continuance was made, the law of Virginia, by
which it is now contended that the Court ought to have been governed, was
not cited, nor even mentioned.

With respect to the conduct of Judge Chase towards Callender’s counsel,
we shall prove that it was free from any appearance of harshness, or
desire to intimidate, abash, or oppress; that the irritation which took
place proceeded from the counsel themselves, and that the conduct of the
Court was far more mild and forbearing than from those irritations could
have been expected. That every decision on the law was the joint opinion
of Judge Chase and his colleague, delivered after consultation between
them. That every interruption of the counsel arose from their pertinacity
in pressing points which had been decided, and on which propriety and
duty required them to be silent; and that after the respondent had
delivered the opinion of the Court on these points of law, he offered to
assist the counsel for the traverser in framing a case for the opinion of
all the judges of the Supreme Court, and thus to give them an opportunity
of correcting any errors which he and his colleague might have committed
in those decisions. And finally, we shall produce a witness who, having
attended the trial and taken down all the proceedings in short-hand, will
lay before this honorable Court an exact detail of all that passed.

Passing then to the matter of the fifth and sixth articles, we shall
prove, by a rule solemnly made by the Supreme Court of the United States,
that they never considered the State laws as regulating _process_, by
virtue of the act of Congress which is relied on in support of these
articles; but merely as governing the decision of rights acquired under
them, when such rights come into question in the courts of the United
States; that the practice in the courts of Virginia, under the State
law in question, has been and is conformable to our construction, and
not to that contended for on the other side. And as a proof how little
the recollection of men, even the most correct, can be relied on, in
cases where their feelings have been strongly excited, we shall produce
a record, in which the learned gentleman who, though very young, was
Attorney-General of Virginia in 1800, and who has delivered his testimony
with the greatest candor and propriety, did himself order a capias, on
a presentment in a case not capital. We shall produce evidence to prove
that the capias is the proper process, in all cases of presentments,
except those of petty offences, which are tried by the court, without
an indictment, and are punishable by fine only, but not imprisonment.
And to remove every possible doubt on this head of accusation, we shall
prove that when the presentment against Callender was made, and it
became necessary to issue process against him, Judge Chase applied to the
district attorney for information as to what was the proper process, who
answered, a capias; and that the capias, which was actually issued, was
drawn up by the clerk, inspected and approved by the district attorney,
and issued on his suggestion.

Respecting the transactions at Newcastle, in the State of Delaware,
which constitute the matter of the seventh article, we shall prove that
those offensive and improper expressions, which are attributed to the
respondent, relative to a seditious temper, in the State of Delaware,
and especially in the county of Newcastle and the town of Wilmington,
never were uttered by him; that the witnesses who have deposed to those
expressions are under a mistake; and that nothing was said or done by
Judge Chase on that occasion, but what he has admitted in his answer;
but what propriety justifies, and his duty required. To this end we
shall offer the testimony of persons who were in a situation to remark
every occurrence, to listen to every expression, and on whom such
expressions, had they been uttered, could not have failed to make a
strong impression. We shall then proceed to the charge delivered to the
grand jury at Baltimore, which furnishes the eighth and last ground of
accusation; and then we shall prove that the respondent said nothing of
a political nature to the jury, except that which he has stated in his
answer, and which he hopes to satisfy this honorable Court he had a right
to say, however indiscreet or unnecessary the exercise of that right in
this instance may have been. We shall produce a host of witnesses to
prove that he never uttered such sentiments as are attributed to him
by one witness, relative to the present Administration, its character,
views, and manner of obtaining its power; sentiments which he admits
would have been in the highest degree reprehensible on such an occasion;
that the charge which was delivered was read from a book; and that he
spoke nothing extemporary, as other witnesses for the prosecution have
supposed. And, finally, we shall produce this book to speak for itself;
shall prove it to be the same from which the charge was delivered; and
shall conclude with the examination of witnesses who stood round the
respondent while he read it, sat by his side, and almost looked over him
while he delivered the charge which it contains.

This, Mr. President, will be the general bearing of our testimony; which
we shall now, with the permission of this honorable Court, proceed to
adduce, in the order in which it has been stated.


_Samuel Ewing, sworn._

Mr. Hopkinson. Please to state whether you were in the court the day
subsequent to that on which the opinion was delivered by the Court, and
what you recollect occurred at that time?

Mr. Ewing. I attended at the court the day succeeding, and I remember
that Judges Chase and Peters, addressing Messrs. Lewis and Dallas, said
they were not to consider any thing which took place the day before as a
restriction on the course they wished to pursue; Judge Peters said that
every thing done yesterday was withdrawn. Judge Chase asked them if they
would go on in the cause; some conversation ensued, which ended in the
determination of Messrs. Lewis and Dallas not to proceed in the defence
of Fries. Judge Chase then made this observation: that if, after the
Court had expressed their opinion on the law, they persisted in stating
to the jury their sentiments on the law, they must do it at the hazard
of their legal reputations. I did not understand this as a menace, but
as a declaration to the counsel that they must do it on their standing
at the bar, and from a regard to their reputations. If I state any thing
further, it will only be a recapitulation of the testimony already given.


_Edward J. Coale, sworn._

Mr. Hopkinson. Will you examine that paper, and say what you know
respecting it?

Mr. Coale. It is a copy of the paper handed down by Judge Chase on the
trial of Fries, made at the instance of Judge Chase, from a paper in
his handwriting; there were some words in the original which I could
not ascertain: I left blanks for them, and they were filled up by Judge
Chase; the other parts are written by me. It was made out before the
trial of Fries. When in the office of Judge Chase, I was frequently in
the habit of transcribing papers from his handwriting. After I left him
I went to Philadelphia, and lived there when Fries was tried. The judge
occasionally, during my residence there, sent for me to transcribe his
opinions; and on that occasion he called on me to transcribe this paper
from the original handwriting of himself.


_William Meredith, sworn._

Mr. Hopkinson. Were you present at the trial of Fries?

Mr. Meredith. On the 22d day of April, 1800, I went to the court house
for the purpose of attending the trial. It was rather at a late hour;
I think after eleven o’clock before I reached the court house. I met
several persons coming from the court room; I thought therefore that the
Court had adjourned, but not seeing any gentlemen of the bar, or the
judges, I went on; when I came into court, I saw Judge Chase holding a
paper in his hand, and he said that the Court had with great deliberation
considered the overt acts in the indictment against Fries, that they
had made up their minds on the extent of the constitutional definition
of treason, and that to prevent their being misunderstood, they had
committed their opinion to writing, one copy of which was intended to be
given to the district attorney, another to the counsel for the prisoner,
and a third to be given to the jury; perhaps something else might have
been said, but I do not recollect it. The paper was then thrown down by
him to the bar, and a sentiment of this kind expressed by Judge Chase:
that this opinion was not intended by the Court to prevent the counsel
from proceeding in the usual manner. I felt a desire to take a copy of
the paper. I do not recollect whether more than one was thrown down. I
had not, however, an opportunity of doing it. The paper was so fully
occupied till the adjournment of the Court, that although I made two or
three attempts to obtain it, I could not succeed. The Court adjourned a
short time afterwards. After I went home I recollect that an application
was made to me by the clerk of the court to return the copy, which he
understood I had taken. I informed him I had not taken a copy. On the
following day I was in the court room at the opening of the Court. Fries
was put to the bar, and the judge then inquired whether the counsel were
ready to proceed on the trial. I remember Mr. Lewis addressing himself to
the Court, and objecting to proceed in the defence, because the counsel
had been restrained by the Court from proceeding in the manner which
they deemed most beneficial to their client. I remember also that Judge
Chase told him that he ought not to refer to the opinion which had been
delivered on the preceding day; that the counsel were not to be bound
by that opinion, as it had been withdrawn. Mr. Lewis referring to that
opinion, however, considered it as the formed and decided opinion of
the Court, and that although the Court had withdrawn it, it still would
have an operation upon their minds; that while the Court was under its
influence, they could not expect to be heard in any of their arguments
with effect. Judge Peters replied that the opinion was withdrawn, and I
think Judge Chase repeated the opinion before expressed, that the counsel
were not to be bound by that opinion, might enter fully into the case,
and argue as well on the law as on the fact before the jury. I recollect
Mr. Lewis stating to the Court his opinion of the appositeness of cases
decided at common law in England. I remember Judge Chase expressing his
opinion and belief that they were perfectly inapplicable; and afterwards
remarking, that if, however, the counsel would go on, it was not the
intention of the Court to circumscribe them, or to take from the jury
the decision of the law as well as the fact. He further added, that the
counsel might manage the defence in such way as they thought proper,
having a regard to their own characters. I am the more particular and
positive of these expressions, because very shortly after the trial I
made a summary of the proceedings. I find it stated as coming from the
mouth of Judge Chase, and that he repeated that the counsel for the
prisoner might go on in their own way, having a regard to their own
characters. Judge Peters made a remark which I thought was calculated
to put the counsel into good humor, but they persisted in their refusal
to proceed. Thus far the Court manifested, in my opinion, a desire that
the cause might progress, and a persuasive and conciliatory temper; but
Mr. Lewis having again decidedly said that he would not proceed, Judge
Chase said, if you suppose by conduct like this to put the Court into
a difficulty, you are mistaken. After a pause, Judge Chase addressed
himself to the prisoner, and asked him if he was ready to proceed on his
trial, or whether he would have other counsel assigned to him. Fries
replied he did not know what was best for him to do, but he would leave
his case to the Court. Mr. Rawle stated that from the peculiarity of
the circumstances of the case, and the prisoner being left without the
assistance of counsel, his wish was that the trial might be postponed
for a day, and the postponement took place by order of the Court. The
following morning when the Court was assembled, Fries was again put to
the bar, and Judge Chase inquired of him whether he wished the Court to
assign him counsel? His reply was, that he would trust himself to the
Court and jury. Judge Chase replied, Then by the blessing of God the
Court will be your counsel, and will do you as much justice as could be
done by the counsel that were assigned you, or nearly in those words. The
trial proceeded, but I was not present during the whole of it.


_Luther Martin, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Did you furnish Judge Chase with a copy of the book, entitled
the “Prospect before Us,” and at what time did you furnish him with it?

Mr. Martin. It is not a pleasing thing for me to be a witness on this
point, as I may be considered as a party concerned, and especially from
being one of the counsel for Judge Chase. Yet, as it is required from me,
I will proceed to state what I know. When I was in New York, I observed
in a newspaper which I took up at a barber’s shop an advertisement for
the sale of the “Prospect before Us.” I mentioned it to Judge Washington,
and he sent his servant to procure a copy, and I desired him to purchase
two copies. I read it, and as was usual with me with respect to books any
wise interesting, I scored such passages as were remarkable either for
their merit or demerit, and I did score a great portion of the book. But
I did not score them with the least idea of an indictment being founded
upon them. When I scored the book I did not know that Judge Chase was
going on the circuit of Virginia. My scoring was for my own amusement,
and for that of my friends. Afterwards I saw Judge Chase. I asked him if
he was going down to Richmond; he answered yes. I asked if he had seen
the book called the “Prospect before Us?” He said he had not. I then told
him, I will put it into your hands; you may amuse yourself with it as you
are going down, and make what use of it you please. There was a great
deal more scored than was contained in the indictment. I most solemnly
declare that I had no view to a prosecution in scoring it; though I have
no hesitation in saying that in common with every worthy inhabitant of
America I detested the book.

Mr. Nicholson. What do you mean by detest?

Mr. Martin. I am ready candidly to acknowledge that I did think it a
book that ought to be prosecuted; and I did not think that Judge Chase
would have an opportunity of seeing it unless I gave him a copy of it.
Having since heard it suggested that I had some share in drawing up the
indictment against Callender, I most solemnly declare I did not put pen
to paper on the subject.


_James Winchester, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Will you please to state whether you were in Annapolis in
1800, in court with Judge Chase, and Mr. John T. Mason, and what was the
conversation which then took place?

Mr. Winchester. I attended a circuit court held at Annapolis in 1800.
I do not recollect either the day the Court commenced or ended. I
think on the last day of the term sentence was passed on ---- Saunders
for stealing, in his character of postmaster, the contents of a
letter. A crowd gathered round the door, and retarded our passage
out of court. I do not remember what persons remained; but Mr. Mason
came up and addressed himself to Judge Chase. My recollection is at
best but imperfect, and of this conversation necessarily indistinct.
In the account of it, therefore, I shall use my own language. I may
occasionally use the language of Judge Chase and Mr. Mason. According to
the impression on my mind the conversation commenced in this way: Judge
Chase had delivered a charge to the grand jury. Mr. Mason came up, and
in a laughing manner jocosely asked, In what light are we to consider
the charge, as moral, political, judicial, or religious? These are the
words, I believe, but of this I am not certain. The judge replied in the
same style and manner, I believe, that it was a little of all. I cannot
be certain, but I think Mr. Mason intimated to the judge that he would
not deliver such sentiments in Virginia. It appeared to me that the
language of Mr. Mason conveyed to Judge Chase the idea that he was afraid
to deliver such sentiments in Virginia, though I am not myself confident
that such was his meaning. The judge replied that he would, and that he
would at all times and in all places execute the laws in the manner he
had declared.


_William Marshall, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Inform the Court how soon you saw Judge Chase after his
arrival at Richmond, what passed between you, &c.

Mr. Marshall. Judge Chase arrived in Richmond, but whether on the 21st
or 22d of May, I do not recollect; but my impression is that it was
Tuesday. I waited on him, as was usual with me, and gave him information
respecting the state of the docket. The associate judge did not attend
on the 22d, when the Court was opened and the grand jury received their
charge. They went to their room, and did not return till Saturday the
24th of May, when they returned a presentment against James T. Callender,
which I have. [The original presentment was produced by the witness,
read, and delivered to the Secretary.]

As soon as I had read the presentment, at the request of the attorney of
the district the jury were taken back to their chamber, and progress was
made in preparing the indictment. There was some conversation between
Judge Chase and Mr. Nelson, which lasted for a few minutes. Judge Chase
inquired what was the proper process on the presentment. The answer
which the district attorney made, was, that he supposed a capias was the
proper process. I recollect that Judge Chase said something of a bench
warrant, which was a practice unknown to us. Judge Chase asked me to draw
the warrant. I said I could not. He then said he would endeavor to draw
it. Afterwards Judge Chase desired the district attorney to draw out the
form of a capias; the judge said he would draw one himself, and that I
might draw out another; and he said he would take the most approved of
the three. I recollect mine was drawn first; but whether before Judge
Chase and Mr. Nelson had finished theirs, I do not recollect. On looking
over mine, he said he was better satisfied with mine than his own; and he
requested me to sign, seal, and deliver it to the marshal.

[Mr. Marshall here produced and read the original capias.]

On Saturday the 24th of May, in the afternoon, the grand jury brought
in the indictment. I have taken these circumstances from a copy of the
minutes of my office, which, if the Court wish to see, I can produce,
as I have them with me. Judge Chase alone formed the Court from the 22d
to the 29th of May, inclusive. On the 27th of May the marshal brought
Callender into court, Judge Chase being at that time the only member of
the Court. A chair was handed to him, and he remained in court while the
Court proceeded with the docket in the usual way, until near evening,
when Judge Chase observed that as the traverser was in court, he might
perhaps have some application to make. I do not recollect whether the
counsel afterwards employed for the defence of Callender were then in
court; but if they were, they made no observations. But Mr. Meriwether
Jones, with whom Callender resided, said that Callender was not then
prepared to make any application; but that perhaps to-morrow he would
move a continuance. Then Judge Chase applied to Callender, and asked
if he could give bail. Mr. Jones replied that he could give bail in a
moderate sum. Judge Chase asked Callender what were his circumstances;
that in fixing the sum, he would be governed by that circumstance.
Callender said they were nearly equal. The judge repeated the question,
and then Callender said he was indebted about two hundred dollars, and
there was about as much due to him which he expected to receive; and
therefore he did not consider himself worth any thing. Judge Chase then
asked if he could give bail, himself in two hundred dollars, and another
in a like sum. The reply made by Mr. Callender or Mr. Jones was, that
he could find bail to that amount; and he accordingly gave bail. On
the 28th May, an application was made by Mr. Hay; this was the first
instance in which Mr. Callender took any steps for his defence. Mr. Hay
stated that he was not well acquainted with the practice in such cases;
that he had an affidavit, of a general nature, stating the impossibility
of going into the trial, with any prospect of success, without the
attendance of a number of witnesses who lived at a great distance. Mr.
Hay also inquired whether a general affidavit was sufficient, or whether
a special affidavit, stating the names of the witnesses and the facts
they were expected to prove, would be required. Judge Chase said that
the strict practice of the law required a special affidavit; but they
might take till to-morrow to prepare a special affidavit, submitting it
to their discretion to manage the cause as they thought proper. I beg
pardon for being a little too hasty in my narrative. When Mr. Hay offered
his motion for a continuance, the Court said that before they could
hear the motion it was necessary that the traverser should plead to the
indictment. For if he pleaded guilty, there would be no necessity for an
application. Mr. Hay assured the Court that the traverser would not plead
guilty. Mr. Callender was arraigned and he plead not guilty; and then the
conversation which I have stated took place. The reply of Judge Chase
was, after a general affidavit is made, it must be relied on, but you
may withdraw the general, and file a special affidavit. Nothing further
passed on the 28th.

On the 29th, in the morning, Mr. Hay produced a special affidavit; I
have the original here. It is stated therein, that there were a number
of witnesses, one from New Hampshire; one from Massachusetts; some from
Pennsylvania, and some from South Carolina, absent; who were material
witnesses for his defence; that there were also sundry documents to be
procured; and an essay written by Mr. Adams on canon and feudal law,
which the traverser supposed it important to have for his defence. Mr.
Hay, on these grounds, moved for a continuance to the next term, in a
pretty long speech. Judge Chase observed, that every person before he
made a publication, if he meant to justify it, ought to know the names
of his witnesses; and if he meant to justify it by documents, they ought
to have been within his reach. It was not to be presumed, indeed, that
he could calculate upon being able to procure his witnesses in a few
days; that in this case, it was alleged that one witness resided in New
Hampshire, which was a great way off. He said that the ordinary sittings
of the Court would be too short for him to obtain witnesses from so great
a distance. He said that the prisoner should have time, and he should
have a fair trial, but he could not allow him to the next term. He said
he might have two weeks--but that might be too short a time--you may
have three weeks, a month, nay, six weeks. We cannot sit so long, because
we are obliged to hold a court in the district of Delaware; but I will
adjourn this Court, to go to Delaware, and will return in six weeks. In
the course of the observations offered by Mr. Hay to the Court, as well
as I can recollect, he said, if the documents and witnesses were here, he
did not think he would be prepared during that term to investigate all
the facts, and the law arising on them; but he would be prepared against
the next term, if the Court would indulge him with a continuance. After
Judge Chase had made this offer of a postponement, I do not distinctly
remember that Mr. Hay or Mr. Nicholas made any reply. After a short
interval Judge Chase said, as they did not seem disposed to take the time
he had offered, the trial should come on within the time the testimony of
the witnesses residing in Virginia, deemed material, can be procured. He
asked the marshal what was the distance of the residences of Mr. Giles
and General Mason, and in what time they could conveniently come to
Richmond; and, whether his deputy marshals could go for them? The reply
of the marshal was, that his deputies were prepared to execute any orders
of the Court. Judge Chase then directed me to make out the subpœnas for
Monday, the 2d of June; and I issued subpœnas for Messrs. Giles, Mason,
and Taylor; but Colonel Taylor’s name does not appear in the affidavit.
The deputy marshals were directed to use all possible expedition in
serving the subpœnas: they were all returned executed on Monday the 2d of
June, endorsed with the hour of the day on which they were executed.

[Here Mr. Marshall offered the originals with the endorsements of the
time of service.]

On Monday, the 2d day of June, Colonel Taylor appeared in court. The
other witnesses were called, but they did not appear. A postponement was
asked by one of the gentlemen, for two hours, who stated that it had
rained on Sunday preceding, which might have impeded travelling, and it
was granted. Some time in the course of the day, Judge Chase observed he
might have till to-morrow, which was accepted.

On Tuesday morning, soon after the opening of the Court, the motion for
a continuance was renewed, founded on the affidavit of Callender, which
gave rise to the first motion. Judge Griffin was then in court, having
arrived on the 30th of May, and continued during the remainder of the
term. It was argued much at length, and received the same decision as on
the 29th. The marshal was then ordered to call the petit jury; twelve
jurors appeared; there were some objections which I do not precisely
recollect, to the panel of the jury; and a motion made to quash the
array. An argument was made and some authorities quoted; Judge Chase said
they were not to be relied on, and he asked for Coke upon Lyttleton. I
brought it from the library in the capitol. Judge Chase looked into it,
and said the array should not be quashed; but I do not know the principle
on which he decided. When the jury had all answered, the gentlemen
proposed to propound a question to the jurors as they came to the book.
I do not recollect what the question was, but Judge Chase said he would
propound the proper question himself. The question which Judge Chase
said it was proper to propound, was: “Have you formed and delivered
an opinion (for he said it was necessary to have delivered as well as
formed it) on the indictment?” The answer of the first juror was, that
he had never seen or heard the indictment, and could not say that he had
formed an opinion respecting it. Eight or nine of the jurors were asked
the same question, and gave a like answer. The gentlemen who defended
the traverser then said it was unnecessary to ask the other jurors that
question; the rest were sworn, and the trial proceeded. The course it
took was pretty lengthy, and I cannot state all the circumstances that
took place. I recollect that the testimony of Colonel Taylor was refused,
but I do not recollect the particular circumstances attending it.

Mr. Giles was on a jury in the circuit court, on, I think, the 27th
of May, the day Callender was brought into court by the marshal. When
Mr. Giles’s name was called, Judge Chase asked me whether that was the
celebrated Mr. Giles, member of Congress. I said that it was. He said
that he had never seen him before. Nothing more passed at that time.
In the evening I was at Judge Chase’s lodgings. He asked me whether I
supposed Mr. Giles would remain in Richmond until the trial of Callender.
I said it was uncertain, that it was not customary for Mr. Giles to
remain any length of time when he came to town. Judge Chase said he
wished he would remain, and serve in Callender’s case; nay, he wished
that Callender might be tried by a jury of his own politics. He said
that if his situation as a judge would permit him to drop a hint to
the marshal with respect to the jury, he would intimate his wish that
Callender should be thus tried; but, in his situation, it would be
improper for him to interfere with the duty of the marshal.

Mr. Harper. Inform the Court at what time, if any, you were at Judge
Chase’s chambers, when a certain Mr. John Heath was there; what passed,
and what did not pass.

Mr. Marshall. Judge Chase was, as he informed me, a total stranger in
Richmond, and had never been there until he held the Court in 1800. He
asked me if I would call upon him from time to time. When I knew he was
at home, I used to go in an evening, and spend an hour or two with him
at his lodgings. I also generally went in the morning, about an hour
before the meeting of the Court. I recollect about ten o’clock going to
Mr. Chase’s lodgings. I went, I think, but of this I am not positive,
with Mr. Randolph. I found Mr. Heath in Judge Chase’s chamber, or in the
passage. Mr. Heath was, I think, in the act of leaving the room; he had
his hat in his hand, and I met him either in his way out of the room, or
in the passage.

President. Can you state the day of the month?

Mr. Marshall. I cannot, but I think it was the day before Judge Griffin
arrived. I recollect very well, on that day Mr. D. Randolph and myself
walked up to the court room. I was surprised at seeing Mr. Heath at Judge
Chase’s, and asked Mr. Randolph what could have brought him there.

Mr. Harper. Was Mr. Heath in the act of going out when you entered?

Mr. Marshall. Yes, sir, he was on the floor. He had taken his leave, as I
supposed, of Judge Chase, and was either out of the room, or in the act
of coming out of it. I do not recollect positively whether Mr. Randolph
went with me. I recollect going with Mr. Randolph to court, and that
it was the usual practice of Mr. R. and myself to go to Judge Chase’s
chambers in the morning and attend him to court. I do not certainly
recollect whether that morning we went together to the judge’s chambers,
but I am positive we left the chamber together. The Court met generally
at eleven o’clock. I had something particular to do that morning, and it
was from ten to half-past ten when I went to the judge’s chambers; it may
have been about ten. The time I saw Mr. Heath must have been about ten
o’clock.

Mr. Harper. Did any conversation take place between the judge and Mr.
Heath while you were there?

Mr. Marshall. I believe I met Mr. Heath outside of the door. There was
not a word of conversation at any rate.

Mr. Harper. Did any incident take place respecting a paper handed from
Mr. Randolph to Mr. Chase?

Mr. Marshall. There did not.

Mr. Harper. Did you hear any thing about creatures called democrats?

Mr. Marshall. I never heard any thing pass between them. I never heard
the judge say any thing about the jury, except what occurred either
at the judge’s lodgings or at court, which I took to be instructions
to summon twenty-four jurors about twenty-five years of age, and
freeholders; that there should be enough to supply the juries required at
that court.


SATURDAY, February 16.

The Court was opened at 10 o’clock A. M.


_David M. Randolph, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Were you marshal of the United States for the district of
Virginia in 1800?

Answer. I was, sir.

Mr. Harper. Did you attend the circuit court held in May of that year, as
marshal?

A. I did, sir.

Mr. Harper. Did you summon the panel of the jury that served on the trial
of Callender?

A. I did.

Mr. Harper. Had you any conversation with Judge Chase on the forming that
panel?

A. I had no conversation with him on that subject. There was a
conversation offered to me by Judge Chase.

Mr. Harper. What was it?

A. The judge recommended to me that I should get persons generally from
the country; represented that they should be twenty-five years of age, of
fair characters, untainted by party prejudices.

Mr. Harper. Did any gentlemen summoned apply to you to be discharged?

A. Several. At the moment I received orders to have two juries ready by
Monday, I called on my two deputies, and desired them to take down, on
distinct papers, the names I mentioned to them. I observed that I chose
to take the responsibility on myself. While they were taking down the
names, I summoned several persons whose names were not put down till
Monday. On Monday, finding my two deputies had not summoned a sufficient
number, I went in quest of them. I found them at the end of the town,
in the act of executing my orders. Mr. Moseby, one of my deputies, was
standing with Colonel Vanderval, I think in conversation with him. I
called him across the street, and asked him how they succeeded. At this
time I saw my other deputy. They told me they wanted but one or two
jurors. I told them they must make haste. About this time I saw Mr.
Basset entering town on horseback. I told him that he had been crossed as
a grand juror for non-attendance; that he must serve as a petit juror,
which would give him an opportunity of offering his apology. I took
out my watch, and told him that I allowed him five minutes. We arrived
at the capitol, and my deputies there gave me their memorandums, from
which, and my own, I made up the list of the jury. Two gentlemen, Mr.
Lewis and Mr. Blakely, offered something like excuses. I looked at Mr.
Blakely, and said there was only one excuse that I would admit, to wit:
his being under twenty-five years of age. He said he was under that age,
and I dismissed him. Mr. Lewis said he might make the same excuse. I
said I doubted it, but I let him off. As I went into the passage, I met
Mr. Samuel Myers, who also desired to be let off. I told him I could not
and would not. He said I would excuse him for a reason which he could
assign. He whispered, and said that he was prejudiced against Callender.
I permitted him to go, but begged him to keep that reason to himself.
Another juror summoned, was very warm and importunate to be excused. I
told him there was only one ground on which I would excuse him. He asked
me what it was. I answered that if it applied to him he already knew it.
I begged him to go to the court, and he would learn what it was. He did
so. Colonel Harvie stopped me in the passage in a hasty manner, and with
great warmth and friendliness urged me to let him off. He said he was
sheriff of Henrico County. I said I knew it, but that I also knew that
his duties were generally performed by deputies. I did not let him off.
He applied to the Court, and was excused.


_John Marshall, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to inform this honorable Court whether you did, or did
not, on the part of Colonel Harvie, make an application for his discharge
from the jury, and on what ground that application was made?

Mr. Marshall. I was at the bar when Colonel Harvie, with whom I was
intimately acquainted, informed me that he was summoned on the jury.
Some conversation passed, in which he expressed his unwillingness to
serve, and stated that he was an unfit person; for that his mind was
completely made up, that he thought the (sedition) law unconstitutional,
and that, whatever the evidence might be, he should find the traverser
not guilty; and requested me, on that ground, to apply to the marshal
for his discharge. I told the marshal that Colonel Harvie was extremely
desirous of being discharged, and, on his discovering great repugnance
to his discharge, I informed him that he was predetermined, and that no
testimony could alter his opinion. The marshal said that Colonel Harvie
might make his excuse to the Court; he observed that he was watched, and
to prevent any charge of improper conduct from being brought against him,
he should not interfere in discharging any of the jurors who had been
summoned. I informed Colonel Harvie of this conversation, and it was
then agreed that I should apply to the Court for his discharge, upon the
ground of his being sheriff of Henrico County; that his attendance was
necessary, as that Court was then in session. I moved the discharge of
the juror on that ground, and he was discharged by the Court.

Mr. Randolph. Were you in court during a part of the trial, or during the
whole of the trial?

Mr. Marshall. I think I was there only during a part of the time.

Mr. Randolph. Did you observe any thing unusual in the conduct on the
part of the counsel towards the Court, or the Court towards the counsel,
and what?

Mr. Marshall. There were several circumstances that took place on that
trial, on the part both of the bar and the bench, which do not always
occur in trials. I would probably be better able to answer the question,
if it were made more determinate.

Mr. Randolph. Then I will make the question more particular by asking
whether the interruptions of counsel were much more frequent than usual?

Mr. Marshall. The counsel appeared to me to wish to bring before the jury
arguments to prove that the sedition law was unconstitutional, and Mr.
Chase said that that was not a proper question to go to the jury; and
whenever any attempt was made to bring that point before the jury, the
counsel for the traverser were stopped. After this there was an argument
commenced (I think) by Mr. Hay, but I do not recollect positively, to
prove to the judge that the opinion which he had given was not correct
in point of law, and that the constitutionality of the law ought to go
before the jury; whatever the argument was which Mr. Hay advanced, there
was something in it which Judge Chase did not believe to be law, and he
stopped him on that point. Mr. Hay still went on, and made some political
observations; Judge Chase stopped him again, and the collision ended,
by Mr. Hay sitting down, and folding up his papers as if he intended to
retire.

Mr. Randolph. There were many preliminary questions, such as, with
respect to the continuance of the cause, the admissibility of testimony,
&c. Did the interruptions take place on the part of the Court only when
the counsel pressed the point of the unconstitutionality of the sedition
law?

Mr. Marshall. I believe that it was only at those times, but I do not
recollect precisely. I do not remember correctly what passed between
the bench and the bar; but it appeared to me that whenever Judge Chase
thought the counsel incorrect in their points, he immediately told them
so, and stopped them short; but what were the particular expressions
that he used, my recollection is too indistinct to enable me to state
precisely; what I do state is merely from a general impression which
remains on my mind.

Mr. Randolph. Was there any misunderstanding between the counsel and the
Court, and what was the cause of that misunderstanding, or what was your
opinion as to the cause, or did you form one?

Mr. Marshall. It is impossible for me to assign the particular cause. It
began early in the proceedings and increased as the trial progressed. On
the part of the judge it seemed to be a disgust with regard to the mode
adopted by the traverser’s counsel, at least I speak as to the part which
Mr. Hay took on the trial, and it seemed to increase also with him as he
went on.

Mr. Randolph. When the Court decided the point that the jury had not a
right to decide upon the constitutionality of a law, did the counsel for
the traverser begin an argument to convince Judge Chase that the opinion
which he had delivered on that point was not well founded? Is it the
practice in courts when counsel object to the legality of an opinion
given by the Court, to hear the arguments of counsel against such opinion?

Mr. Marshall. If the counsel have not been already heard, it is usual
to hear them, in order that they may change or confirm the opinion of
the Court, when there is any doubt entertained. There is, however, no
positive rule on this subject, and the course pursued by the Court will
depend upon circumstances; where a judge believes that the point is
perfectly clear and settled, he will scarcely permit the question to be
agitated. However, it is considered as decorous on the part of the judge
to listen while the counsel abstain from urging unimportant arguments.

Mr. Randolph. In the circuit courts of the United States, after a court
is opened for any district, is it the practice of such courts to adjourn
over from time to time, in order to hold a court in another district in
the intermediate time, and then to return back; or is not the uniform
practice to postpone causes when they cannot be conveniently tried, to
the next term?

Mr. Marshall. I can only speak of courts where I have attended, in which
the practice is, that the business of one term shall be gone through as
far as possible, before any other court is held.

Mr. Randolph. Was it ever the practice of any court, in which you have
practised or presided, to compel counsel to reduce to writing the
questions which they meant to propound to their witnesses?

Mr. Marshall. It has not been usual; but in cases of the kind, the
conduct of the Court will depend upon circumstances. If a question
relates to a point of the law, and is understood to be an important
question, it might be proper to require that it be reduced to writing.
Unless there is some special reason which appears to the Court, or on the
request of the adverse counsel, questions are not commonly reduced to
writing, but when there is a special reason in the mind of the Court, or
it is required by the opposite counsel, questions may be directed to be
committed to writing.

Mr. Randolph. When these questions are reduced to writing, is it for a
special reason, after the Court have heard the question, and not before
they have been propounded?

Mr. Marshall. I never knew it requested that a question should be reduced
to writing in the first instance in the whole course of my practice.

Mr. Randolph. Did you ever, sir, in a criminal prosecution, know a
witness deemed inadmissible, because he could not go a particular length
in his testimony--because he could not narrate all the circumstances of
the crime charged in an indictment, or in the case of a libel; and could
only prove a part of a particular charge, and not the whole of it?

Mr. Marshall. I never did hear that objection made by the Court except in
this particular case.

[Some inquiry was here made relative to the above question put by
Mr. Randolph, and objected to by Mr. Cocke, which Mr. R. answered by
observing that he withdrew it.]

Mr. Harper. Please to inform this honorable Court, sir, whether you
recollect that Judge Chase during any part of the proceedings made an
offer to postpone the trial of Callender, and if you do, to what time?

Mr. Marshall. I recollect at the time a motion was made for the
continuance till the next term, that Judge Chase declared, as his
opinion, that it ought to be tried at the present term. A good deal of
conversation took place on the subject. The counsel for the traverser
stated several circumstances in favor of their client, particularly
relative to the absence of his witnesses; but the whole terminated at
that time by a postponement for a few days; so many days as, I thought
at the time, were sufficient for obtaining the witnesses residing in
Virginia. I do not now recollect what the time was, nor do I say it was
sufficient. I simply recollect that I thought it was. When the cause
came on again, there was no proposition that I recollect on the part of
the traverser’s counsel for a continuance, but a desire was expressed
of a postponement for a few hours in order to give their witnesses time
to arrive at Richmond, as it was possible they had been impeded by the
badness of the roads; a considerable quantity of rain having fallen the
preceding day. There was a declaration on the part of the Court that they
might take until the next day, and they went on to say they might have
a longer time, if they thought it was necessary, but the precise length
of time offered I do not recollect; but I do remember that they said the
trial must come on before the present term closed.

The President. Do you recollect whether the conduct of the judge on this
trial was tyrannical, overbearing, and oppressive?

Mr. Marshall. I will state the facts. The counsel for the traverser
persisted in arguing the question of the constitutionality of the
sedition law, in which they were constantly repressed by Judge Chase.
Judge Chase checked Mr. Hay whenever he came to that point, and after
having resisted repeated checks, Mr. Hay appeared to be determined to
abandon the cause, when he was desired by the judge to proceed with his
argument, and informed that he should not be interrupted thereafter. If
this is not considered tyrannical, oppressive, and overbearing, I know
nothing else that was so.

Mr. Randolph. Are you acquainted with Mr. Wirt; was he a young man at
that time; was he single, married, or a widower?

Mr. Marshall. I am pretty well acquainted with him; he is about thirty
years of age, and a widower.


_Edmund J. Lee, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Were you at the circuit court in the spring of 1800, held at
Richmond, at which Judge Chase presided?

Mr. Lee. I was not in court when Callender was presented by the grand
jury; but I was when application was made for a continuance, and I
remember that Judge Chase, on an application made for a continuance, on
account of the absence of some of the witnesses, informed the counsel
that he could not continue the cause, but if they would fix upon any
determinate time, within which they could obtain their witnesses, without
its going over to the next term, the Court would postpone the trial.
Judge Chase also added that he had no objection to postpone it for a
fortnight or a month; I am not certain whether he did not say he would
postpone it for a longer time, I do not know but he said for six weeks,
but he said positively he would not postpone it to the next term. He
added, if the counsel conceived they could obtain the evidence within the
time mentioned, they might have it.


_Robert Gamble, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Were you at the circuit court of the United States for the
Virginia district, in the month of May or June, 1800, held at Richmond?

Mr. Gamble. I was one of the jurors, sir, and I was in court when a
motion was made for continuing the cause of Callender to the next term.

Mr. Harper. Do you recollect whether an offer was made by the Court to
postpone that cause?

Mr. Gamble. Yes, sir; Judge Chase said he would postpone it for a week, a
fortnight, a month, or more, and I think he mentioned he would postpone
it for six weeks, or as long as the term would admit, without its going
over to the next term.


_Philip Gooch, sworn._

Mr. Harper. What did you observe relative to the conduct of the Court and
counsel on that day? State what happened.

Mr. Gooch. When Mr. Basset suggested to the Court his wish to be informed
whether it was their opinion that he was a proper person to serve on the
jury, because he had formed and expressed an opinion on the extracts
which he had seen, and declared that if correctly copied from the work
called “The Prospect before Us,” the author was within the pale of the
sedition law; on that suggestion, I recollect, the Court decided, and
laid it down as law, that he must not only have formed an opinion, but
delivered it also, and the judge gave some reasons why he must not
only have formed, but delivered an opinion. I think he said that if a
notorious murder was committed in the body of a county, which every
man believed ought to be punished with death, and had so formed his
opinion, it would in that case be impossible to get a jury to try such
an offender, if it was an objection that a man had formed an opinion. I
understood that he had consulted Judge Griffin on this point. The court
was very crowded, but I had obtained a situation just behind the judges,
and had an opportunity of hearing in some degree what passed between
them, though not distinctly. Mr. Basset was eventually sworn upon the
jury. The cause proceeded.

Mr. Wirt opened the cause on the part of the traverser; he made some
allusion to the Court’s prohibiting the mode of defence which the counsel
for the traverser had adopted, but he was interrupted by the Court, and
was told that the decision of the Court must be binding for the present;
that if they objected, they might file their bill of error, and it should
be allowed.

Mr. W. proceeded in the cause, and was endeavouring to show that the
sedition law was unconstitutional; the Court interrupted him, and told
him that what he had to say must be addressed to the Court, but if he
was going on that point, he must again be informed that the Court would
not suffer it to be urged. Mr. W. appeared to be in some agitation, but
continued his argument, and when he came up to that point a second time,
he was again interrupted by the Court. Mr. W. resumed his argument, and
said he was going on. Judge Chase again interrupted him and said, “No,
sir, you are not going on, I am going on; sit down.” I recollect, also,
after the judge had made some observations, Mr. W. again proceeded, and
having observed that as the jury had a right to consider the law, and as
the constitution was law, it followed syllogistically that the jury had
a right to decide on the constitutionality of a law. Judge Chase replied
to him, A _non sequitur_, sir, and, at the same time, made him a bow.
Whether these circumstances took place exactly in the order in which I
have mentioned them, I am not positive, but I believe they did. Mr. W.
sat down, and the judge delivered a lengthy opinion. He stated that the
counsel must argue the law before the Court, and not before the jury, for
it was not competent for the jury to decide that point, or that the jury
were competent to decide whether the sedition law embraced this case or
not, but that they were not competent to decide whether the sedition law
was constitutional or not, and that he would not suffer that point to be
argued.

Mr. Harper. What was the effect produced by the reply of Judge Chase to
Mr. Wirt’s syllogism, a _non sequitur_?

Mr. Gooch. It appeared to me as if it was intended to excite merriment;
and if it was so intended, it certainly had that effect, and the
same appeared to me to be the motive of the judge in adding the word
_punctuatim_ after the words _verbatim et literatim_. I thought these
circumstances were calculated to display his wit.

Mr. Harper. When the judge told Mr. Wirt to sit down, did you conceive
the conduct of the court to be rude and peremptory, or was there any
thing like it in his application of the term “young gentlemen?”

Mr. Gooch. I did not perceive any thing rude or intemperate in his
conduct, unless it can be inferred from the words themselves, when
he said, You show yourselves clever young gentlemen, but the law is,
nevertheless, not as you have stated it.


MONDAY, February 18.


_Gunning Bedford, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to state to the Court whether you were present in your
judicial character at a circuit court held at Wilmington in 1800, and
relate the circumstances which occurred.

A. I attended that Court on the 27th of June. Judge Chase presided.
I arrived in the morning about half an hour before Judge Chase. We
went into court about eleven o’clock. The grand jury was called and
impanelled. The judge delivered a charge: they retired to their box;
after an absence of not more than an hour they returned to the bar.
They were asked by the judge whether they had any bills or presentments
to make to the Court. They said they had none. The Court called on the
attorney of the district to say whether there was any business likely
to be brought forward. He replied that there was none. Some of the
grand jury then expressed a wish to be discharged. Judge Chase said it
was unusual for the Court to discharge the grand jury so early in the
session; it is not the practice in any circuit court in which I have
sat. He turned round to me, and said, Mr. Bedford, what is your usual
practice? I said it depended upon circumstances, and on the business
before the Court; that when the Court was satisfied there was nothing to
detain them they were discharged. Judge Chase then turned to the jury,
and observed, “But, gentlemen of the jury, I am informed that there is
conducted in this State (but I am only _informed_) a seditious newspaper,
the editor of which is in the practice of libelling and abusing the
Government. His name is ----, but perhaps I may do injustice to the man
by mentioning his name. Have you, gentlemen of the jury, ever turned your
attention to the subject?” It was answered no. “But,” resumed the judge,
“it is your duty to attend to things of this kind. I have given you in
charge the sedition act among other things. If there is any thing in what
is suggested to you, it is your duty to inquire into it.” He added, “It
is high time that this seditious printer should be corrected; you know
that the prosperity and happiness of the country depend upon it.” He then
turned to the attorney of the district, and said, Mr. Attorney, can you
find a file of those papers? He answered that he did not know. A person
in court offered to procure a file. The attorney then said, as a file was
found, he would look it over. Can you, said the judge, look it over, and
examine it by to-morrow at ten o’clock. Mr. Attorney said he would. Judge
Chase then turned to the grand jury, and said, Gentlemen, you must attend
to-morrow at ten o’clock. Other business was gone into, and the Court
adjourned about two o’clock.

On my way to Judge Chase’s lodgings, I said to him, My friend, I believe
you know not where you are; the people of this country are very much
opposed to the sedition law, and will not be pleased with what you said.
Judge Chase clapped his hand on my shoulders and replied, “My dear
Bedford, no matter where we are, or among whom we are, we must do our
duty.”

The next day we went into court about ten o’clock. The grand jury went to
their chamber, and I believe Mr. Read returned with them into court. They
were asked if they had any thing to offer to the Court; and the attorney
was called on again to state whether he had found any thing in the file
of a seditious nature. He had a file of the paper before him, and he
said he had found nothing that was a proper subject for the notice of the
jury, unless a piece relating to Judge Chase himself. The judge answered,
Take no notice of that, my shoulders are broad, and they are able to bear
it; but where there is a violation of a positive law of the United States
it is necessary to notice it.


_Nicholas Vandyke, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to state whether you were at the circuit court for
Delaware in the year 1800?

A. I attended the circuit court held in Newcastle on the 27th and 28th
of June, 1800. I was not present when the Court opened; but I think I
entered the court house while Judge Chase was delivering a charge to
the grand jury. After its delivery the grand jury retired; they were
absent a short time: and as well as I can recollect before and when they
returned, I was either out of the court house, or engaged in conversation
with some person out of the bar. I think so, as I have no recollection
of the question put to the grand jury, whether they had found any bills,
and that put to the district attorney. I entered the bar while there was
a pause, and silence prevailed. I recollect that the first circumstance
that attracted my attention was the observation of Judge Chase to the
grand jury, that since he had come among them, he had been credibly
informed that there was a seditious printer within the State, in the
habit of libelling the Government of the United States, and having
received this information, he thought it his duty to call the attention
of the grand jury to the subject. He appeared to me to be proceeding to
state the name of the printer; but he did not name him. He said that
might be doing injustice to the man, or that it was improper in him. I
cannot say which was the term he used. I think he then asked the district
attorney if there were not two printers in the State. He answered that
there were. There was then some conversation between the judge and the
district attorney. My impression was that it conveyed a request from
Judge Chase to the district attorney to inquire into the subject on which
he had previously spoken to the jury. Mr. Attorney said that he had not
seen the papers. The judge asked him whether he could not procure a file
of them. I do not recollect that the name of the printer was mentioned
then, or during the whole sittings of the Court. Some person at the bar
said a file could be procured. Judge Chase asked the attorney, if he
could make the inquiry by to-morrow at ten o’clock. About this time I
heard some observations made respecting the discharge of the grand jury
on that day. Some of the gentlemen said it was a busy season, that they
were farmers, and were desirous of returning to their homes. Judge Chase
replied that might be very true; but that the business of the public
was also important; it must be attended to: and therefore he could not
discharge them. I do not pretend to say I have pursued the language
used. I have only attempted to give my impression of the facts that
occurred.


_Archibald Hamilton, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please inform the Court whether you were present at a circuit
court for Delaware in 1800?

A. I recollect that I was present on the 27th of June. I arrived about 10
o’clock, at which time Judge Chase was not there. Some time after, the
Court was formed, the grand jury was sworn, and Judge Chase delivered
a charge. Having retired for about an hour, the grand jury returned to
the bar. Judge Chase asked them if they had any bills or presentments
to make. Their reply was that they had not. Judge Chase then asked the
attorney of the district if he had no business to lay before them. He
said he had not. The jury requested to be discharged. Judge Chase said,
it was not usual to discharge them so early, some business might occur
during the course of the day. He told them he had been informed that
there was a printer who was guilty of libelling the Government of the
United States; his name is ----; here he stopped, and said, “Perhaps
I may commit myself, and do injustice to the man. Have you not two
printers?” The attorney said there were. Well, said Judge Chase, cannot
you find a file of the papers of the one I allude to? Mr. Read said he
did not take the papers, or that he had not a file. Some person then
observed that a file could be got at Mr. Crow’s. Judge Chase asked the
attorney if he could examine the papers by the next morning. Mr. Read
said, that under the directions of the Court, he conceived it to be his
duty, and he would do it.

On the second day the same questions, whether they had found any bills,
were put to the grand jury. They answered that they had not. Mr. Chase
asked the attorney of the district if he had found any thing in the
papers that required the interposition of the jury. He said that he had
found nothing which in his opinion came within the sedition law; but
there was a paragraph against his honor. Judge Chase said, that was not
what he alluded to. He was abused from one end of the continent to the
other; but his shoulders were broad enough to bear it.


_Samuel Moore, affirmed._

Mr. Harper. Were you in the circuit court held in Delaware in June, 1800,
when it met?

A. No, sir. I did attend early enough on the first day to hear the charge
given to the grand jury. I think I did not attend before twelve o’clock.
I attended as a juror. On the next day I attended early, and was in
the court house when the Court met. When the jury returned into court,
inquiry was made whether they had any bills or presentments to make. They
answered no. The Court then inquired of the attorney of the district
whether he had any business to lay before the grand jury. He said he had
not. While he was making this reply, he rose, and laid hold of a file of
newspapers, which I took to be the Mirror of the Times, and while he
was in the act of presenting it, he observed that he had not seen any
thing that in his opinion required notice, unless it were a publication
reflecting on Judge Chase, which did not appear to him to come under the
sedition law. Judge Chase answered, No, sir; they have abused me from
one end of the continent to the other; but it is the Government, and not
myself, that I wish protected from calumny. Immediately after the grand
jury were discharged.


_William H. Winder, sworn._

Mr. Harper. I will ask you whether you were in the circuit court of
the United States, held at Baltimore, in May, 1803? I will, however,
previously observe that it is not my intention to say or to prove that
the witness, when he deposed to certain facts, knew that they had not
passed. I mean only to impeach his correctness, and to infer that, as he
was angry, he gave to what he heard the coloring of his own feelings.

Mr. Winder. I was present at that court when it was opened, and the jury
impanelled, and I heard Judge Chase deliver his charge. After delivering
the general and usual charge to the grand jury he said he begged leave to
detain them a few minutes, while he made some general reflections on the
situation of public affairs. He commenced by laying down some abstract
opinions, stating that that Government was the most free and happy that
was the best administered; that a republic might be in slavery and a
monarchy free. He also drew some distinctions with regard to the doctrine
of equal rights, and said that the idea of perfect equality of rights,
more particularly such as had been broached in France, was fanciful and
untrue; that the only doctrine contended for with propriety was, the
equal protection of all classes from oppression. He commented on the
repeal of the judiciary system of the United States, and remarked that
it had a tendency to weaken the judiciary, and to render it dependent.
He then adverted to the laws of Maryland respecting the judiciary, as
tending to the same effect. One was a law for the repeal of the county
court system. He also alluded to the depending law for the abolition of
two of the courts of Maryland. He said something of the toil and labor
and patriotism of those who had raised the fair fabric, (constitution
of Maryland,) and said that he saw with regret some of their sons now
employed in destroying it. He also said that the tendency of the general
suffrage law was highly injurious, as, under it, a man was admitted to
full political rights, who might be here to-day and gone to-morrow.


_James Winchester, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please, sir, to state to this Court your recollection
respecting a charge delivered by Judge Chase in the circuit court of
Maryland in May, 1803.

Mr. Winchester. As already stated, that Court sat in May, 1803, in a room
in Evans’s tavern. The Court and gentlemen of the bar sat round several
dining tables. I sat on the left of Judge Chase, and the jury were on
his right. He addressed a charge to them, the beginning of which was
in the usual style of such addresses. He then commenced what has been
called the political part of the charge, with some general observations
on the nature of government. He afterwards adverted to two measures
of the Legislature of Maryland; the first related to an alteration of
the constitution on the subject of suffrage; the other contemplated an
alteration in the judiciary. He commented on the injurious tendency of
the principle of universal suffrage, and deprecated the evil effects
it was likely to have. Incidental to these remarks, he adverted to the
repeal of the judiciary law of the United States. I say incidental, for
my impression was that his object was to show the dangerous consequences
that would result to the people of Maryland from a repeal of their
judiciary system, and to show that as the act of Congress had inflicted
a violent blow on the independence of the federal judiciary, it was
more necessary for the State of Maryland to preserve their judiciary
perfectly independent. I was very attentive to the charge for several
reasons. I regretted it as imprudent. I felt convinced that it would be
complained of; and I am very confident from my recollection, and from
the publications respecting it, which I afterwards perused, that all the
political observations of the judge related to the State of Maryland.


TUESDAY, February 20.


_Walter Dorsey, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to inform the Court whether you were at a circuit
court held at Baltimore in 1803.

Mr. Dorsey. I was.

Mr. Harper. Were you present when Judge Chase delivered a charge to the
grand jury?

Mr. Dorsey. I was.

Mr. Harper. Were you in such a situation as to hear that charge?

Mr. Dorsey. I was.

Mr. Harper. Were you near Mr. Montgomery?

Mr. Dorsey. I was; I think there was only one person between us.

Mr. Harper. Did you attend to the charge?

Mr. Dorsey. I attended to what is generally called the political part
of it, because it was novel, and contained speculations with respect to
government in general, and remarks on national and State laws.

Mr. Harper. Do you recollect any thing in it respecting the
Administration?

Mr. Dorsey. I do not. I recollect a part of it relating to the State
and national judiciary, and to universal suffrage. I did not hesitate
to state that it was an indiscreet thing; my attention was particularly
drawn to it by seeing in the room the editor of a newspaper, and from
expecting that it would be the subject of newspaper animadversion.


_John Purviance, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to inform this honorable Court whether you were
present at a circuit court held at Baltimore in May, 1803.

Mr. Purviance. I was.

Mr. Harper. State what happened on that occasion.

Mr. Purviance. I do not pretend to recollect every thing which occurred;
but as I attended to what Judge Chase said in his charge to the grand
jury, I think I have a pretty distinct recollection as to the manner in
which he delivered that address; he appeared to me to read the whole from
a written paper lying before him. I never expected that this inquiry
would have been made of me, and after such a lapse of time I can only
speak of the impressions now on my mind.

Mr. Harper. Do you recollect whether Judge Chase made any mention of the
present Federal Administration, and what was it?

Mr. Purviance. I have no recollection that he mentioned it, but as it was
identified with the repeal of the law for establishing the circuit court
of the United States; and so far as the Executive composed a part of the
Legislature, he may have mentioned the Administration.

Mr. Harper. Was there any particular mention or allusion to the Executive
of the United States?

Mr. Purviance. No, sir, nothing of the kind; I have endeavored to retrace
in my mind every thing which was said, and I have not the smallest
recollection that any remark was made upon the Executive Department of
the United States.


_Nicholas Brice, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to inform this honorable Court whether you were at a
circuit court held in May, 1803, when a charge was delivered by Judge
Chase to the grand jury.

Mr. Brice. I was there and attended to the charge very particularly.

Mr. Harper. Did he say any thing respecting the present Administration?

Mr. Brice. Not in the slightest manner, further than mentioning the
repeal of the judiciary law of the United States, which he mentioned
incidentally in the course of his observations on the alterations of the
judiciary system in the State of Maryland. One thing more I will add,
with respect to the advice which it is alleged he gave to the grand jury:
shortly after the charge was delivered, in talking over this subject with
Mr. Stephen, I recollect that I rather thought it was an inference drawn
from the charge, than any express advice of the Court on that point.
Indeed, I am pretty sure the words were not used.


_James P. Boyd, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Please to inform this honorable Court whether you were
present at the circuit court held in Baltimore in May, 1803, and what
occurred at that time.

Mr. Boyd. I was there, but I do not know whether I was there at the
opening of the Court; but I was there when the charge was delivered
to the grand jury. After Judge Chase had gone through that part of the
charge which is an instruction to the grand jury relative to the duties
of their office, he proceeded to make some further observations, to which
I paid particular attention because they were novel to me. I was under an
impression at the time that Judge Chase was watched.

Mr. Harper. Did that charge contain a sentiment like those you have
heard, that the present Administration was weak, or wicked, &c.?

Mr. Boyd. I have not a scintilla of recollection of a word of the kind,
no further than as an inference to be drawn from what was said in
relation to the repeal of the Judiciary law. I have, however, a faint
trace of the idea in my mind, not from my own recollection, but from
having repeatedly heard it stated that there was such a remark made in
the charge.


_William McMechin, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Inform this honorable Court whether you were present at the
circuit court held at Baltimore, in May, 1803.

Mr. McMechin. I was present and heard the charge delivered by Judge Chase
to the grand jury.

Mr. Harper. Have you any recollection of his having said any thing
against the present Administration?

Mr. McMechin. I have no recollection of any thing of the kind, either
that they were weak, or of their having unfairly acquired power; such an
idea was mentioned in no way, unless it be inferred from the remark on
the repeal of the law establishing the sixteen circuit judges.


_William S. Govane, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Were you at the circuit court of Baltimore in May, 1803?

Mr. Govane. I was, and heard the charge delivered by Judge Chase. The
room in which the Court was held was a long one, in a tavern; a range of
tables formed the bar, and the seats around were occupied by professional
gentlemen. I went to the bottom of the table, opposite to Judge Chase,
and directed my attention towards him. Whilst he was delivering his
charge he appeared to read it from a book, but generally ended the
sentences by looking towards the grand jury; except this circumstance, he
appeared to read the whole time.

Mr. Harper. Do you retain a distinct recollection of the substance of
what the judge said?

Mr. Govane. I think I do.

Mr. Harper. Do you remember any part containing animadversions on
the present Administration, such as that they were weak, feeble, or
incompetent?

Mr. Govane. I think no such words were used. If I could swear to a
fact negatively after such a lapse of time, I could swear that no such
expressions fell from the judge. He said that a Monarchy might be free,
and a Republic a tyranny; and then proceeded to define what a free
government was.


_William Cranch, sworn._

Mr. Harper. Were you present at the circuit court held at Baltimore in
1803?

Mr. Cranch. I was. The Court was held at Evan’s tavern, in Baltimore.
Judge Chase was seated in an arm-chair, at one end of a long table
placed before him. The grand jury were on his right, some sitting on
benches placed along the wall and others standing. I stood myself about
fifteen feet from the judge, who was sitting during the whole time he was
delivering his charge; he generally held the book in his hand.

Mr. Harper--(showing a book). Is that the book?

Mr. Cranch. He appeared to be reading from such a book.

Mr. Harper. Did he read the whole, and did he read constantly?

Mr. Cranch. He appeared to me to read the whole charge, but I did not
keep my eyes so constantly fixed upon him as to declare positively that
he did.

Mr. Harper. Were there variations in his manner of delivering the charge,
as if he was at one time reading and at another speaking _ex tempore_?

Mr. Cranch. He delivered some parts with more emphasis than others.
He often raised his eyes from the book, but I did not observe that
he repeated more than one sentence without recurring to the book; he
repeated no more than a man might repeat after running his eyes hastily
over a passage.

Mr. Harper. Did he raise his eyes for a longer time than a man might be
supposed to do who was reading a composition of his own?

Mr. Cranch. I do not think he did.

Mr. Harper. Do you recollect the latter part of the charge?

Mr. Cranch. I recollect more of the latter part than of the beginning,
because I paid more attention to the latter part.

Mr. Harper. Do you recollect any sentiments expressed relating to the
weakness of the present Administration, and that they were not employed
in promoting the public good, but in preserving ill-gotten power?

Mr. Cranch. No, sir, there was no such expression, as I recollect.

Mr. Harper. Was there any expression at all relative to the present
Administration?

Mr. Cranch. Not as an Administration, nor any thing alluding to the
Administration separate from the Government of the United States.

Mr. Harper. In what way was the Government alluded to?

Mr. Cranch. By alluding to the repeal of the act of February, 1801, for
the establishment of the circuit judges. I recollect no other measure
of the General Government which was alluded to, or any allusion to the
present Executive.


WEDNESDAY, February 20.

[_The testimony on both sides being closed, the argument of the case
began, Mr. Early, one of the managers, opening for the prosecution._]

Mr. EARLY.--The relative rights of judges and juries have at some periods
of judicial history been so little understood, and the limits of each so
indistinctly marked, that the benefits of the institution of jury trial
were left much at the mercy of _arbitrary and overbearing judges_. But it
was reserved for the honor of modern times to dissipate this uncertainty
so baneful to justice, and to fix down the establishment upon its only
proper foundation; that of the right to determine, without control, both
the law and the fact _in all criminal cases whatsoever_. This right
has now been so long practised upon in the United States, and may be
considered as so well established, that it is scarcely to be expected
we shall witness upon that point any difference of opinion. Still less
is it to be expected that we shall witness such difference, when we are
discussing principles which apply to cases capital. In such case it is
the glory of the laws of this country, that the offence of the accused
should be left exclusively to the judgment of those least liable to be
swayed by the weight of accusing influence. It is no part of my intention
to deny the right of judges to expound the law in charging juries. But it
may be safely affirmed that such right is the most delicate they possess,
and the exercise of which should be guarded by the utmost caution and
humanity.

The accused shall enjoy the right to a “trial by an _impartial_ jury.”
We charge the respondent with deliberately violating this important
provision of the constitution, in arresting from John Fries the privilege
of having his case heard and determined by an impartial jury; for that
the respondent took upon _himself_ substantially to decide the case by
prejudging the law applying thereto, at the same time accompanying the
opinion thus formed and thus delivered, by certain observations and
declarations calculated necessarily to create a prepossession against the
case of Fries in the minds of those who had been summoned to serve upon
the jury, thereby making them the reverse of impartial.

These were the acts of a man, who, from his own declarations, appears
to have well understood upon what _points the defence would turn_. It
was the act of a man, who, it appears, had been well informed of all
that passed at the previous trial of Fries; who knew that there was no
dispute as to facts, and that the whole of the defence depended upon the
discussion and determination of those very principles of law which he
had thus prejudged, and upon the application of those authorities which
he had thus excluded in the hearing and very presence of those who were
to pass upon the life and death of the accused. No argument had been
heard from counsel; no opportunity had been afforded to prove that the
offence committed did not amount to the crime charged; no defending
voice had been raised in behalf of the accused; but, without being
heard, and without having had any opportunity to be heard, his case was
adjudged _against_ him. I say, _adjudged against him without the chance
of being heard_. For surely the case was adjudged against him, when the
only point upon which it was defensible was determined against him, and
that determination publicly announced from the bench. That this was done
before the accused could possibly have had a chance of being heard, is
placed beyond contradiction by all the testimony. And that the judge knew
the point which he thus prejudged, to be the only ground upon which the
defence rested, is perfectly clear. For, from his own declarations at the
time of announcing the opinion, it appears that he was well acquainted
with all that had passed at the previous trial of Fries.

But, sir, we must look further into the progress of this transaction.
It was not enough that the poor trembling victim of judicial oppression
should thus have his dearest privileges snatched from him, by a
prejudication of his case; it was not enough that the impartiality
of those who were to compose his jury should be converted into a
prepossession against him, by the imposing authority of solemn
declarations from the bench; but the small remaining, darling hope of
life, was to be smothered by a preclusion of his counsel from arguing
the law to the jury. This fact, though sternly denied in the answer of
the respondent, has, nevertheless, been established in a manner which
must irresistibly force conviction upon the mind. Mr. Lewis affirms
it positively. Mr. Dallas confirms it in a manner peculiarly strong.
Not being himself present when the opinion was delivered to the bar,
he received from Mr. Lewis a statement of what had passed, and, in an
address to the Court afterwards, repeated distinctly this statement,
and particularly that part which attributed to the judge a declaration,
that, if the counsel had any thing to say upon the law, they must
address themselves to the Court, and not to the jury. To this statement
no reply was made by the Court, either correcting or denying it. Thus
stands the evidence in the affirmative. Opposed to this we have the
negative testimony of Messrs. Rawle, Tilghman, and Meredith, who have
no recollection of any such declaration. I address myself to those who
well know the difference between affirmative and negative testimony. I
address myself to those who well know the established rule in the law
of evidence, that the testimony of one affirmative witness countervails
that of many negative ones; and I am sure that I address myself to
those who must feel the complete coincidence of this rule with the
dictates of common sense. Upon this ground alone we might safely rest
our proposition; but, sir, we will not rest it here. It appears from the
testimony of the witnesses on both sides, that almost every observation
from the council to the Court, on the second day, was predicated
upon the idea that something had been said on the preceding day,
restrictive of their privileges. These observations, although addressed
to the Court, and carrying this feature prominent in their face, were
neither contradicted nor corrected by the Court. This was a strong
tacit admission of the correctness of the idea upon which they were
bottomed. But, sir, we have not only this tacit admission, but we have in
testimony, this strong and impressive declaration from Judge Chase, that
“the counsel might be heard in opposition to the opinion of the Court at
the hazard of their characters.”

But, Mr. President, we have the positive admission of the respondent,
in page 18 of his answer, that certain observations were made by him
condemning the use of common law authorities upon the doctrine of
treason, and also condemning authorities under the statute of treasons,
but prior to the English Revolution. [Here the passage was read.] By a
recurrence to page 22 of the answer, it will be found that the respondent
admits that these observations of his were made on the first day; yet,
sir, nothing of all this is remembered by Messrs. Rawle, Tilghman, or
Meredith. How light, then, how extremely light, must their bare want of
recollection weigh against the positive affirmative testimony of Messrs.
Lewis and Dallas!

Considering my position as uncontrovertibly established, I will proceed
to observe that the offence with which Fries stood charged, was the
highest possible offence which can be committed in a state of society.
The punishment annexed to its commission, was the highest possible
punishment known to our laws. The accused was, therefore, entitled to
every possible indulgence. In favor of life, not only every possible
ground should be occupied by counsel to the jury, but every possible
argument listened to and weighed with patience and forbearance; and it
should never be forgotten that Judge Chase had such a conduct set as an
example before him in a previous trial of the same case. Yes, sir, a
brother judge of his, who has since gone to the world of spirits, had set
him an example conspicuous for the purity of its excellence, and which
should have arrested his career in the commission of this cruel outrage
upon all humanity. But Judge Chase predetermines the law, then prohibits
the counsel from proving to the jury that the law was not as laid down.
This was, in effect, an extinguishment at once of the whole right of
jury trial. All the privileges and all the benefits of that institution
were swept at once from an American court of justice, and scarcely the
external form preserved. The law was predetermined by the judge, and the
accused was debarred from pleading it to the jury. Of what avail is it,
sir, that the jury should be made judges of law and of fact, when the law
is not permitted to be expounded to them? Of what avail is it that the
accused should have a trial by jury, when he is prevented from stating
and explaining to the jury the only grounds upon which his case is
defensible? The right to hear and determine facts is _not more the right_
of a jury, than the right to hear and determine the law. To deprive them,
then, of the privilege of hearing and determining the law, is as much a
violation of their rights, as to deprive them of the privilege of hearing
and determining facts. The right of the accused to be heard upon the
facts to the jury, is not more his right, than the right of being heard
upon the law to the jury. To deprive him, then, of the privilege of being
heard upon the law to the jury, is as much a violation of his rights, as
to deprive him of the privilege of being heard upon the facts to the jury.

The second, third, and fourth articles, exhibited by the House of
Representatives, charge the defendant with a course of conduct upon a
particular trial which affords many grounds of accusation. In this case
it is true no unfortunate individual was charged with an offence which
demanded his life as an expiation; yet, sir, there were other rights
involved equally sacred in the laws of a free country. The liberty
and the property of the accused were the price of a conviction. In
casting our eyes over the ground upon which the different scenes of the
transaction now about to be examined are spread, we are struck with
a feature not usual in the history of human concerns. It would seem
that even the restraint of appearances was no longer felt. We find the
respondent setting out with a conduct, which seemed to prove that the
fate of the accused was fixed. We find him pursuing a system of conduct
throughout, which wrested from the accused some of his established and
most valuable privileges. We find him endeavoring to heap shame and odium
on those who occupied the station of advocates, because they would not
tamely yield to his unwarrantable invasion of long-established rights.

Mr. President, notwithstanding the labored attempts made by the defendant
in his answer to exculpate himself from imputation in compelling Mr.
Basset to serve upon the jury, in the trial of Callender; yet, sir, I
must be permitted to say that those attempts appear to me to be only
the exertions of a mind conscious of impropriety, and seeking to impose
upon the understanding of others. The test adopted, by which to try the
impartiality of the jurors, in that case may possibly by some be held
a correct one; but the manner of applying that test as then practised
upon, is what I believe can be accounted for upon no other supposition
than that of a determination on the part of the judge to procure the
conviction of the accused. Upon what other principle can it be accounted
for, that the jurors should be asked whether they had formed and
delivered an opinion upon the charges laid in the indictment, when they
knew not and were not suffered to know what those charges were? Why else
could it be laid down by the judge, that because the individuals called
to serve upon the jury did not know what charges were in the indictment,
(having never seen it nor heard it read,) that therefore they could not
have formed and delivered an opinion upon the subject? And why else did
the judge, when this monstrous logic was contradicted by the fact of one
of the jurors delivering in open court an opinion upon the whole subject
of those charges, without having seen or heard the indictment read; why
else did the judge, in the teeth of this damning fact, order the jurors
sworn?

Every juror sworn might, like Mr. Basset, have formed and delivered an
opinion which concluded the conviction of the accused, and yet because
they did not know that the subject-matter of such opinion constituted the
charges in the indictment, having neither seen it nor heard it read, the
expression of such opinion created no disqualification. Unworthy evasion!
An evasion which prevents the doctrine of disqualification in a juror
from receiving any practical operation. An evasion which effectually puts
at naught that principle of the constitution so often adverted to in a
former part of the argument, that “the accused shall enjoy the right of
a trial by an impartial jury.” Upon this point I beg leave to read two
authorities. [Mr. Early here cited 3 Bac. Abr. 176, and Co. L. 157.]

But, sir, the scene rises upon us. We have now to examine a part of the
transaction for which, I had supposed, human invention might be tortured
for a palliation in vain. I allude to the rejection of Mr. Taylor’s
testimony. The reason assigned for that rejection was, that the witness
could not prove the truth of the whole of _any one charge_. Let us, for
a moment, examine the consequences of this doctrine. According to the
judge’s own decisions then, as well as his doctrine now, each charge
laid in the indictment must have constituted a separate offence. For it
is explicitly declared both by Mr. Hay and Mr. Nicholas, that when an
application was made to continue the case, because of the absence of
some material witnesses, the application was rejected, upon the ground
that it did not appear from the affidavit filed that the witnesses, so
absent, could prove the truth of all the charges. That proof of the
truth of a part only, would be of no avail, and that the whole must be
proved to entitle the traverser to an acquittal. Each charge in the
indictment, then, must have constituted a _separate offence_; for the
charges cannot be made to help each other out. One charge, however, it
seems might consist of different facts. This was the case with several
in that indictment. It was particularly the case with the very charge,
the truth of which Mr. Taylor was called to prove. “The President was
a professed aristocrat. He had proved faithful and serviceable to the
British interest.” Here was a charge made up of two distinct facts;
so distinct in their nature, that the knowledge of their truth might
not only rest with different persons, but was extremely likely not to
rest with any _one_ witness. Put the case of a man charged with any
offence--murder, theft, or any other crime you please. There may be a
string of facts upon the proof of which the defence may depend; some
within the knowledge of one man, some within that of another. Was it ever
heard of before, that, because one witness could not prove the existence
of all those facts, that, therefore, such witness should not be examined
as to what he did know? Or, if some of the facts depended upon written
testimony, was it ever heard of before, that, therefore, a witness should
not be examined as to those resting on oral testimony? To these questions
no man will answer in the affirmative. Why, then, was an unheard-of and
palpably absurd doctrine brought to bear in Callender’s case? Was the
defence of justification, under the sedition law of the United States,
such an anomaly in its nature, that none of the established rules of
jurisprudence would apply to it? Was it a thing so _entire_ in its
nature, that it could not consist of different parts? I have always
been taught, and the respondent’s answer confirms the principle, that a
defence must apply to the whole of a charge. If, then, a charge consist
of different parts, surely, so must the defence. But, according to Judge
Chase, be the parts ever so many, they shall not be proven, unless the
proof can all be made by one witness, or unless it appear that the
defendant has proof in reserve to establish all.

The fifth and sixth articles rest upon grounds so extremely simple, and
so easily comprehended, that it appears totally unnecessary to fatigue
the patience of the honorable Court by dwelling upon them.

The seventh article is as follows:

“That at a circuit court of the United States, for the district of
Delaware, held at Newcastle, in the month of June, one thousand eight
hundred, whereat the said Samuel Chase presided, the said Samuel Chase,
disregarding the duties of his office, did descend from the dignity
of a judge, and stoop to the level of an informer, by refusing to
discharge the grand jury, although entreated by several of the said
jury so to do; and after the said grand jury had regularly declared,
through their foreman, that they had found no bills of indictment, nor
had any presentments to make, by observing to the said grand jury that
he, the said Samuel Chase, understood ‘that a highly seditious temper
had manifested itself in the State of Delaware, among a certain class
of people, particularly in Newcastle County, and more especially in the
town of Wilmington, where lived a most seditious printer, unrestrained
by any principle of virtue, and regardless of social order; that the
name of this printer was’--but checking himself, as if sensible of the
indecorum which he was committing, added, ‘that it might be assuming
too much to mention the name of this person, but it becomes your duty,
gentlemen, to inquire diligently into this matter,’ or words to that
effect; and that with intention to procure the prosecution of the printer
in question, the said Samuel Chase did, moreover, authoritatively enjoin
on the District Attorney of the United States, the necessity of procuring
a file of the papers to which he alluded, (and which were understood to
be those published under the title of ‘Mirror of the Times and General
Advertiser,’) and, by a strict examination of them, to find some passage
which might furnish the groundwork of a prosecution against the printer
of the said paper; thereby degrading his high judicial functions,
and tending to impair the public confidence in, and respect for, the
tribunals of justice, so essential to the general welfare.”

The respondent stands here charged with a conduct, than which, in my
opinion, nothing could be more at war with his official duty--nothing
more tarnish his official character. The constitution and laws of this
country certainly intended in erecting high judicial tribunals, that
those who might be appointed to minister therein, should be impartial
dispensers of justice between such as might resort thither for an
adjustment of their differences. In public prosecutions more especially
was it intended that such dispensation should be made without respect to
persons. In these, above all other cases, ought a judge to stand aloof
from influence, free from predilection towards one, or prejudice against
the other. Most peculiarly here is it his duty to stand firm at his post,
resisting the overbearing influence of a powerful public, and protecting
the rights of the accused in so unequal a contest. But Judge Chase,
disregarding these principles, always held sacred in a land of laws,
converts himself into a hunter after accusations. He who, in the humane
language of the laws, should be counsel for the accused, becomes himself
an accuser. He, whose duty it is impartially to decide between the
prosecutor and prosecuted, becomes himself the procurer of prosecutions.

    The eighth article charges the respondent with prostituting
    the judicial character by making a political speech to the
    grand jury at Baltimore, in the State of Maryland, against the
    Government of the United States and the Government of Maryland.

There are features in that part of the judge’s official conduct, charged
in this article, which place him in a point of view awfully grand.
We have heretofore been viewing him as bringing his talents to bear
upon individuals. Here we see his genius rising, in the majesty of its
strength, to far higher objects. Here we see him consigning over whole
governments to the scourge of his own avenging wrath. Whithersoever he
turned his eyes, whether to the State constitution and laws, or to the
laws and constitution of the whole Union, they were equally exposed to
the whip and the rack.

M. CAMPBELL then rose and spoke as follows.

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Senate: The scene, presented to the
nation by this trial, is more than usually interesting and important. One
of the highest officers of the government, called upon by the voice of
the people, through their representatives, before the highest tribunal
known to our constitution--that same tribunal that sanctioned his
elevation--to answer for the abuse of the power with which he had been
intrusted! It is a melancholy truth, that derogates much from the dignity
of human nature, but it is a truth that has been for ages established by
experience, that high and important powers have a tendency to corrupt
those on whom they are conferred. Few minds are possessed of sufficient
integrity and independence, when elevated above the ordinary level of the
great mass of their fellow-citizens, to resist the impulse their high
station gives them, to grasp at still greater powers, and prostitute
those which they already possess.

Hence it has been the great exertion of all governments, who regard the
rights and liberties of the people, and still must continue to be so, to
watch over the conduct of the high and confidential officers of State,
and guard against their abusing the powers reposed in them. For this
purpose the mode of trial by impeachment was resorted to in very early
times in that country from which we have derived most of our laws and
usages. Near five hundred years ago, the representatives of the people in
that nation felt themselves clothed with sufficient authority to check
the abuses of power, in the highest officers under the Crown, by calling
upon them by impeachment to answer before the House of Lords for their
conduct, and punishing them for such acts as were unauthorized, illegal,
or oppressive.

It was a wise and politic measure to have charges of this nature tried
by the highest tribunal in the nation, that would not be _awed_ by the
great powers and elevated standing of the accused, nor influenced by the
popular voice of the accusers, further than a strict regard to impartial
justice would require. As I conceive, therefore, that pure and unstained
impartiality ought to be the characteristic feature in the trial by
impeachment, I shall for myself, and I conceive I may in the name of the
representatives of the people, utterly disclaim any design or wish that
party considerations, or difference in political sentiments, should,
in the remotest degree, enter into the investigation, or affect the
decision of this question. Yet, in order to ascertain the motives that
actuated the respondent, it may become necessary to notice the difference
of political sentiments, so far as regarded the accused, and those
who are stated to have been injured by his conduct, at the time those
transactions took place, that gave origin to this prosecution.

In the view which I propose taking on this subject, I shall in the first
place notice the provisions in the constitution relative to impeachment,
and endeavor to ascertain the precise object and extent of such
provision, so far as the same may relate to the present case.

The first provision in the constitution on this subject, (art. 1st,
sec. 3,) declares, that the Senate shall have the sole power to try all
impeachments. Here we discover the great wisdom of the framers of the
constitution. The highest and most enlightened tribunal in the nation is
charged with the protection of the rights and liberties of the citizens
against oppression from the officers of Government under the sanction of
law; unawed by the power which the officer may possess, or the dignified
station he may fill, complete justice may be expected at their hands. The
accused is called upon before the same tribunal, and in many instances,
before the same men, who sanctioned his official elevation, to answer for
abusing the powers with which he had been intrusted. Men who are presumed
to have had a favorable opinion of him once, are to be his judges; no
inferior or co-ordinate tribunal is to decide on his case, which might
from motives of jealousy or interest be prejudiced against him and wish
his removal. No, sir, his judges, without the shadow of temptation to
influence their conduct, are placed beyond the reach of suspicion.

The next provision in the constitution declares that judgment in cases
of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office and
disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit
under the United States.

Here the constitution seems to make an evident distinction between
such misdemeanors as would authorize a removal from office, and
disqualification to hold any office, and such as are criminal, in the
ordinary sense of the word, in courts of common law, and punishable by
indictment. So far as the offence committed is injurious to society,
only in consequence of the power reposed in the officer being abused
in the exercise of his official functions, it is inquirable into
only by impeachment, and punishable only by removal from office, and
disqualification to hold any office; but so far as the offence is
criminal, independent of the office, it is to be tried by indictment,
and is made punishable according to the known rules of law in courts
of ordinary jurisdiction. As, if an officer take a bribe to do an act
not connected with his office, for this he is indictable in a court of
justice only. Impeachment, therefore, according to the meaning of the
constitution, may fairly be considered a kind of inquest into the conduct
of an officer, merely as it regards his office; the manner in which he
performs the duties thereof; and the effects that his conduct therein may
have on society. It is more in the nature of a civil investigation, than
of a criminal prosecution. And though impeachable offences are termed in
the constitution high crimes and misdemeanors, they must be such only
so far as regards the official conduct of the officer; and even treason
and bribery can only be inquired into by impeachment, so far as the same
may be considered as a violation of the duties of the officer, and of
the oath the officer takes to support the constitution and laws of the
United States, and of his oath of office; and not as to the criminality
of those offences independent of the office. This must be inquired into
and punished by indictment.


THURSDAY, February 21.

Mr. CAMPBELL, _in continuation_.

I will now proceed, as well as my indisposition will permit, to examine
in a brief manner the second part of the subject, containing the several
charges founded on the trial of Callender, at Richmond, as stated in the
second, third, and fourth articles of the impeachment. I will consider
these several articles in the order in which the transactions on which
they are founded took place in court. In order to ascertain the motives
that actuated the judge in this whole transaction, it will only be
necessary to view his conduct as proved, so far as the same relates to
this subject, previous to the trial. The first account we have of the
intended prosecution, or I might say persecution, of Callender, is at
Annapolis. Here the judge received the famous book called the “Prospect
before Us,” and upon which the prosecution was founded, and here the
determination was formed to convict and punish Callender. The respondent
said he would take the book with him to Richmond; that the libellous
parts had been marked by Mr. Martin, and that before he returned he
would teach the lawyers of Virginia to know the difference between the
liberty and licentiousness of the press; and that, if the Commonwealth of
Virginia was not totally depraved, if there was a jury of honest men to
be found in the State, he would punish Callender before he returned from
Richmond. This is the evidence of Mr. Mason, nearly in his own words,
and no person will pretend to doubt its correctness. What language could
be used that would more clearly show the partiality and predetermination
of the judge to punish Callender, and the spirit of persecution by
which he was actuated? Again: on his way to Richmond, according to the
evidence of Mr. Triplett, the judge reviles the object of his intended
vengeance; states his surprise and regret that he had not been hanged in
Virginia; remarks that the United States had shown too much lenity to
such renegadoes; and after arriving at Richmond, informs the deponent
he was afraid they would not be able to get the damned rascal at that
court. Thus evincing in every stage of this business that intolerant
spirit of oppression and vengeance that seems to have given spring to
all his actions. After the indictment is found against Callender, the
panel of the petit jury is presented to the judge; he inquires if he
had any of the creatures called Democrats on that panel, directs the
marshal to examine it, and if there were any such on it, to strike them
off. This is the evidence of Mr. Heath, whose character and standing
in society are known to many of the members of this honorable Court.
And, though his evidence is opposed to the negative declarations of Mr.
Randolph, who affirms that he did not present the panel of the jury to
the judge, or receive such directions, yet I conceive the Court will give
more weight to the affirmative declarations of Mr. Heath, with regard
to these facts, than to the negative assertions of Mr. Randolph, who
may have forgotten the transaction. This point rests upon the integrity
and veracity of Mr. Heath. He could not receive the impression of these
facts, unless the transaction had taken place; he could not reasonably be
mistaken; the affair was new and extraordinary, and must have arrested
his attention; and in this case there is no ground to make allowance
for a treacherous memory, for it is not pretended that the witness, Mr.
Heath, has forgot the facts, but that they never existed. If you do
not, therefore, believe the statement he makes, it must follow that you
admit the witness has wilfully and corruptly stated a falsehood. This,
I presume, will not be admitted. But, on the other hand, Mr. Randolph
may have forgotten the transaction in the bustle of business, and this
will account for the difference in the evidence of the witnesses without
impeaching the veracity of either. This mode of reconciling the evidence
is agreeable to the rules of law. I take the facts, therefore, as stated
by Mr. Heath, to be correct, and they afford an instance of judicial
depravity hitherto unequalled and unknown in our country--a direct
attempt to pack a jury of the same political sentiments with the judge to
try the defendant. This is a faint representation of the previous conduct
of the judge relative to this subject, before whom the defendant was
about to be tried, or rather before whom he was to be called for certain
conviction and punishment, for it ought not to be dignified with the name
of a trial. With this view, therefore, of the temper and disposition of
the judge, and of his previous conduct on this occasion, we will examine
the first important step taken in the trial, in which the designs of
the judge begin more clearly to unfold themselves, viz: his refusal to
postpone or continue the trial until the next term, on an affidavit
regularly filed, stating the absence of material witnesses and the places
of their residence, being the second charge in the fourth article.

The next charge which I propose to examine is contained in the second
article of the impeachment, and consists in the judge’s overruling the
objection of John Basset, one of the jury, who wished to be excused from
serving on the trial of Callender, because he had made up his mind as to
the book from which the words charged to be libellous in the indictment
had been drawn. The constitution secures to defendants charged with
crimes, the right of a trial by an impartial jury; any thing, therefore,
that goes to show that a man has made up an opinion with regard to the
guilt or innocence of the accused, or with regard to the matter in
question, or decided it in his own mind, proves him to be disqualified
to serve as a juror, because it proves he is not impartial, has a bias
upon his mind, and cannot be said to be indifferent. The same doctrine
is supported by the laws of England. In order to show this, I will refer
the Court to 3 Bac. Ab. (new ed.) 756, and also Co. Litt. 158; where
it is stated, if a juror has declared his opinion, touching the matter
in question, &c., or has done any thing by which it appears that he
cannot be indifferent or impartial, &c., these are principal causes of
challenge; and therefore such juror would be disqualified. Here it is
manifest, that though declaring an opinion is good cause of challenge to
a juror, if it is not necessary he should declare such opinion in order
to disqualify him; it is sufficient that he has done something, whether
making up an opinion, or doing any act whatever, by which it appears he
is not indifferent, is not perfectly impartial.

The next charge to be inquired into, is that stated in the third article,
in rejecting the evidence of Colonel Taylor, a material witness in favor
of the defendant, on the pretence that he could not prove the truth of
the whole of one charge. In this instance the judge acted contrary to all
former precedents in courts of justice, and without the shadow of law
or reason to justify his conduct. Not a solitary case could be stated
by any of the witnesses of a similar conduct in a judge. The rule here
adopted, with regard to the admissibility of evidence, would deprive the
jury of their undoubted right to decide on the credibility and weight
of evidence, as well as on the extent to which it proved the matter
in question; would transfer in substance this right to the Court, and
thereby shake to its very centre the fabric so justly admired, and held
so sacred, _of trial by jury_. It would make it necessary for the party
to present to the Court all the evidence relied upon to make out his
case. This evidence, the Court or judge would first deliberately examine,
compare it with the charges or case to be supported, and if it did not,
in his opinion, prove the whole of one charge, or go the whole extent
of the case to be established by it, he would reject it, and not permit
the jury to hear it. This would strip the jury of the very prerogative
that renders this kind of trial so much superior to all others, that of
deciding on the weight and credit of evidence.

But it is stated that Judge Griffin concurred with him in opinion, and
this is insisted upon by the accused in different parts of his answer,
as an excuse for the errors he committed, if, as he states, they were
errors. This seems to be a kind of forlorn hope resorted to, when all
other expedients fail. To this argument of the judge I would in this
place answer, once for all, that it can be no excuse for him, nor any
justification of his offences, that another has been equally guilty with
himself; and it must strongly prove the weakness of his defence to rely
upon this ground. Though Judge Griffin has not yet been called to an
account for his conduct on this occasion, that is no reason why he should
not hereafter be made to answer for it. The nation has not said he was
innocent, or that he will not be proceeded against for this conduct; and
there is no limitation of time that would screen him from the effects of
charges of this kind, if they should be brought forward and supported
against him hereafter. No ground of excuse therefore can arise from the
circumstance of Judge Griffin not having been called upon to answer for
his conduct in this respect.

I will now proceed to notice very briefly the conduct of the judge in
the subsequent part of this trial. Compelling the defendant’s counsel to
reduce to writing all questions to be asked the witness, was a direct
innovation on the practice in our courts of justice, and tended to
embarrass the management of and weaken the defence. It is proved by the
testimony of all the witnesses, that no such practice ever prevailed
in our courts of justice, for such a purpose as that avowed in this
instance; the only cases in which it is required to reduce to writing
questions to be asked a witness, and the only cases in which it can be
proper or consistent with reason and justice to do so, are those in which
an objection is made to a question proposed to be asked, on the ground of
its being improper and contrary to the rules of evidence; and in order to
ascertain the precise meaning and effect of the question, so as to decide
on the objection made to it, it may be proper to require it to be reduced
to writing, but it never was before done, so far as we can discover, for
the purpose of ascertaining how far the witness could prove the matter
in question, and whether he could prove the whole of one charge or not,
and thereby decide whether the witness should or should not be examined.
According to this rule the judge would first try the cause himself upon
the evidence offered, by the questions thus reduced to writing, and if
he did not consider such evidence fully sufficient to support the whole
of the charge or case to which it was offered, he would reject it, and
not permit the jury to hear a word of it, lest they might consider it
stronger than he did, and give it sufficient weight to support the
case to which it was offered. This mode of proceeding was left to be
discovered and adopted by Judge Chase.

Barely to notice the conduct of the respondent, at Newcastle in Delaware,
as charged in the seventh article, is sufficient to show that he was
there actuated by the same spirit of persecution and oppression that has,
as already stated, marked the whole of his conduct during the course
of these transactions. That he should descend from the elevated and
dignified station in which he was placed as a judge, to hunt for crimes
as a common informer against his fellow-citizens; urge the jury to take
notice of, and present certain persons sufficiently designated though not
named; and press the attorney for the district to search for evidence
among the files of newspapers to support a prosecution, was degrading
to the sacred character of a judge, and was perverting the judicial
authority to a mere engine of persecution to answer party purposes.
Of the same complexion with this is the conduct of the respondent in
delivering an inflammatory and disorganizing charge to the grand jury
at Baltimore, as stated in the eighth article of the impeachment.
This proceeding evinced a mind inflamed by party spirit and political
intolerance; it was calculated to disturb the peace of the community,
and alarm the people at the measures of Government: to force them by
the terror of judicial denunciation to relinquish their own political
sentiments and adopt those of the judge. This was the favorite object
of this whole proceeding, and to obtain it no means were left untried.
It was attempted to excite the fears of the public mind, to destroy the
confidence of the people in the administration of their Government. The
judicial authority was prostituted to party purposes, and the fountains
of justice were corrupted by this poisonous spirit of persecution, that
seemed determined to bear down all opposition in order to succeed in a
favorite object. Citizens of all descriptions felt alarmed at this new
and unusual conduct. All the counsel at the bar, wherever the respondent
went, though consisting of the ablest and most enlightened in the nation,
were agitated into a general ferment, and the whole community seemed
shocked at such outrages upon common sense; for to go to trial was to go
to certain conviction. Is this, Mr. President, the character that ought
to distinguish the Judiciary of the United States? No, sir. The streams
of justice that flow from the American bench ought to be as pure as the
sunbeams that light up the morning. The accused should come before the
Court, with a well-founded confidence that the law will be administered
to him with justice, impartiality, and in mercy. When this is the case,
he submits without a murmur to his fate, and hears the sentence of
condemnation pronounced against him, with a mind that must approve the
justice of the law and the impartiality of those who administer it.

The decision of this cause may form an important era in the annals of
our country. Future generations are interested in the event. It may
determine a question all-important to the American people; whether the
laws of our country are to govern, or the arbitrary will of those who are
intrusted with their administration. Mr. President, we, on this important
occasion, behold the rights and liberties of the American people hover
round this honorable tribunal, about to be established on a firm basis by
the decision you will make, or sent afloat on the ocean of uncertainty,
to be tossed to and fro by the capricious breath of usurped power and
innovation.

Mr. CLARK addressed the Chair as follows--Mr. President: I rise only to
make a few remarks on two of the articles, the fifth and sixth, that
the counsel for the respondent may be possessed of all the points we
mean to make. I will endeavor, in a few words, to state the practice
which we think ought to have been pursued in the case of Callender. The
practice in the federal courts is regulated by that in each State. If
this position be correct, we contend, that the proper process in the
case of Callender was a summons. An act of Virginia, passed in the year
1792, provides that the grand jury “shall present all treasons, murders,
felonies, _or other misdemeanors whatsoever_, which shall have been
committed or done within the district for which they are impanelled.”

By another act of Virginia, passed in the same year, it is enacted that,
“upon presentment made by the grand jury of an offence not capital, the
Court shall order the clerk to issue a summons or other proper process
against the person or persons so presented, to appear and answer such
presentment _at the next Court_, and thereupon hear and determine the
same according to law.”

In this last provision, the words, “_or other proper process_,” have
a direct application to the previous provision, which enacts that the
grand jury shall present all treasons, murders, felonies, “or other
misdemeanors.” For treasons, murders, and felonies, we admit that a
capias is the proper process; and when the law directs _other proper
process_, it had reference to a class of crimes where a capias was
required. It is in vain alleged, that the counsel for Callender made
no objection to the process issued. They were not at that time to be
considered as his counsel; it was only after he was brought into court
that their duty commenced.

Further, whether the proper process was a capias or summons, the law of
Virginia requires that it shall be returnable to the next Court; and I
contend that this point is established by the English practice. To show
which I refer to Hawkins’s Pleas of the Crown, where it is stated that
a _venire facias_, which is in the nature of a summons, is the proper
process, and that it is returnable to the next Court.

It was surely, then, the duty of the judge to be acquainted with the
laws of England, however unacquainted he may have been with the laws of
Virginia. He cannot, therefore, on this ground, attempt a justification
from ignorance. In his answer he informs us that ignorance of the law
is no excuse. If it is no excuse in an unlettered individual, shall it
constitute the apology of him who was expressly appointed to expound
the law and administer justice? And if, on this occasion, he was not
acquainted with the law, did it, therefore, become him to proceed with
such fatal precipitancy? No sooner was the presentment made than the
marshal, before any indictment was brought in, was despatched after
Callender. We can only account for this by supposing that it was the
intention of the judge to act in conformity to his previous declaration,
however jocularly it may have seemed to have been made; and that this
was one of the means he had determined to pursue in order to convict
Callender, regardless of the dignity of his station or the innocence of
the man. Having offered these remarks, I am instructed to say that the
case is fully opened on the part of the prosecution.


_Argument for the Defence._

Mr. HOPKINSON.--Mr. President: We cannot remind you, and this honorable
Court, as our opponents have so frequently done, that we address you
in behalf of the majesty of the people. We appear for an ancient and
infirm man, whose better days have been worn out in the service of that
country which now degrades him; and who has nothing to promise you for
an honorable acquittal but the approbation of your own consciences.
We are happy, however, to concur with the honorable Managers in one
point; I mean the importance they are disposed to give to this cause.
In every relation and respect in which it can be viewed, it is, indeed,
of infinite importance. It is important to the respondent to the full
amount of his good name and reputation, and of that little portion of
that happiness the small residue of his life may afford. It is important
to you, Senators and judges, inasmuch as you value the judgment which
posterity shall pass upon the proceedings of this day. It is important
to our country, as she estimates her character for sound, dignified,
and impartial justice, in the eyes of a judging world. The little, busy
vortex that plays immediately round the scene of action, considers this
proceeding merely as the trial of Judge Chase, and gazes upon him as the
only person interested in the result. This is a false and imperfect view
of the case. It is not the trial of Judge Chase alone. It is a trial
between him and his country, and that country is as dearly interested as
the judge can be, in a fair and impartial investigation of the case, and
in a just and honest decision of it. There is yet another dread tribunal
to which we should not be inattentive. We should look to it with solemn
impressions of respect. It is posterity; the race of men that will come
after us. When all the false glare and false importance of the times
shall pass away; when things shall settle down into a state of placid
tranquillity, and lose that bustling motion that deceives with false
appearances; when you, most honorable Senators, who sit here to judge,
as well as the respondent who sits here to be judged, shall alike rest
in the silence of the tomb, then comes the faithful, the scrutinizing
historian, who, without fear or favor, will record this transaction; then
comes a just and impartial posterity, who, without regard to persons
or to dignities, will decide upon your decision. Then, I trust, the
high honor and integrity of this Court will stand recorded in the pure
language of deserved praise, and this day will be remembered in the
annals of our land, as honorable to the respondent, to his judges, and to
the justice of our country.

We have heard, sir, from the honorable Managers who have addressed
you, many harsh expressions. I hope, sir, they will do no harm.
We have been told of the respondent’s unholy sins, which even the
heavenly expectation of sincere repentance cannot wash away; we have
been told of his volumes of guilt, every page of which calls loudly
for punishment. This sort of language but pursues the same spirit
of asperity and reproach which was begun in the replication to our
answer. But we come here, sir, not to complain of any thing; we come
expecting to bear and to forbear much. It does, indeed, seem to me,
that the replication filed by the honorable Managers on behalf of the
House of Representatives and of all the people, carries with it more
acrimony than either the occasion or their dignity demanded. It may be
said that they have resorted for it to English precedent, and framed it
from the replication filed in the celebrated case of Warren Hastings.
There is, however, no similarity between that case and ours. Precedents
might have been found more mild in their character, and more adapted
to the circumstances of our case. The impeachment of Hastings was not
instituted on a petty catalogue of frivolous occurrences, more calculated
to excite ridicule than apprehension, but for the alleged murder of
princes and plunder of empires. If, however, the choice of this case
as a precedent for our pleadings, has exposed us to some unpleasant
expressions, it also furnishes to us abundance of consolation and hope.
There, the most splendid talents that ever adorned the British nation,
were strained to their utmost exertion to crush the devoted victim of
malignant persecution. But in vain; the stern integrity, the enlightened
perception, the immovable justice of his judges, stood as a barrier
between him and destruction, and safely protected him from the fury of
the storm. So, I trust in God, it will be with us.

In England, the impeachment of a judge is a rare occurrence. I recollect
but two in half a century. But, in our country, boasting of its superior
purity and virtue, and declaiming ever against the vice, venality, and
corruption of the Old World, seven judges have been prosecuted criminally
in about two years. A melancholy proof either of extreme and unequalled
corruption in our Judiciary, or of strange and persecuting times amongst
us.

The first proper object of our inquiries in this case is, to ascertain
with proper precision what acts or offences of a public officer are the
objects of impeachment. This question meets us at the very threshold
of the case. If it shall appear that the charges exhibited in these
articles of impeachment are not, even if true, the constitutional
subjects of impeachment; if it shall turn out on the investigation
that the judge has really fallen into error, mistake, or indiscretion,
yet if he stands acquitted in proof of any such acts as by the law of
the land are impeachable offences, he stands entitled to discharge on
his trial. This proceeding by impeachment is a mode of trial created
and defined by the constitution of our country; and by this the Court
is exclusively bound. To the constitution, then, we must exclusively
look to discover what is or is not impeachable. We shall there find
the whole proceeding distinctly marked out; and every thing designated
and properly distributed necessary in the construction of a court of
criminal jurisdiction. We shall find, 1. Who shall originate or present
an impeachment. 2. Who shall try it. 3. For what offences it may be
used. 4. What is the punishment on conviction. The first of these points
is provided for in the second section of the first article of the
constitution, where it is declared that “the House of Representatives
shall have the sole power of impeachment.” This power corresponds with
that of a grand jury to find a presentment or indictment. In the third
section of the same article, the Court is provided before whom the
impeachment thus originated shall be tried: “The Senate shall have the
sole power to try all impeachments.” And the fourth section of the second
article points out and describes the offences intended to be impeachable,
and the punishment which is to follow conviction; subject to a limitation
in the third section of the first article.

I offer it as a position I shall rely upon in my argument, that no judge
can be impeached and removed from office for any act or offence for which
he could not be indicted. It must be by law an indictable offence. One
of the gentlemen, indeed, who conduct this prosecution, (Mr. Campbell,)
contends for the reverse of this proposition, and holds that for such
official acts as are the subject of impeachment no indictment will lie or
can be maintained. For, says he, it would involve us in this monstrous
oppression and absurdity, that a man might be twice punished for the same
offence--once by impeachment, and then by indictment. And so most surely
he may; and the limitation of the punishment on impeachment takes away
the injustice and oppression the gentleman dreads.

The House of Representatives has the power of impeachment; but for what
they are to impeach, in what cases they may exercise this delegated
power, depends on other parts of the constitution, and not on their
opinion, whim, or caprice. The whole system of impeachment must be taken
together, and not in detached parts; and if we find one part of the
constitution declaring who shall commence an impeachment, we find other
parts declaring who shall try it, and what acts and what persons are
constitutional subjects of this mode of trial. The power of impeachment
is with the House of Representatives--but only for impeachable offences.
They are to proceed against the offence in this way when it is committed,
but not to _create_ the offence, and make any act criminal and
impeachable at their will and pleasure. What is an offence, is a question
to be decided by the constitution and the law, not by the opinion of a
single branch of the Legislature; and when the offence thus described
by the constitution or the law has been committed, then, and not until
then, has the House of Representatives power to impeach the offender. So
a grand jury possesses the sole power to indict; but in the exercise of
this power they are bound by positive law, and do not assume under this
general power to make any thing indictable which they might disapprove.
If it were so, we should indeed have a strange, unsettled, and dangerous
penal code. No man could walk in safety, but would be at the mercy of the
caprice of every grand jury that might be summoned, and that would be
crime to-morrow which is innocent to-day.

What part of the constitution then declares any of the acts charged and
proved upon Judge Chase, even in the worst aspect, to be impeachable?
He has not been guilty of bribery or corruption; he is not charged with
them. Has he then been guilty of “_other high crimes and misdemeanors_?”
In an instrument so sacred as the constitution, I presume every word
must have its full and fair meaning. It is not then only for crimes and
misdemeanors that a judge is impeachable, but it must be for _high_
crimes and misdemeanors. Although this qualifying adjective “_high_”
immediately precedes and is directly attached to the word “_crimes_,”
yet, from the evident intention of the constitution and upon a just
grammatical construction, it must be also applied to “_misdemeanors_.”
Observe, sir, the crimes with which these “other high crimes” are classed
in the constitution, and we may learn something of their character. They
stand in connection with “_bribery and corruption_;” tried in the same
manner and subject to the same penalties. But if we are to lose the force
and meaning of the word “_high_” in relation to misdemeanors, and this
description of offences must be governed by the mere meaning of the term
“misdemeanors,” without deriving any grade from the adjective, still my
position remains unimpaired, that the offence, whatever it is, which
is the ground of impeachment, must be such a one as would support an
indictment. “Misdemeanor” is a legal and technical term, well understood
and defined in law; and in the construction of a legal instrument we must
give to words their legal signification. A misdemeanor or a crime, for in
their just and proper acceptation they are synonymous terms, is an act
committed or omitted, in violation of a _public_ law, either forbidding
or commanding it. By this test let the conduct of the respondent be
tried, and, by it, let him stand justified or condemned.

Does not, sir, the Court, provided by the constitution for the trial
of an impeachment, give us some idea of the grade of offences intended
for its jurisdiction? Look around you, sir, upon this awful tribunal
of justice--is it not high and dignified, collecting within itself
the justice and majesty of the American people? Was such a court
created--does such a court sit to scan and punish paltry errors and
indiscretions, too insignificant to have a name in the penal code, too
paltry for the notice of a court of quarter sessions? This is indeed
employing an elephant to remove an atom too minute for the grasp of an
insect. Is the Senate of the United States, solemnly convened, and held
together in the presence of the nation, to fix a standard of politeness
in a judge, and mark the precincts of judicial decorum?

If I am correct in my position that nothing is impeachable that is not
also indictable, for what acts then may a man be indicted? May it be on
the mere caprice or opinion of any ten, twenty, or one hundred men in the
community; or must it not be on some known law of the society in which he
resides? It must unquestionably be for some offence, either of omission
or commission, against some statute of the United States--or some statute
of a particular State, or against the provision of the common law.
Against which of these has the respondent offended? What law of any of
the descriptions I have mentioned has he violated? By what is he to be
judged, by what is he to be justified or condemned, if not by some known
law of the country; and if no such law is brought upon his case--if no
such violation rises on this day of trial in judgment against him, why
stands he here at this bar as a criminal? Whom has he offended? The House
of Representatives--and is he impeached for this?

I maintain as a most important and indispensible principle, that no man
should be criminally accused, no man can be criminally condemned, but
for the violation of some known law by which he was bound to govern
himself. Nothing is so necessary to justice and to safety as that the
criminal code should be certain and known. Let the judge, as well as the
citizen, precisely know the path he is to walk in, and what he may or
may not do. Let not the sword tremble over his unconscious head, or the
ground be spread with quicksands and destruction, which appear fair and
harmless to the eye of the traveller. Can it be pretended there is one
rule of justice for a judge and another for a private citizen; and that
while the latter is protected from surprise, from the malice or caprice
of any man or body of men, and can be brought into legal jeopardy only
by the violation of laws before made known to him, the latter is to be
exposed to punishment without knowing his offence, and the criminality
or innocence of his conduct is to depend not upon the laws existing at
the time, but upon the opinions of a body of men to be collected four
or five years after the transaction? A judge may thus be impeached and
removed from office for an act strictly legal, when done, if any House of
Representatives, for any indefinite time after, shall for any reason they
may act upon, choose to consider such act improper and impeachable. The
constitution, sir, never intended to lay the judiciary thus prostrate at
the feet of the House of Representatives, the slaves of their will, the
victims of their caprice. The judiciary must be protected from prejudice
and varying opinion, or it is not worth a farthing. Suppose a grand jury
should make a presentment against a man, stating that most truly he had
violated no law or committed any known offence; but he had violated their
notions of common sense--for this was the standard of impeachment the
gentleman who opened gave us--he had shocked their nerves or wounded
their sensibility. Would such a presentment be received or listened to
for a moment? No, sir. And on the same principle, no judge should be put
in jeopardy because the common sense of one hundred and fifty men might
approve what is thus condemned, and the rule of right, the objects of
punishment or praise, would thus shift about from day to day. Are we to
depend upon the House of Representatives for the innocence or criminality
of our conduct? Can they create offences at their will and pleasure,
and declare that to be a crime in 1804, which was an indiscretion or
pardonable error, or perhaps an approved proceeding in 1800? If this
gigantic House of Representatives, by the usual vote and the usual forms
of legislation, were to direct that any act heretofore not forbidden by
law, should hereafter become penal, this declaration of their will would
be a mere nullity; would have no force and effect, unless duly sanctioned
by the Senate and the approbation of the President. Will they then be
allowed, in the exercise of their power of impeachment, to create crimes
and inflict the most serious penalties on actions never before suspected
to be criminal, when they could not have swelled the same act into an
offence in the form of a law? If this be truly the case, if this power of
impeachment may be thus extended without limit or control, then indeed is
every valuable liberty prostrated at the foot of this omnipotent House
of Representatives; and may God preserve us! The President may approve
and sign a law, or may make an appointment which to him may seem prudent
and beneficial, and it may be the general, nay the universal sentiment
that it is so; and it is undeniable that no law is violated by the act.
But some four or five years hence there comes a House of Representatives
whose common sense is constructed on a new model, and who either are or
affect to be greatly shocked at the atrocity of this act. The President
is impeached. In vain he pleads the purity of his intention, the legality
of his conduct; in vain he avers that he has violated no law and been
guilty of no crime. He will be told, as Judge Chase now is, that the
common sense of the House is the standard of guilt, and their opinion of
the error of the act conclusive evidence of corruption. We have read,
sir, in our younger days, and read with horror, of the Roman Emperor
who placed his edicts so high in the air that the keenest eye could not
decipher them, and yet severely punished any breach of them. But the
power claimed by the House of Representatives to make any thing criminal
at their pleasure, at any period after its occurrence, is ten thousand
times more dangerous, more tyrannical, more subversive of all liberty
and safety. Shall I be called to heavy judgment now for an act which,
when done, was forbidden by no law, and received no reproach, because
in the course of years there is found a set of men whose common sense
condemns the deed! The gentlemen have referred us to this standard,
and being under the necessity to acknowledge that the respondent has
violated no law of the community, they would on this vague and dangerous
ground accuse, try, and condemn him. The code of the Roman tyrant was
fixed on the height of a column, where it might be understood with some
extraordinary pains; but here, to be safe, we must be able to look into
years to come, and to foresee what will be the changing opinions of men
or points of decorum for years to come. The rule of our conduct, by which
we are to be judged and condemned, lies buried in the bosom of futurity,
and in the minds and opinions of men unknown, perhaps unborn.

The gentleman (Mr. Early) who has offered you his observations on these
articles of impeachment, appears to have grounded his argument not on the
evidence, but on the articles. Supposing, perhaps, that they would be
proved, he has taken it for granted that they have been proved, and has
shaped his remarks accordingly. Had we filed a general demurrer to these
charges, thereby admitting them as stated, the argument of the gentleman
might have had the force and application he intended. But, if I mistake
not, the respondent has pleaded not guilty, and the case must therefore
be decided by the amount of the evidence, and not by the averments of the
articles. I admit, indeed, that the honorable Managers are put to some
difficulty in this respect. They are under the necessity of making their
election between the articles and the evidence as the foundation of their
argument; for they are so totally dissimilar, that they could not take
them both; they meet in so few and such immaterial points, that no man
can argue from them both for five sentences. This being the situation
of the gentleman, he has thought proper to select the articles and the
facts therein set forth as the foundation of his argument in defiance of
the testimony. In the observations I shall have the honor to submit, I
propose to take the evidence as my text and guide, and leave the articles
to shift for themselves, under the care and patronage of our honorable
opponents.

Upon reading this first article of impeachment against the respondent,
after a due degree of horror and indignation at the monstrous tyranny
and oppression portrayed in it, the first question that would strike the
mind of the inquirer would naturally be, when did this horrid transaction
take place--when and where was it that Judge Chase thus persecuted an
unfortunate wretch to the very brink of the grave, from which he was
snatched by the interference of executive mercy, shocked at the injustice
of his condemnation? When were the rights of juries and the privileges
of counsel and their clients thus thrown down and prostrated at the feet
of a cruel and inexorable judge? What would this inquirer think and
believe on being informed that these atrocious outrages upon justice,
law, and humanity, were perpetrated five years since? Why and where has
the justice of the country slumbered so long? What now awakens it from
this lethargic sleep? Why has this monstrous offender so long escaped
the punishment of his crimes? To what region of refuge did he fly? But
will not surprise be greatly increased when it is told that at the time
of the trial of John Fries, this injured and oppressed man,--at the very
time when these crimes of the judge were committed, the Congress of the
United States, the guardian of our lives and liberties, were actually
in session in the very city where the deeds were done, and probably
witnessed the whole transaction? I do not expect to be answered here, for
I cannot suspect our honorable opponents of so much illiberality, that
at that period the administration of our affairs was in the hands of the
political friends of the judge, and therefore he was permitted to escape,
however atrocious his crimes. Whatever, sir, may have been the character
of that Administration, even if a weak and wicked one, as it has been
represented, it could have no object in protecting any individual at
so great a risk to themselves and their reputation. If Judge Chase had
really violated the law and constitution to come at the blood of Fries,
and had done this in the face of the public, the Administration would
have put too much at hazard by endeavoring to shelter him. I hope,
however, no such reason will be given for the neglect of these charges;
and as we most cheerfully and truly confide in the justice of the present
Administration, we trust no such distrust will be avowed of the integrity
of the former; we feel as safe under trial now as we should have done
then, and look without distrust for the same impartial justice from this
honorable Court, as we should have expected and received at any time.

This first article, sir, charges, “that unmindful of the solemn duties
of his office, and contrary to the sacred obligations by which he stood
bound to discharge them faithfully and impartially and without regard to
persons, the said Samuel Chase on the trial of John Fries, charged with
treason, before the circuit court of the United States, held for the
district of Pennsylvania, in the city of Philadelphia, during the months
of April and May, 1800, whereat the said Samuel Chase presided, did, in
his judicial capacity, conduct himself in a manner highly arbitrary,
oppressive, and unjust.” This general accusation is followed by three
distinct specifications of offence, to wit:

“1. In delivering an opinion, in writing, on the question of law, on the
construction of which the defence of the accused materially depended,
tending to prejudice the minds of the jury against the case of the said
John Fries, the prisoner, before counsel had been heard in his defence:

“2. In restricting the counsel for the said Fries from recurring to such
English authorities as they believed apposite, or from citing certain
statutes of the United States, which they deemed illustrative of the
positions, upon which they intended to rest the defence of their client:

“3. In debarring the prisoner from his constitutional privilege of
addressing the jury (through his counsel) on the law, as well as on the
fact, which was to determine his guilt, or innocence, and at the same
time endeavoring to wrest from the jury their indisputable right to hear
argument and determine upon the question of law, as well as the question
of fact, involved in the verdict which they were required to give.”

In the whole of these specifications I am able to discover but one truth;
the rest is wholly contradicted and disproved by the evidence. It is
true, that Judge Chase did form and reduce to writing, and, in a limited
manner, deliver an opinion on a question of law, on the construction
of which the defence of the accused materially depended--but when the
article goes on to charge that this opinion tended to prejudice the
minds of the jury against the case of John Fries the prisoner, before
counsel had been heard in his defence, it is utterly unfounded and
untrue. To whom was this opinion delivered? To the counsel for Fries
and to the Attorney for the United States; and to no other person. The
third copy, and but three were made, never was delivered to the jury or
to any other person, and never could produce any prejudice or injury to
John Fries--nor indeed was it ever intended to come to the knowledge of
the jury, until they had completely heard the discussion of the case by
counsel, when they were to have _taken out_ with them this opinion of the
judge upon the law of the case submitted to them. At that period of the
trial when it was not only the right but the duty of the Court to state
to the jury their opinion of the law arising on the facts, then, and not
until then, was it the intention of the judge to communicate to them this
deliberate opinion. Could this be done with any intention to injure or
oppress the prisoner? If such was the intention of the act, then, and not
otherwise, it was criminal. In inquiring into the nature of this act, I
confine myself now to the forming and delivery of this opinion, and to
decide its innocence or criminality we should consider it in relation to
its _motives_, its _time and manner_, and its _consequences_. If nothing
partial, oppressive, or corrupt, is to be found in any of these, I know
not in what or whence the criminality is to be established. In deciding,
sir, upon the _motive_ which prompted the judge to this act, we must look
for materials in the testimony: by this we must be governed, and not by
the imputations, surmises, and constructions of our opponents, however
eloquent and ingenious. The judge and his motives are not only strongly
denounced in the article, but have also had the same fate from the mouths
of the Managers. I take the evidence for my guide, and I know it will be
the guide of this honorable Court.

What then, sir, is the whole amount of the crime of the judge on
this occasion? That he, a law judge, had been bold enough to form an
opinion--not on John Fries’s case, or the facts or circumstances of it,
for he knew them not; but on certain abstract points of law, without
first consulting and hearing Messrs. Lewis and Dallas. And further, he
had not only formed such opinions, but he had the audacity to put them
into the hands of these gentlemen, which, in the article of impeachment,
is called “delivering the opinion.” The judge, then, on mature
deliberation, from a full consideration both of English and American
precedents and decisions, had really made up his mind upon what overt
acts would constitute the treason of levying war; and to prevent mistake,
he had reduced this opinion to writing, and for the information of the
counsel on both sides (no partial selection) he gave a copy of this
opinion to each of them, and intended to give another to the jury to take
out with them. The jury should have this opinion where they could not
mistake it, instead of their memories where it might be misunderstood. Is
not this, sir, a fair and just epitome of the facts given in evidence? Is
it not the full measure and amount of the judge’s crime and corruption?

We have heard much about the agitation of the bar on this occasion. The
particular cause of it has not been clearly explained. It might have been
produced by the demeanor of Mr. Lewis, which, from his own account, was
violent and indignant, or it might have been the mere bustle produced
by the different efforts that were made to get hold of the obnoxious
paper which Mr. Lewis cast from him with so much feeling as too foul
for his hand; or from a combination of these with other causes. Another
circumstance equally immaterial has been dignified with much importance
by the attention the Managers have bestowed upon it--I mean the _novelty_
of the proceeding. Every witness was asked in solemn form, “Did you ever
see the like before?” “How long have you been a practising lawyer?”
“How many criminals have you defended?” “Was not this mode of forming
and giving opinions by the Court a novelty to you?” Granted--it was a
_novelty_--I say granted for argument’s sake--it was a novelty; and what
follows? Is it therefore impeachable? Every innovation, however just and
beneficial, is subject to the same consequence. But, sir, if this novelty
proceeded not from impure intentions, and was not followed by oppressive
or injurious consequences, where is its injustice or criminality? There
were many other novelties in that trial. It was a novelty that a man
named John Fries should commit treason, and be tried and convicted for
it. I never heard of precisely the same thing before. It was a novelty
that counsel should desert their cause in the abrupt manner in which it
was then done. But I presume it will not be pretended that these things
were wrong merely because they were novel; much less that a judge is to
be convicted of high crimes and to be removed from office for a harmless
novelty. The articles charge not the judge with innovations and novelties
in legal forms, but with depriving John Fries and his counsel of their
constitutional rights; and if he has not done this, the rest is of no
importance now. But what is this strange novelty that excites so much
interest and alarm? Is it that a law judge had a law opinion, and was
capable of making it up for himself without the assistance of learned
counsel? I hope not. I should be sorry to suppose this is a novelty in
the United States. Was it then the reducing this opinion to writing,
putting it on paper with pen and ink, that makes the dangerous novelty?
To have the opinion is nothing; but to write it constitutes the crime.
And yet, sir, where is the difference to the prisoner? Except that in
the latter case there is more certainty; less chance of misapprehension
and mistake on the part of the jury than when it is delivered to them
verbally. It should be recollected, sir, and I am sure it is too
important to be forgotten by this honorable Court, this written opinion
contained all the limitations and discriminations on the law of treason
which could serve the prisoner, as well as those which might operate
against him. But, sir, I deny that there was so much novelty either in
forming this opinion, or in reducing it to writing, as is pretended.
Is it uncommon for judges to state their opinions on particular points
of law to counsel, even before argument, for the direction of their
observations? And was it ever before considered a prejudication of the
case, or an encroachment upon the rights of the bar? In criminal courts
the practice is constant and universal. Previous to the trial of the
cases of treason, after the restoration of Charles II., the judges of
England met together, and did form and reduce to writing opinions, not
only upon the mode of proceeding upon the trials, but also on all those
questions or points of law which they supposed would arise and require
their decision in the course of the trials. (See Kelynge’s Reports, pp.
1, 2, &c.--11.) Here the judges met in consultation expressly for the
purposes now deemed so criminal in Judge Chase, and took to their aid the
King’s counsel. Our judge did not take to his assistance the Attorney of
the United States in forming his opinion; nor did the judges in England
deliver to the counsel of the accused the result of their deliberations,
but doubtless it would have been received as a favor if they had. In the
only two points of difference, therefore, between the two cases, we have
most decidedly the advantage.

Suffer me now, sir, to offer you some observations on the second
specification of the first article of impeachment. I hope it will not
be necessary to trespass greatly on your patience in refuting it. It
charges Judge Chase with “restricting the counsel for the said John
Fries from recurring to such English authorities as they believed
apposite, or from citing certain statutes of the United States, which
they deemed illustrative of the positions upon which they intended to
rest the defence of their client.” This charge consists of two parts;
it complains of a restriction as to English authorities, and as to
American statutes. I will consider them distinctly. First, sir, permit
me to remark that these allegations are made to support the general
charge of partiality, oppression, and injustice. But what becomes of
these pretences when we bear in mind the testimony of Mr. Rawle, the
district attorney, and always, and in every situation, a gentleman whose
character, in all its relations both public and private, bears the
first stamp of respectability, and fears no competition for credit? He
has informed this honorable Court that this restriction so grievously
complained of, and now the subject of a criminal prosecution, was imposed
upon him as well as upon the counsel of Fries. Is this the character
or the conduct of partiality or oppression? Does it evince that strong
appetite the judge is said to have, to drink the heart’s blood of this
unfortunate German, and stain the pure ermine of justice with his gore?
I have always understood by partiality in a judge, a favoring bias to
one party to the prejudice of the other; but where a restriction is put
equally on both sides, I cannot conjecture how it can be resolved into
partiality or oppression. It will be seen presently that as far as this
restriction could have any operation, it was friendly in that operation
to John Fries. But, sir, what was this restriction so much complained
of, and now magnified into a high crime? That certain English decisions
in the law of treason, made before the Revolution of 1688, should not
or ought not to be read to the jury; and pray, sir, what were these
decisions? I will take their character from Mr. Lewis himself, and no
man is better acquainted with them. He says they were decisions of
dependent and corrupt judges, who carried the doctrine of constructive
treason to the most dangerous and extravagant lengths. True, they were
so--sanguinary, cruel, and tyrannical in the extreme; and could the
exclusion of such cases injure John Fries? If cases which extenuated and
softened the crime of treason had been rejected, he might indeed have
suffered; but how he was or could be injured by keeping from the jury
those cases which aggravated his offence, I am really at a loss to learn.
The restriction there was on the United States. Had they been adduced
by the Attorney-General, no doubt they would have been ably answered by
the defendant’s counsel; but the ability of the counsel was not inferior
to Fries’s counsel; and if Judge Chase had indeed a design to oppress
and injure John Fries, and to convict him on strained constructions of
treason, his best policy would surely have been to have suffered these
cases to have come forward, and if supported by his authority and the
talents of the counsel of the United States, they might have had their
influence with the jury, notwithstanding the able refutations they might
have received.

May I not now flatter myself, sir, that all the criminality charged
upon the respondent, in the second specification of the first article
of impeachment, is washed away from the minds of this honorable Court?
Under this hope and impression, I will proceed to consider, as briefly
as possible, the third and last specification. In this the judge is
charged with “debarring the prisoner from his constitutional privilege
of addressing the jury (through his counsel) on the law as well as on
the fact which was to determine his guilt or innocence, and at the same
time endeavoring to wrest from the jury their indisputable right to hear
argument, and determine upon the question of law, as well as the question
of fact, involved in the verdict which they were required to give.” This
charge is absolutely unfounded and untrue, and is, in all its parts, most
completely disproved by the evidence. As to debarring counsel from being
heard, I need only refer you, sir, to the testimony of Messrs. Tilghman
and Meredith, who expressly swear, that Judge Chase, when he threw
down the paper containing the opinion the Court had formed on the law,
explicitly declared, that, nevertheless, counsel would be heard against
that opinion. It is, indeed, true that Mr. Lewis seems, throughout the
business, to have been under an impression that nothing would be heard
in contradiction to that opinion; and that his professional rights
were invaded. But this appears to be a hasty and incorrect inference
or conclusion of his own, from the conduct of the Court. He wholly
misapprehended the Court, and has charged his misapprehension to their
account. This is the usual effect of such precipitate proceedings. The
Managers have greatly relied on this circumstance; they urge that Mr.
Lewis, through the whole affair, and in all he said concerning it, took
for granted and stated that he was debarred from his constitutional
privileges. He did so; but he did so under a mistake of his own, not
proceeding from the Court. It is not only that no other witness speaks
of any such restriction, but expressly negative it and say, some of them
at least, that none such was imposed; but Mr. Rawle has further informed
you, that it appeared to him throughout the business that Mr. Lewis had
wholly misunderstood the Court and mistook their intention. But, surely,
sir, we are not to be condemned because we have been misunderstood;
especially as the mistake seems to have been peculiar to Mr. Lewis, and
no other witness fell into the same error. I rely most implicitly on
Mr. Rawle’s testimony, not only from the strength and correctness of
his character, but from the unusual pains he took to be accurate in his
knowledge of this transaction. His notes are copious, connected, and
satisfactory, and although he has no notes of the first day’s proceeding,
yet he seems to have given an uncommon and cautious attention to every
circumstance to which he has testified. This gentleman negatives every
idea of any restriction upon the arguments of counsel, and is supported
by every witness but Mr. Lewis.

But, sir, there is one circumstance in this second day’s proceeding,
which has been introduced to show, that the respondent continued the
same tyrannical spirit with which he is charged on the first day, and
which it may be incumbent on him to remove. I mean the “unkind menace,”
as it has been termed by one of the witnesses, used to the counsel of
Fries, when the judge told them they would proceed in the defence at
the hazard or on the responsibility of their character. To ascertain
the true nature of the expression, whatever it was, which fell from the
Court in this respect, I will refer to the same guide I have endeavored
to follow throughout my argument, I mean the evidence. The aspect of this
pretended menace will then be changed into a complimentary confidence
in the discretion of the counsel, or at least into no more than such
a menace as every gentleman of the bar acts under in every case; that
is, to manage every cause before a jury with a due regard to their own
reputation; to urge nothing as law to the jury, which they are conscious
is not law, and to introduce no matter which they know to be either
improper or irrelevant. This, in its worst character, will be found
to be the whole amount of this terrible menace. What account does Mr.
Lewis give of this occurrence? After stating that the Court manifested a
_strong desire_ that he and his colleague should proceed in the defence
of their client; that every restriction, if any had been imposed, was now
removed, and that they were at full liberty to address the jury on the
law and the fact as they thought proper; the judge said that this would
be done “under the direction of the Court, and at the peril of their own
character, _if we conduct ourselves with impropriety_.” And was it not
so? And where is the criminality of saying so? Mr. Lewis did not consider
this as a menace intended to restrict him in the exercise of the rights
just before conceded him by the Court, but rather as an unwarranted
suspicion of his sense of propriety; for, says he, “I did not know of any
conduct of mine to make this caution necessary.”

A very strange and unexpected effort has been made, sir, to raise a
prejudice against the respondent on this occasion, by exciting or rather
forcing a sympathy for John Fries. We have heard him most pathetically
described as the ignorant, the friendless, the innocent John Fries. The
ignorant John Fries! Is this the man who undertook to decide that a
law which had passed the wisdom of the Congress of the United States,
was impolitic and unconstitutional, and who stood so confident of this
opinion as to maintain it at the point of the bayonet? He will not thank
the gentleman for this compliment, or accept the plea of ignorance as an
apology for his crimes. The friendless John Fries! Is this the man who
was able to draw round himself a band of bold and determined adherents
resolved to defend him and his vile doctrines at the risk of their own
lives, and of the lives of all who should dare to oppose? Is this the
John Fries who had power and friends enough actually to suspend, for
a considerable time, the authority of the United States over a large
district of country, to prevent the execution of the laws, and to command
and compel the officers appointed to execute the law to abandon the
duties of their appointment, and lay the authority of the Government at
the feet of this _friendless usurper_? The innocent John Fries! Is this
the man against whom a most respectable grand jury of Pennsylvania, in
1799, found a bill of indictment for high treason; and who was afterwards
convicted by another jury, equally impartial and respectable, with the
approbation and under the direction of a judge, whose humanity and
conduct, on that very occasion, have received the most unqualified praise
of the honorable Manager who thus sympathizes with Fries? Is this the
John Fries, against whom a second grand jury, in 1800, found another
bill for the same offence, founded on the same facts, and who was again
convicted by a just and conscientious petit jury? Is this _innocent_
German the man who, in pursuance of a wicked opposition to the power
and laws of the United States, and a mad confidence in his ability to
maintain that opposition, rescued the prisoners duly arrested by the
officers of the Government, and placed those very officers under duress;
who, with arms in his hands and menace on his tongue, arrayed himself in
military order and strength, put to hazard the safety and peace of the
country, and threatened us with all the desolation, bloodshed, and horror
of a civil war; who, at the moment of his desperate attack, cried out to
his infatuated followers, “Come on! I shall probably fall on the first
fire, then strike, stab, and kill all you can?” In the fervid imagination
of the honorable Manager, the widow and orphans of this man, even before
he is dead, are made in hypothesis to cry at the judgment seat of God
against the respondent; and his blood, though not a drop of it has been
spilt, is seen to stain the pure ermine of justice. I confess, sir, as a
Pennsylvanian, whose native State has been disgraced with two rebellions
in the short period of four years, my ear was strangely struck to hear
the leader of one of them addressed with such friendly tenderness, and
honored with such flattering sympathy by the honorable Manager.

It is not unusual, sir, in public prosecutions for the accused to appeal
to his general life and conduct in refutation of the charges. How proudly
may the respondent make this appeal! He is charged with a violent attempt
to violate the laws and constitution of his country, and to destroy the
best liberty of his fellow-citizens. Look, sir, to his past life, to
the constant course of his opinions and conduct, and the improbability
of the charge is manifest. Look to the days of doubt and danger; look
to that glorious struggle so long and so doubtfully maintained for that
independence we now enjoy; for those rights of self-government you now
exercise, and do you not see the respondent among the boldest of the
bold, never sinking in hope or in exertion, aiding by his talents and
encouraging by his spirit; in short, putting his property and his life in
issue on the contest, and making the loss of both certain by the active
part he assumed, should his country fail of success! And does this man,
who thus gave all his possessions, all his energies, all his hopes to
his country and to the liberties of the American people, now employ the
small and feeble remnant of his days, without interest or object, to
pull down and destroy that very fabric of freedom, that very Government,
and those very rights he so labored to establish? It is not credible; it
cannot be credited, but on proof infinitely stronger than any thing that
has been offered to this honorable Court on this occasion. Indiscretions
may have been hunted out by the perseverance of persecution; but I trust
most confidently that the just, impartial, and dignified sentence of
this Court, will completely establish to our country and to the world,
that the respondent has fully and honorably justified himself against
the charges now exhibited against him; and has discharged his official
duties, not only with the talents that are conceded to him, but with an
integrity infinitely more dear to him.


FRIDAY, February 22.

Mr. KEY.--Mr. President, I rise to make some observations on the second,
third, and fourth articles of the impeachment. I shall not apologize for
the manner in which I shall discharge a duty which I have voluntarily
undertaken, but merely regret that indisposition has prevented my giving
the subject that attention which it merits. It will be at once perceived
that these articles relate to the trial of Callender. Before, however,
I go into an examination of the second article, it may be proper to
notice the situation in which the judge found himself and the state
of the public mind at the time. The sedition law was passed in the
year 1799. It immediately arrested the public attention, and strongly
agitated the public feelings. In the State of Virginia it was peculiarly
obnoxious; many of the most respectable characters considered it as
unconstitutional, and as a violation of the liberty of the press; most
deemed it impolitic; while some viewed it as a salutary restraint on
the licentiousness of the press, more calculated to preserve than to
destroy it. In this state of the public mind it became the duty of the
respondent, in the ordinary assignment of judicial districts, to go into
the district of Virginia, where he was entirely a stranger, to carry the
laws into execution. It is scarcely necessary to observe that when laws
are considered obnoxious, much of the odium attending them inevitably
falls on those who carry them into effect. In May, 1800, Judge Chase
went to Richmond to hold a court; and soon after it was in session, the
grand jury found a presentment and afterwards a bill against James T.
Callender for an infraction of this law, in publishing the book entitled
“The Prospect before Us,” which brought into issue its constitutionality.
Professional men of talents, carried along by the tide of public opinion,
volunteered their services in defence of the accused; and every effort
was exhausted to wrest the decision from the respondent. Exceptions were
accordingly taken at every stage of the case; and when the jurors were
brought to the book, a question arose which forms the foundation of the
charge contained in the second article.

If we extract from this article the epithets it contains nothing will
remain, and epithets fortunately do not constitute crimes. The offence
and fact charged is, the permitting Mr. Basset to be sworn on the jury
with an intention to oppress the traverser, which is not in the least
supported by the testimony. The article alleges that Mr. Basset wished
to be excused. I appeal to the testimony, whether he did wish or desire
to be excused. The observations he made arose entirely from a scruple
in his own mind, and not from any objection to serving. Instead of
his wishing to be excused, the real fact is that which he said flowed
from the peculiar situation in which he stood; and he says that he
declared himself willing to serve, provided in law he was competent. The
fact, therefore, on which this article rests, is not supported by the
testimony, and not being supported, I might here dismiss this branch of
the subject without further animadversion.

Suppose we are mistaken in the fact, which we say is proved, that
Mr. Basset did not desire to be excused; admit that he did pray to
be excused; still, so far as he has himself, on oath, explained the
situation of his mind, there was no cause for challenge.

Admit, also, that we are mistaken in the law we have laid down, does it
follow as a necessary consequence that the directing Basset to be sworn
on the jury, was done with an intent to oppress the traverser? We call
for the facts that impeach the motives of Judge Chase. In the opening of
this case we were told that the respondent was highly gifted with rich
attainments of mind. It was correctly said; and it might have been added
that his integrity was equal to his talents. But the observation was
made to raise his head at the expense of his heart. I will examine this
argument.

The truth is that no judge is liable for an error of judgment. I
apprehend this is conceded by the article itself, which states a criminal
intent. Now for the evidence. What criminal intention do the honorable
Managers draw from it? It is said that the respondent is highly gifted
with intellectual powers, and must have known in this instance the
law. _Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes._ I dislike the compliment; the
best-gifted mortals are frail, and a single erroneous decision may be
made by any man.

I will now proceed to the third article, which, when correctly
understood, will be found as destitute of impeachable matter as either
of the other articles. It is as follows: “That, with intent to oppress
and procure the conviction of the prisoner, the evidence of John Taylor,
a material witness on behalf of the aforesaid Callender, was not
permitted by the said Samuel Chase to be given in, on pretence that the
said witness could not prove the truth of the whole of one of the charges
contained in the indictment, although the said charge embraced more than
one fact.”

In opening the case one of the honorable Managers inquired what human
subtilty or ingenuity could devise to extenuate this act of the
respondent. Our reply is that it requires no subtilty or ingenuity; that
it was correct in point of law, and that the case is so clear, that he
who runs may read. The Court must permit me to observe that the article
presents an abstract case, not growing out of, or connected with the
evidence. This Court, I apprehend, is not sitting here to decide this
abstract point, whether in any case it is admissible to prove one fact
contained in a particular charge by one witness, and one by another; but
to determine whether in this case, where one witness was offered to prove
part of one charge, and no other witness offered to the same charge, it
was proper to receive testimony offered. I contend that the decision was
correct on the case before the Court.

Mr. Robertson says, “The attorney for the United States having concluded,
the counsel for the traverser introduced Colonel Taylor as a witness,
and he was sworn; but at the moment the oath was administered, the
judge called on them, and desired to know what they intended to prove
by the witness. They answered, that they intended to examine Colonel
Taylor, to prove that Mr. Adams had avowed principles in his presence
which justified Mr. Callender in saying that the President was an
aristocrat--that he had voted against the sequestration law, and the
resolutions concerning the suspension of commercial intercourse with
Great Britain.” This was then the object and view with which Colonel
Taylor was called on. What is the charge in the articles of impeachment?
That the testimony of Colonel Taylor was rejected “on pretence that
the said witness could not prove the truth of the whole of one of the
charges, contained in the indictment, although the said charge embraced
more than one fact.” The charge in the indictment is that the President
“was a professed aristocrat; that he proved faithful and serviceable
to the British interest:” and Colonel Taylor was called to prove that
Mr. Adams had voted against the sequestration law, and the resolutions
concerning the suspension of commercial intercourse with Great Britain.
Was it competent to Colonel Taylor to give evidence on this point? The
best evidence the nature of the case will admit must be adduced. Colonel
Taylor then was clearly an incompetent witness on this point; as there
was better evidence, the journals of this honorable body, within the
reach of the traverser. It only then remained for Colonel Taylor to
prove that the President had avowed principles which showed him to be an
aristocrat; which, if proved, would have been altogether immaterial. To
prove no other facts was he called upon. Are then counsel to be indulged
in consuming the time of courts in the examination of witnesses, who have
nothing relevant to offer?

I will now proceed to the fourth article, which contains five distinct
specifications of facts charging misconduct on the respondent at Richmond.

This conduct is said to have been evinced, in the first place, “In
compelling the prisoner’s counsel to reduce to writing, and submit to the
inspection of the Court, for their admission or rejection, all questions
which the said counsel meant to propound to the above-named John Taylor,
the witness.”

If this was incorrect, I cannot perceive its injustice to Callender, nor
its partiality or intemperance. But did the conduct of the Court in this
instance correspond with the law and the practice? I apprehend that it
did. I understand it to be a clear and admitted principle of law, that
the Court is the only competent tribunal to determine the competency,
the admissibility, and the relevancy of evidence; when admitted, its
credibility is the exclusive province of the jury. I have before stated
the reasons which rendered it necessary in this case to know what
Colonel Taylor could prove. To understand the object for which he was
produced with greater certainty and precision, the judge ordered the
questions proposed to be put to be previously reduced to writing. I am
not sufficiently acquainted with the practice in the courts of Virginia
to say this was not novel, but I may surely venture to affirm that there
was nothing criminal in it. I know well that in different States there
are different forms of practice. I can only say, that Judge Chase, going
from Maryland, where the practice does prevail, would naturally carry to
Virginia the knowledge of the practice of the State from which he went.

The _second_ specification is in the following words:

“In refusing to postpone the trial, although an affidavit was regularly
filed, stating the absence of material witnesses on behalf of the
accused; and although it was manifest that, with the utmost diligence,
the attendance of such witnesses could not have been procured at that
term.”

This charge is grounded on the fact of a refusal to postpone the trial on
an affidavit. That the Court acted correctly in this instance will appear
from this consideration. Nothing is more clear than that, under the
common law, all applications for a continuance, on affidavit, are founded
on the discretion of the Court. Is it not wonderfully singular that there
should have been an application founded on an affidavit, if the law of
Virginia, as stated in the 6th article, applied to the case? One thing is
clear: either that the Attorney-General and Mr. Hay lost all recollection
of the existence of this law of Virginia respecting continuances, or
that they considered it inapplicable; for they would not otherwise have
founded the application on an affidavit. They would have produced the
law and have demanded a continuance. Did they do so? No. If, then, the
law officer of the State and Mr. Hay both forgot that it existed, is it
surprising that it should be unknown to Mr. Chase? If those gentlemen did
recollect the existence of the law, they must surely have been of opinion
that it did not apply to the case of Callender, or they would have saved
themselves the trouble of filing an affidavit. It will however be shown
that it did not apply, and hence their application founded on affidavit.

On the third specification, which charges the respondent with “the use
of unusual, rude, and contemptuous expressions towards the prisoner’s
counsel; and in falsely insinuating that they wished to excite the public
fears and indignation, and to produce that insubordination to law, to
which the conduct of the judge did, at the same time, manifestly tend;”
I have but a few observations to make. I should indeed have spared many
of the remarks I have made, were it not for an ignorance of the peculiar
ground on which the honorable Managers mean to rely in their reply, and
were it not for the fear that an omission to notice any of the charges
preferred, might be considered as an abandonment of our defence as far as
related to them.

I have nowhere discovered in the evidence any thing that supports in
point of fact the charge against Judge Chase, of falsely insinuating that
the prisoner’s counsel wished to excite the public fears and indignation
to produce insubordination to law. The judge did say that the counsel
used a popular argument, calculated to mislead and deceive the populace;
and this is the extent and head of his offending; but there is a wide
difference between this and the charge laid to his door. He told the
counsel, and told them truly, that they were availing themselves of a
popular argument, calculated to mislead and deceive the people. Attend,
I pray you, to the testimony of Mr. Hay. Did not the counsel for the
prisoner say they had no hope of exculpating him on the facts? Did they
not say they did not argue for Callender? That it was the cause, and not
the man, they defended? That they did not expect to convince Judge Chase,
or any other federal judge, of the unconstitutionality of the sedition
act? Were they not then laboring with their whole talents to catch the
popular ear? Did they not expressly declare that they had little hopes of
the jury, and that their object was to make an impression on the public
mind? And when the judge declared that the constitutionality of the act
could not be discussed before the jury, did they not, failing in their
object, abandon the defence? The ground which they meant to have taken
was withdrawn, and they withdrew with it.

As to the use of unusual, rude, and contemptuous expressions towards
the prisoner’s counsel, no particular facts appear to be relied on. The
term _captious_ may be unusual; the phrase _young gentlemen_, which in
the opening the honorable Manager metamorphosed into _boys_, but which
last word does not by the testimony appear to have been used, may have
been obnoxious to the ears of those to whom it was applied. There may
not have been manifested in this language the most refined decorum; but
let us recollect that our honorable client is not now on his trial for a
violation of the decorums of society. Possessed of great ardor of mind
and quickness of feeling, he conceives with rapidity, and expresses
with energy his ideas. This may be a weakness; but it is a weakness of
nature. Had he a colder heart, and weaker head, he might not be exposed
to these little indiscretions. But where is the _vade mecum_ from which
a judge is to derive precedents for his behavior? Courts are instituted,
not to polish and refine, but to administer justice between man and man.
One judge may possess a more pleasing urbanity of manners than another;
but are we to infer that because a man is warm in the expression of his
sentiments, he is, therefore, angry? It will not be contended that when
the counsel for the traverser spoke of the necessity of the indictment
being _verbatim et literatim_, in the witty reply of the judge that
they might as well insist that it should be _punctuatim_, there was any
violation of decorum manifested. The reply grew out of the occasion, and
never was a remark better applied.

I know of no other unusual language, except the expression of _non
sequitur_; and surely there was nothing improper in that. We have been
told that it is the usual habit of Judge Chase to interrupt counsel
when they attempt to lay down as law that which is not law. In this
case, he certainly did so; but it does not appear that he departed from
his ordinary course; and if he had, where is the rule which, on such
occasions, is to govern a judge? Such conduct, as I have before observed
on another point, violates no moral obligation, infringes no statutory
provision. The judge may not have displayed the urbanity, the suavity,
and the patience, which so happily characterize some high characters; but
where or when has the absence of these minor qualities been considered
as criminal? Some of the witnesses, and among them Colonel Taylor, have
described the conduct of the judge as imperious, sarcastic, and witty;
but no witness has pronounced it tyrannical or oppressive.

With regard to the fourth specification, which relates to the
interruption of counsel, I shall say but little. A judge has a right at
all times to interrupt counsel whenever they act improperly. It is the
inherent right of courts. When that is laid down as law which is not
law, it is not only their right, but it is their duty, to stop them.
Such interruptions may be considered vexatious by the counsel that are
interrupted; but of such matters the Court only can be the judge. One
witness, examined on the frequency of the interruptions of counsel on the
trial of Callender, has said that more interruptions occurred in a case
before Judge Iredell, whose eulogium has been pronounced by an honorable
Manager; and another witness has informed us that it is the habit of
Judge Chase frequently to interrupt counsel in civil as well as criminal
cases; that the habit arises from the vigor of his mind, and the ardor
of his feelings; that this is somewhat embarrassing to counsel, but that
a little suavity on their part soon restores the judge to good humor. On
this point I have no further observations to make. I will leave it to the
good sense of this honorable body to determine how far the conduct of the
respondent was, on this occasion, indecorous, and how far, on account of
this conduct, he is liable to impeachment.

As to the fifth specification, which is in these words: “In an indecent
solicitude, manifested by the said Samuel Chase, for the conviction of
the accused, unbecoming even a public prosecutor, but highly disgraceful
to the character of a judge, as it was subversive of justice.” I have no
precise idea of the meaning of the term _indecent solicitude_--solicitude
means _mental_ anxiety. If we are to understand by solicitude that the
judge felt anxiety for the furtherance of justice, that is simply an
operation of the mind, and to determine whether it is praiseworthy or
reprehensible, some overt act must be shown. For is it possible that, in
any interesting case, a judge can sit on the bench without feeling some
interest in the issue? This is more than falls to the lot of mortal. No,
he must have feelings; and all that can be required is, that he restrain
them from breaking out into acts subversive of justice. I will endeavor,
on this point, to condense the testimony. It is said that the solicitude
of the respondent is evinced by his indecent behavior to the counsel, and
by his conduct previous to the trial. A jocular conversation is resorted
to; and expressions made in the most unguarded moments are drawn forth in
judgment against him. After he had delivered a charge at Annapolis, Mr.
Mason came up to him, and asked him what kind of charge he had delivered,
whether it was to be considered as legal, religious, moral, or political.
To which the judge replied that it was a little of all. Some conversation
ensued on the licentiousness of the press, and he observed that when he
went to Richmond, if a respectable jury could be found, he would have
Callender punished. All this is worked up, as it were by magic, to prove
a deliberate purpose on his part to institute a prosecution. That a man
of the intelligence of Judge Chase, had he conceived such a project,
should thus jocosely, as is proved, and in public have divulged it,
is beyond all belief. Let not a casual conversation of this light and
sportive kind be tortured into evidence of a deliberate design. No man,
the least acquainted with the general character of Judge Chase, will
entertain the idea for a minute.

Another circumstance complained of, is, that Judge Chase was provided
with a _scored_ copy of “The Prospect before Us;” and this is adduced to
prove his purpose to oppress Callender. But we have given it in testimony
that this copy was scored by Mr. Martin, who handed it to the judge, when
he was about going to Richmond, to amuse him on the road, and to make
such other use of it as he pleased. What was there improper or indecent
in this? Further: the respondent is next hunted through a line of stages
on his passage from Dumfries to Richmond; and Mr. Triplet is brought
forward to prove that he expressed a wish that the damned rascal had been
hanged. Had there been a settled purpose to convict or oppress Callender,
would it not have been manifested by concealment and prudence, instead of
being divulged by such an intemperate impulse of feeling?

We next find the respondent at Richmond. And here a gentleman states
that having moved the Court for an injunction, he went to the chambers
of Judge Chase on the subject, on the morning subsequent to the motion
being made, and before the judge had gone to court; that while he was
there, Mr. David M. Randolph, the marshal, came in, and showed the judge
the panel of jurors for the trial of Callender; that the judge asked
him whether there were on it any of the creatures called democrats; and
added, if there are, strike them off. Here must be some mistake. The
witness must have heard some other person say so. Sure I am that the
testimony will show that the statement of Mr. Heath cannot be received as
correct. I impute no criminal intention to the witness; this is not my
habit; but, for ascertaining the weight which it ought to have, I will
collect and compare the several parts of the testimony on this point.

It appears that Mr. Heath was at the judge’s chambers but once. Mr.
Marshall, the clerk of the Court, called on Judge Chase the same morning
that Mr. Heath was there--he cannot recollect whether Mr. Randolph went
with him, according to his usual practice, but he is certain, from a
conversation he states, that they walked together to court; he met Mr.
Heath either in the act of coming out of the judge’s room, or exterior
to the door; and he heard no such conversation as he relates. What says
Mr. Randolph? That no such conversation ever did take place. Here, then,
the testimony is directly opposed. But it is said that our testimony is
negative, and is therefore outweighed by the positive testimony of Mr.
Heath; this, however, is not the fact. Much of our testimony is positive.
Mr. Randolph declares that he has never shown the panel of a jury to a
judge, except in the case of a grand jury offered to the Court to select
a foreman; and he is positive that the panel in the case of Callender was
not made out until the morning of the third of July, in court, when his
deputies came forward with the names of the jurors they had summoned, on
small slips of paper; and in corroboration of this evidence, it appears
on the testimony of Mr. Basset, who was sworn on the jury, that he was
not summoned until the third of July; and that the marshal sent out his
deputies that very morning to summon jurors. We oppose, then, to the
simple declaration of Mr. Heath, unaccredited by other witnesses, the
clear and strong evidence of Mr. Randolph, corroborated by that of Mr.
Marshall and Mr. Basset.

It does, then, appear to me that none of the alleged facts are so
supported as to show an indecent solicitude on the part of the respondent.

Mr. LEE.--May it please this honorable Court: We are now arrived,
Mr. President, in the course of the defence, to the fifth article
of impeachment. I have, sir, been led to believe, that the present
prosecution is brought before this honorable Court as a court of criminal
jurisdiction, and that this high Court is bound by the same rules of
evidence, the same legal ideas of crime, and the same principles of
decision which are observed in the ordinary tribunals of criminal
jurisdiction. The articles themselves seem to have been drawn in
conformity to this opinion, for they all, except the fifth, charge, in
express terms, some criminal intention upon the respondent. This doctrine
relative to impeachment is laid down in 4 Black., 259, and in 2 Woodeson,
611. “As to the trial itself, it must of course vary in external
ceremony, but differs not in essentials from criminal prosecutions before
inferior courts. The same rules of evidence, the same legal notions of
crimes and punishments, prevail. For impeachments are not framed to
alter the law, but to carry it into more effectual execution, where it
might be obstructed by the influence of too powerful delinquents, or
not easily discerned in the ordinary course of jurisdiction, by reason
of the peculiar quality of the alleged crimes. The judgment, therefore,
is to be such as is warranted by legal principles and precedents.” The
Constitution of the United States appears to consider the subject in the
same light. By the third section of the third article, “the trial of
all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury;” and by
the fourth section of the second article, the nature and extent of the
punishment in cases of impeachment is defined. Hence it may be inferred
that a person is only impeachable for some criminal offence. With this
view, I have examined and re-examined the fifth article of impeachment,
to know against what the defence should be made. Looking at it with a
legal eye, I find no offence charged to have been committed; and although
it may seem strange, it is not the less true, this circumstance has
produced the greatest difficulty and embarrassment in what manner the
defence should be made.

In conformity to the rule of the Supreme Court and the authority of the
case just cited, Judge Chase determined that the laws of the State
of Virginia, which require a summons to be issued in cases of the
Commonwealth, did not apply to the courts of the United States. Why, let
me again ask, should this section receive the construction contended
for by the honorable Managers? It has been shown that the laws of the
United States provide fully in regard to the process to be issued by
their courts: that, for the furtherance of justice, such a construction
is neither necessary nor convenient, and is inconsistent with other parts
of the same statute. It is therefore perfectly correct in the Court to
bestow no attention upon the laws of Virginia concerning the process to
be awarded against Callender. When a presentment was found by the grand
jury, it was the duty of the Court to act; it was their duty to award a
proper process for arresting the offender. This is not only warranted
by the principles and reasons already adduced, but is inferrible from
various passages of the laws of Congress, particularly from the 19th and
20th sections of the statute passed 30th April, 1790, 1st vol. page 108.

I will now proceed to make some observations upon the sixth article of
impeachment: “And whereas it is provided by the 24th section of the
aforesaid act, entitled ‘An act to establish the judicial courts of the
United States,’ that the laws of the several States, except where the
constitution, treaties, or statutes of the United States, shall otherwise
require or provide, shall be regarded as the rules of decision in trials
at common law in the courts of the United States, in cases where they
apply; and whereas by the laws of Virginia it is provided, that in cases
not capital, the offender shall not be held to answer any presentment
of a grand jury until the Court next succeeding that during which such
presentment shall be made; yet the said Samuel Chase, with intent to
oppress and procure the conviction of the said James Thompson Callender,
did, at the Court aforesaid, rule and adjudge the said Callender to
trial, during the term at which he, the said Callender, was presented and
indicted, contrary to law in that case made and provided.”

The charge in this article against the respondent is in substance that
he, with intent to oppress and procure the conviction of Callender, ruled
him to trial during the term at which he was presented and indicted,
contrary to the laws of Virginia, which it is alleged have provided
that in cases not capital, the offender shall not be held to answer any
presentment of a grand jury until the next succeeding Court.

This article it is admitted does contain an accusation of crime; but
I hope I shall be able to satisfy this honorable Court, that in this
instance no crime or offence was committed. I shall undertake to show
that no error in law was committed, and that if the judge had done
otherwise he would have been more liable to censure than he now is. If
this be made to appear, as a supposed illegality of his conduct is the
foundation of the charge, there will remain nothing to support the charge.

The accused judge had sworn to support the Constitution of the United
States, and to administer justice without respect to persons, and to
perform all the duties of his office according to the laws of the United
States. If in ruling Callender to trial at the same term at which he was
indicted, he acted according to law, the judge performed his duty, and
ought not to be charged with oppression.

The article may be understood as affirming, that there exists some law
of Virginia which positively prohibits the trial of a misdemeanor at
the same term at which the indictment is found. No such law has been
produced, and I must be allowed to deny that any such law of Virginia
exists. When the party appears and answers the presentment, the trial may
immediately take place. When the party appears and answers an indictment,
the trial may immediately take place, _if_ so ruled by the Court, who are
vested with a discretion unfettered by any positive statute. The defence
of this article may therefore be placed on two grounds, either of which
will be sufficient. 1st. There is no law of Virginia which prohibits the
trial of a misdemeanor at the same term the indictment is found. And,
2dly. If there be such a law, the same is not binding on the courts of
the United States, in respect to offences against the United States.

In cases where bail is requirable, to delay the trial may be used to the
oppression of the accused. It is therefore enjoined by the constitution
and by the laws that there shall be no delay. If the honorable judge, who
stands accused of trying Callender too soon, had deferred the trial to
another term, that is to say six months, and the traverser could not have
given bail, he would have been imprisoned six months without a trial.
After he was convicted, the sentence of imprisonment pronounced by the
same judge was only an imprisonment of about nine months. He had acted,
therefore, not only according to law, but with humanity, in bringing
the traverser to trial at the same term at which he was indicted. If
the trial had been postponed to another term, and Callender in the mean
time had been imprisoned, such a conduct in the Court would have given
cause of complaint against the judge, who would then have been accused of
postponing the trial of an innocent man, for the purpose of oppression.
What in such a case ought the judge to have done? Exactly what he did.
Obeying the constitution and the laws of the United States, he brought
the traverser to a speedy and public trial.

It is, may it please the honorable Court, upon these grounds that the
respondent stands justified in his conduct, in relation to the charge
contained in the sixth article of impeachment.

In the distribution of the articles of impeachment among the counsel
of the respondent, he assigned to me the 5th and 6th, and I humbly
indulge the hope that the defence which has been made will be deemed
satisfactory. But before I conclude, I hope I may be allowed shortly
to advert to some of the remarks which have fallen from the honorable
Managers in respect to this part of the accusation.

The honorable Managers have attempted to show a difference between a
presentment and an indictment, and that until the indictment was found,
a capias ought not to have been issued, even if it were lawful to issue
it upon an indictment. That there is no such distinction, I appeal to
those passages of the acts of Congress to which reference has been
already made. I appeal to the reason of the thing and to the nature of a
presentment. It is a species of indictment, an informal indictment; it is
an accusation of a grand jury. There are cases where it would be improper
in a court to wait until a presentment shall be put in the form of an
indictment. Circumstances may be such that the offender would escape if
process was not issued upon the presentment.

It has been objected that the judge misconducted himself towards the
counsel during the trial of Callender in various instances, which it
has been argued proceeded from a desire to convict and punish the
traverser, howsoever innocent. I will observe with great deference, that
if in the opinion of some gentlemen the judge did not act with becoming
politeness to the counsel, it is not a high crime or misdemeanor that
may be examined or tried in this honorable Court. But I trust, upon a
view of the circumstances as they have been given in evidence, that this
Court will be of opinion that the respondent behaved to the counsel with
sufficient propriety. One of the counsel, Mr. Wirt, offered to the Court
a syllogism, to which the honorable judge promptly replied in a technical
phrase of logic, and this excited in the audience some diversion. When
another of the counsel, Mr. Nicholas, was speaking on the favorite
topic of the right of the jury to consider the constitutionality of the
sedition law, he was not interrupted by the judge. But Mr. Nicholas has
been proved to have been always civil, always respectful to a court of
justice, consequently the Court would be civil to him. A third counsel,
Mr. Hay, who was extremely desirous, as he has himself testified, to
make an oration, not only for the purpose of satisfying the jury but the
audience that a jury had a right to judge of the constitutionality of the
sedition law, was interrupted by the judge, who denied his position. Mr.
Hay had stated other matters during the trial which appeared to the judge
to be erroneous. He had stated that a jury in this case of Callender, was
the proper tribunal to assess the fine, in which he had been corrected
by the Court; that one of the jurors, Mr. Basset, was not qualified to
serve, &c. His zeal in the cause of liberty and the constitution made
him pertinacious in some things which the judge pronounced to be errors.
It was no wonder then that such an advocate was stopped and often
interrupted by the Court. If any thing was done amiss by the judge during
the trial, it was his desiring Mr. Hay to proceed in his own way, and
promising to interrupt him no more let him say what he would; but this
circumstance plainly evinces that the interruptions did not arise from
corrupt motives. It may truly be said that Judge Chase, in his behavior
to counsel, was “all things to all men.” To the logical Mr. Wirt, he was
logical; to the polite Mr. Nicholas, he was polite; to the zealous and
pertinacious Mr. Hay, he was warm and determined. If the counsel had
conducted themselves with propriety towards the Court there would have
been no interruptions; but when the judge found that the opinions of
the bench were slighted, and that the conduct of the bar had a tendency
to mislead and influence the public mind against a statute of Congress,
he endeavored to turn their sentiments and reasoning into ridicule,
and he produced by his wit a considerable degree of merriment at their
expense, of which no doubt Colonel John Taylor, who has proved it for the
prosecutors, was, from his natural temper, a full partaker.

You are now about to set an example in a case of impeachment which will
have a most important influence in our country. It will be an example
to the tribunals in the several States who like you possess the power
of trying impeachments, and who may learn from you by what rules the
doctrine of impeachment is to be regulated. It will be a polar star to
guide in prosecutions of this kind. You are about to set an example to
the ordinary tribunals of justice in every corner of the United States.
They will know how this high Court has done justice between the House
of Representatives of the American nation and a single individual, and
hence they may learn how to do justice to the most weak and friendless
individual, when accused in their courts by the most powerful. An upright
and independent judiciary is all-important in society. Let your example
be as bright in its justice as it will be extensive in its influence.
If the people shall find that their confidential servants, the House
of Representatives, have brought forward an accusation against another
of their servants for high crimes and misdemeanors in his exalted
office, which after a fair and patient hearing has not been supported
by evidence, it will afford them pleasure to hear of his honorable
acquittal, and such, may it please this honorable Court, will be, I
trust, the result of your deliberations.


SATURDAY, February 23.

Mr. MARTIN.--Mr. President: Did I _only_ appear in defence of a
friend, with whom I have been in habits of intimacy for nearly thirty
years, I should feel less anxiety on the present occasion, though
that circumstance would be a sufficient inducement; but I am, at this
time, actuated by superior motives. I consider this cause not only of
importance to the respondent and his accusers, but to my fellow-citizens
in general, (whose eyes are now fixed upon us,) and to their posterity,
for the decision at this time will establish a most important precedent
as to future cases of impeachment.

My observations thus far have been principally with a view to establish
the true construction of our constitution, as relates to the doctrine of
impeachment. I now, Mr. President, will proceed to the particular case
before this honorable Court; and, in the first place, I agree with the
honorable Managers, that there is a manifest difference even between
the credibility of witnesses, and the credibility of testimony, for, I
admit, if witnesses are equally credible, and some swear that words were
uttered, or acts were done, and others, that they did not hear the words,
or that they did not see the acts done, the presumption is certainly in
favor of the positive, and against the negative testimony. But this must
be admitted with considerable restrictions.

If immediately after a transaction, there is a full and clear memory
of the words spoken, or the acts done, there is great reason to credit
the testimony; but, even in that case, if there are a number of persons
equally respectable, having equal opportunity to hear and see, and who
were attentive to what took place, and none of them heard or saw what is
testified by a single witness, there would be great reason to suspect
the affirmative witness to be mistaken; more so if the transactions had
happened for some years antecedent to the examination.

But, as to _Heath_, we do not contradict him _merely by negative
testimony_; we contradict him by a series of positive facts which my
honorable colleague (Mr. Key) has detailed, proved by characters, whose
_veracity cannot be doubted_, which positive facts incontestably show
that what he swore never could have taken place. And, here again, permit
me, sir, to make a further observation, that, where a person is charged
_criminally_ for words he is supposed to have uttered, those words ought
to be proved _with precision_. Every witness on _this_ occasion, who hath
been examined as to expressions used by my honorable client, either on
the one or the other charge, which are held as exceptionable, declares he
cannot pretend to recollect the express words uttered by the judge, but
only to state what at this distance of time he can consider the amount of
what was said. Nay, Messrs. Lewis and Dallas declare further, that they
cannot pretend to say with accuracy, what part of the conversation, of
which they give testimony, took place on the first or the second day, or
in what order. Such kind of testimony, therefore, ought to be received
with great caution, and not to be considered as conclusive.

Having laid down these general principles as to the relative rights and
duties of the Court, the bar, and the jury, I shall proceed with my
honorable client to the State of Pennsylvania.

It was known that John Fries, charged with treason, had, on a former
trial, been found guilty, and that a new trial had been granted upon
a suggestion, which I hope will not become a precedent, will never be
a rule for decisions. When I say this, I mean not to detract from the
merit of that highly-respectable character who presided, and who granted
the new trial. His conduct flowed, I am convinced, from his humanity;
his was the error of the heart, not of the head. It was an honest,
nay, an amiable error. My honorable client knew, when he arrived at
Philadelphia, that the trial of Fries was to take place that term. He
has been acknowledged by the honorable Managers, to be a gentleman of
the highest legal talents. In this they have only done him justice; and
have been as prodigal of their praise as his warmest friends could have
wished. It would have given me great pleasure if they had been as just in
expressing their sense of his integrity. He had been in the practice of
the law for forty years, and also a judge for a number of years, and for
about six years, I believe, presided in the criminal court of Baltimore
County, where, during that time, there were more criminal trials probably
than in any other court in America. I believe I speak moderately, when
I say, that I have attended, on behalf of the State, at least five
thousand criminal trials in that court. From those circumstances it is
to be presumed that he was not deficient in knowledge of what related
to criminal proceedings; but would he have acted the part of an upright
judge, if he had not endeavored to make himself master of the law of
treason, when a case of that nature was about to come before him;
particularly the law of treason, as it related to levying war against
the United States, or in adhering to those who levied war against them,
which is the only kind of treason that our constitution acknowledges;
although I have heard, I must own, of _treason_ against the _principles_
of the constitution, and _treason_ against the _sovereignty_ of the
people--words well enough suited to a popular harangue, or a newspaper
essay, but not for a court of justice.

When Judge Chase arrived at Philadelphia he had the advantage of perusing
the notes of Judge Peters and the district attorney, relating to the
former trial; he thereby became well acquainted with all the points at
that time made by the counsel for Fries; and Mr. Lewis has sworn, that
all the points which were intended to have been made before Judge Chase,
had been made at the former trial. Why then should the Court either wish,
or be obliged to hear counsel again on the law? In two previous cases
the law had been settled. Judge Patterson, a gentleman of the first
abilities, mild and amiable, whom no person will charge of being of a
vindictive, oppressive disposition, and who certainly has more suavity
of manners than my honorable client had, after a most patient and full
hearing, where eminent counsel attended, decided the law as it was
decided by the respondent. Judge Iredell, whose encomium has been most
justly given us by the Managers, a gentleman of great legal talents,
than whom no worthier man has left this for a better world; and who,
while living, honored me with his friendship, after having heard Messrs.
Lewis and Dallas, and after full and patient investigation, gave, in the
case of Fries himself, a similar decision; in both which opinions Judge
Peters perfectly coincided. Under these circumstances, Judge Chase, who
had no doubt of the propriety of those decisions, to prevent waste of
time when there was so much business to transact, and to facilitate the
business, thought it best to inform the counsel on each side, that the
Court considered the law to be settled, and in what manner. For which
purpose they delivered to the clerk three copies of their opinion, one
for the counsel on each side, the third to be given to the jury, when
they left the bar. On this subject, Mr. Lewis, in his testimony, said it
was to be given to the jury when the counsel of the United States had
opened, or after he had closed the pleadings, but he believed the last.
Mr. Rawle is clear that it was to be given to them, when the case was
finished, to take out with them.

No gentleman on behalf of the impeachment has denied the correctness of
this opinion. But the criminality of the judge is, we are told, not in
the opinion itself, but in the _manner_ and the _time_ in which it was
given.

Was there any thing improper that the opinion should be reduced to
_writing_? Why are opinions given? Surely to regulate the conduct
of those to whom given; for this purpose they ought to be perfectly
understood, and in no degree subject to misconception; delivering the
opinion, _in writing_, greatly facilitates these objects; if, therefore,
it was _proper_ to give an opinion, it was _meritorious_ to reduce it
to writing, and Judge Chase, in so doing, most certainly acted with
the strictest propriety. And, unless a court of justice is bound to
sit and hear counsel on points of law, where they themselves have no
doubts, before they give their opinion, my honorable client could not
be incorrect in delivering it at the time when it was delivered. If the
opinion was _proper_, how, I pray, could any _injury_ be done to Fries
by its being delivered? The honorable Managers say, it was intended to
influence the jury. In the first place, this assertion is not supported
by the evidence. When the paper was thrown on the clerk’s table, not one
word was said of its contents; nor did the Court declare any opinion
on Fries’s case. They only determined the indictment correct in point
of form, and not liable to be quashed. They determined that the overt
acts stated were overt acts of treason, if Fries had committed them, but
whether Fries had committed those acts remained for the jury to determine
upon the evidence; as to that part of the case the Court gave no opinion.
But the honorable Managers have told us that Judge Chase must have known
what were the facts in the case, because they had been disclosed in the
former trial. And I pray you, sir, if he had the knowledge, could it
_alter the law in the case_, or render the declaration of what the law
was _more improper_? But, as a new trial was granted, the judge could not
know what additional evidence might be brought forward to vary the case
from its former appearance.

But if the opinion had been publicly read and known, how could it have
_injured_ Fries? He was to have an _impartial_ trial. What is the meaning
of these expressions? It is a trial according to law and fact, in which,
if he is proved innocent, he shall be acquitted; if guilty, convicted.
If, then, the opinion was agreeable to law, it could not prevent, it
could not interfere with his having an impartial trial. If in any case a
person is acquitted, when the facts are clearly proved, and the law is
against him, it must be because he has had a _partial_, not an _impartial
trial_.

Well, be it so, and let us consider the trial of Fries as if it had
been conducted on that principle. The judges, with their minds like
this white sheet of paper, were to sit still and suffer the counsel to
scrawl thereon whatever characters they pleased, to blot and to blur it,
until they were perfectly satisfied. After this ceremony, the judges,
examining the impressions thus made upon the antecedent clean sheet,
were from these, and these _only_, to form their opinion of the law; and
this opinion, having been thus formed from nothing but what occurred
_during_ the trial, and _after_ the jury were sworn, would not be called
a prejudicated opinion, and therefore, I presume, would be perfectly
satisfactory to the honorable Managers. So far we should have done very
well as it related to the trial of Fries. But next day another criminal
is to be tried for a _similar_ offence; Messrs. Lewis and Dallas are not
his defenders. Getman has selected Mr. Tilghman for his counsel. How, I
pray you, are the judges to be qualified to preside with propriety in
this trial? Yesterday they gave a solemn determination in Fries’s case
upon the _same_ question of law which now must come forward in the case
of Getman. Mr. Tilghman was not then heard. The opinion then given is,
as _to Mr. Tilghman and his client_, as much a prejudicated opinion,
an opinion as contaminating to the hands of a lawyer to receive, and
as highly criminal for a court to give, as was the opinion given by my
honorable client. What can be done? The minds of the judges are _no
longer a pure unsullied sheet of paper_. Yesterday, in the trial of
Fries, they had been scrawled upon and sullied by Lewis and Dallas;
the impressions still remain. I, sir, can think of no remedy in this
difficulty, except that the judges should be supplied with a reasonable
quantity of _India rubber_, or something which will answer in its place,
with which they might wipe off and erase every impression which had been
made the day before by Lewis and Dallas, during the trial of Fries;
and thus _once more_ take their seats on the bench for the trial of
Getman, with minds again like clean sheets of white paper, ready to be
again scrawled over, again to be blotted and blurred at the pleasure
of Mr. Tilghman, and from these scrawls, blots, and blurs, and from
these _alone_, to take their impressions as to the law, and form their
decision as to Getman’s case, without regarding, or even _remembering_
the decision they had given the day before; and in this manner to proceed
in every case that might come before them successively in their judicial
capacity.

I shall conclude what relates to this article by observing that the
conduct of Fries’s counsel to the Court on that trial was such as
nothing can excuse. It can only be palliated by the reflection, that
for his crimes he was liable to suffer death. Feelings of humanity and
compassion, independent of interest, might excite in their bosoms an
earnest anxiety to save his life; this may serve to mitigate censure;
but even those feelings, however amiable, ought not to be gratified at
the expense of national justice, nor by an endeavor to stamp upon judges
of uprightness and integrity the dishonorable charge of partiality and
oppression. I fear, sir, I have been tedious on this article; but it will
be considered that, whatever may be my own sentiments of the futility
of any part of these charges, I cannot determine how far this honorable
Court may correspond with me in sentiment; nor can I do otherwise than
treat, as of consequence, any charge brought forward by the honorable
House of Representatives, or not consider it as being of importance.

The second article goes on to charge Judge Chase with overruling the
objection of John Basset, who wished to be excused from serving on the
jury in the trial of Callender, and causing him to be sworn, and to serve
on the said jury by whose verdict Callender was convicted.

This article requires a discussion of the law relating to challenges of
jurors, and whether Mr. Basset was legally sworn on that jury. And here
again, as well as in the case of Fries, I meet with the most perfect
novelties, for except in those trials I never heard of jurors, when
called to be sworn, examined on oath whether they had formed, or formed
or delivered, or whether they had formed and delivered an opinion on the
subject about to be tried. And here also let me observe, that there is no
just grounds for the charge that Judge Chase from partiality administered
the oath differently in Callender’s case from the manner in which he
administered it to the jurors in the case of Fries; for Mr. Rawle,
referring to his notes taken at the time, has told us that in the case of
Fries, one or two of the first jurors were only asked whether they had
formed an opinion, after which the question was put whether he had formed
_or_ delivered an opinion, but ultimately the question asked was, whether
they had formed _and_ delivered an opinion, which question was put to the
greater part of the jurors; so that the interrogatory _ultimately_ fixed
upon in the case of Fries, is the same which was put to all the jurors
who were interrogated in the case of Callender.

I have, Mr. President, been in the practice of the law for thirty
years. Before the Revolution I attended, two or three years, the two
counties on the Eastern Shore of Virginia--Sussex County in Delaware,
and Somerset and Worcester in Maryland; since the Revolution I have
constantly attended the general courts on the Western and Eastern Shores
of Maryland, and the civil and criminal courts of Baltimore County, and
for about six years several other counties in Maryland. In the whole
course of my practice, I have never known a single case, either civil
or criminal, in which the jurors have been, when called to the book,
demanded to answer upon oath either of the aforesaid questions which the
defendant’s counsel requested to be put to them.

If either party choose to challenge a juror for favor, on account of
declarations made by the juror, the only ground for it is that he has
used expressions showing his determination to decide for one party or the
other without regard to truth and justice. In which case the party makes
his objection to the particular juror, specifying the expressions uttered
by the juror indicative of such improper determination, and produces
witnesses to establish his objection; for the juror cannot be examined
on oath to substantiate the charge; and, unless by mutual consent, the
objection made must be decided, not by the Court, but by triers. And the
only matter to be decided is, whether the juror has made any declaration
of a design to give a verdict one way or the other, whether right or
wrong; for if the juror made the declarations from his knowledge of the
facts in the case, this would be no cause of challenge, nor any objection
to his being sworn on the jury. And as the juror himself against whom
such objection is made cannot be examined on oath, it follows, of
course, he cannot be challenged for having formed an opinion, but only
for having delivered it, as third persons cannot know of an opinion
being formed but by its having been delivered. And, as I have observed
already, even the delivery of an opinion is no cause of challenge, if it
appears to have been founded upon the juror’s knowledge of facts, and
not from partiality. In consequence of this principle of law, it can be
no objection against a juror being sworn, even though he should have the
most perfect knowledge of every fact relative to the issue, to try which
he is about to be sworn; on the contrary, the principal reason assigned
why trials ought to be by jurors from the vicinage, is the presumption
that they will be best acquainted with the facts which will be put in
issue for their decision.

I now come, Mr. President, to the third article, wherein my honorable
client is criminally charged for the rejection of the evidence proposed
to be derived from Colonel John Taylor.

In this part of the case the facts are admitted. The next question of
law, therefore, which presents itself for discussion is, whether or not
Col. Taylor’s evidence ought to have been received, or was properly
rejected. Here again I must observe that the honorable Managers, to
support their charge, resort to principles which are to me, to the last
extremity, strange and novel. We are told that the Court have no right to
order questions which are meant to be put to a witness to be reduced to
writing. Nay, that the Court have no right to know what evidence is meant
to be given by the witnesses, or its connection with other testimony, or
its bearing on the cause, but to receive it drop by drop, as the counsel
think proper to deal it out. In answer to these extraordinary ideas which
we have had thus introduced, I must be permitted to assert that the Court
have, in my opinion, an undoubted _right_ to require of the counsel that
they should open their case, explain the nature of the evidence meant to
be given, and on the production of a witness, state what they expect to
prove by such witness. In the course of my practice it has been the usual
method of proceeding for counsel to conduct themselves in this manner,
and on this subject McNally, in his rules of evidence, page 14, expressly
lays it down as a _rule_, “that counsel ought not to call a witness
without first opening to the Court the nature of the evidence they intend
to examine into. This has been _often solemnly adjudged_, though _not
strictly adhered to in practice_.” And in page second he gives us as the
_first_ rule, “that no evidence _ought to be admitted to any point_ but
that on which the issue is joined.” But how is a court to prevent, and
it is only the Court which can prevent, evidence being admitted which
is not pertinent to the point on which the issue is joined, unless they
are first informed what evidence is meant to be given? It is then upon
the authority of McNally established that the Court have the legal right
to know what counsel mean to prove by a witness; and having that right,
they may exercise it whenever, in their discretion, they may think it
necessary.

Let us now examine the set of words to which Colonel Taylor’s evidence
was meant to apply; they were without any innuendo, as follows: “He was
a professed aristocrat; he had proved faithful and serviceable to the
British interest.”

This sentence consists of two separate distinct clauses or parts; the
first, that “he was a professed aristocrat;” the second, that “he had
proved faithful and serviceable to the British interest.” I ask this
honorable Court if either of these clauses or parts, of themselves, and
without an innuendo, carry with them any charge of criminality, or any
thing libellous? To say that a man is an aristocrat, a democrat, or a
republican, is not of itself charging the person with any thing criminal,
nor is it slanderous, unless indeed the charge is accompanied with an
innuendo, stating that, by the epithet so _used_, something very bad was
intended; and _that_ government would indeed merit contempt in which a
person should be punished upon such a charge. So, also, to say that a
man had been faithful and serviceable to the British interest charges him
with nothing criminal, and therefore cannot be slanderous, because the
British and the American interest in many instances have been and may be
the same.

There may be a variety of instances in which the interest of two nations
may concur. There have been many in which the interest of America and of
Britain did concur; many also in which the interest of America and France
have combined. In the first instance a man may have been faithful and
serviceable to Britain, in the other to France, without the violation of
any duty to the United States--without having been guilty of the least
criminality.

The sentence then taken altogether, connecting the two clauses, does not
of itself import any thing criminal, and consequently is not slanderous,
if it remained without any innuendo; and if it was free from an
innuendo, being not slanderous, would not require any evidence relative
thereto. Nay, it would be no part of the charge put in issue, for in
legal construction it is only such part of the publication stated in an
indictment which is slanderous; that is the point in issue.

As to the second question, to wit: “Whether Mr. Adams, while Vice
President, had expressed his disapprobation of the funding system?” the
question could not be in any degree relevant to the one or the other
clause in the sentence. Whether Mr. Adams expressed his disapprobation,
while he was Vice President, of the funding system, or not, could in no
respect go to prove or disapprove his being a professed aristocrat, or
his having sacrificed the interest of the United States to the interest
of Great Britain. The Court, therefore, considering this question totally
irrelevant to the “point in issue,” did as was their duty to do, they
refused to suffer it to be put to the witness.

So much for the two first questions. We now come to the third, respecting
the votes of Mr. Adams, when Vice President, against the bill for the
sequestration of British debts, and the bill for suspending intercourse
with Great Britain. For the conduct of my honorable client in refusing
to permit this question to be put to Colonel Taylor, two reasons may be
assigned; the first, that if the fact was as stated, it could not be
proved by Colonel Taylor. The second, that if the fact was established it
would be totally immaterial to the issue; Colonel Taylor’s evidence was
not the best which the nature of the case admitted. I will not say that
the traverser, in order to prove this vote, was under the necessity of
procuring a copy from the Journal of the Senate, properly authenticated
by their clerk, but he certainly ought at least to have produced a
printed copy of the votes and proceedings of the Senate, as published
by them. One thing at least is certain, that the traverser could not,
consistently with rules of law, give parol evidence to establish the
vote of Mr. Adams, and therefore that Colonel Taylor could not be
legally examined on that subject. But I will go further in defence of my
client, and will say, that if they had had the best possible evidence
of the fact, if they had had an attested copy from the records of the
Senate, the judge would have departed from his duty if he had permitted
the evidence which was wished to have been obtained from Colonel Taylor
to have been given to the jury. Ought any evidence to be given to a
jury which is not proper and pertinent to prove the _fact in issue_, or
to prove some fact from which the fact in issue _ought_ legally to be
_inferred_--evidence not relevant to the point before the Court and jury?
Was not, as to this part of the charge, the fact in issue, whether Mr.
Adams had swerved from his duty by intentionally prostrating the interest
and welfare of his country to the interest and welfare of Great Britain?
Should not a charge of so atrocious a nature be proved by some direct act
of this criminal sacrifice of the interests of the United States to the
interest of Great Britain, or by the proof of some other act from which
such criminal sacrifice must and ought on principles of law to be clearly
and necessarily inferred? And what was the proof proposed to be offered
for the purpose? That upon the question whether British debts should be
sequestered, and whether our intercourse with Great Britain should be
suspended, after full discussion one-half the members of the Senate voted
in favor of those measures, and one-half of the Senate against them;
and that in this situation Mr. Adams, thinking them of too hazardous a
nature, and such as might involve our country in a war, did not choose to
take upon himself so great a responsibility as to give his casting voice
in the affirmative.

I shall now, sir, proceed to the fourth article, which charges the
respondent’s conduct to have been marked during the whole course of the
trial by manifest injustice, partiality, and intemperance.

From the evidence it certainly appears that Judge Chase prevented
the counsel from arguing to the jury that the sedition law was
unconstitutional; and this seems to have given rise to a great portion of
the altercation and ill-humor between the Court and the bench.

I admit that the constitution gives to a criminal the right of having
counsel; but the constitution has not defined the rights or duties of
counsel, or to what extent they are to exercise them. One thing, however,
is certain; that they have no constitutional right to impose upon the
Court or mislead the jury.

When Callender’s counsel contended that if the jury have a right to
decide questions of law, then the constitution being the supreme law
of the land, the jury must of course have the power of deciding on the
_constitutionality_ of a law; the judge might well say it was a _non
sequitur_.

What has been allowed to the jurors as their incidental right on the
general issue? Not to decide whether there is an existing law, or
whether a law is in force, but to declare the true construction of an
_existing_ law, and whether the case at issue comes within the true
construction of such law.

But those who contend that the jury have a right to determine the
constitutionality of a law, insist not for the power of the jury to
decide its true construction and whether the prisoner’s case comes
within it, but to decide whether what is produced as law is not void, a
mere nullity, a dead letter; or in other words, whether such a law is
in existence. The maddest enthusiasts for the rights of jurors, their
most zealous advocates, have never contended for such a right before
the cases of Fries and Callender. Whether a law exists, whether a law
has been enacted, whether a law has been repealed, whether a law has
become obsolete or is in force? The decision of these questions hath
always been allowed the exclusive right of the Court. The power of the
Court to decide exclusively upon these questions hath never been before
controverted. Nay, the very right claimed on behalf of jurors, that they
may determine what is the true construction of the law, and whether the
case is within its provisions, of itself necessarily presupposes, and is
predicated upon the _existence of a law_, the _construction or meaning of
which_ they are to determine. It has indeed been seriously questioned,
and that by gentlemen of great abilities, whether even the Judiciary
have a right to declare a law, passed by the Legislature, to be contrary
to the constitution and, therefore, void! I shall not enter into an
examination of that question, but I have no hesitation in saying that
a jury have no such right, that it never was intended they should have
such right, and that if they had the right, we might as well be without a
constitution.

The first specific instance of my client’s unjust, partial, and
intemperate conduct, which is stated in this fourth article is, that he
compelled the traverser’s counsel to reduce to writing the questions
which they meant to propound to Colonel Taylor. The correctness of this
procedure will depend on the question whether the Court had by law
such a power, for if such a power was possessed by them, it is to be
presumed that they, on that occasion, exercised it according to their
best discretion, nor can it be inferred that their conduct was criminal,
because the procedure was _novel_ in Virginia. There are cases in which
the practice of a court may be considered the law of the court; but these
are not in any manner analogous to the case in question; nor do I find
the _practice_ of the State courts is obligatory “in any case of this
kind on the courts of the United States.” My honorable client did not
consider what was usual in Virginia, but what was correct and proper;
he knew that the law authorized him to make this demand. In Maryland,
where he imbibed his legal knowledge, and where at the bar and on the
bench he had carried it into practice, nothing was more common than
for questions to be reduced to writing at the request of counsel, or
at the request of the Court. If counsel doubt of the propriety of the
evidence meant to be drawn from the witness, or the correctness of the
question meant to be propounded to him, they have a right to request
it to be reduced to writing. So also, if the Court, without whose
approbation no testimony can be given to a jury, and whose duty it is
to prevent improper testimony to be given, has reason to suspect an
intention to introduce such evidence, they have a right, and they ought
to require the questions to be reduced to writing, that there may be no
misapprehension of the tendency of the question, and that they may more
deliberately decide whether it is proper to be put to the witness. And
in this case, the counsel were not required to reduce their questions to
writing in the first instance, or before they had stated what they had
meant to prove, as hath been suggested. When Colonel Taylor was called
and sworn, the Court desired to be informed what they meant to prove by
him. McNally is an authority that in so doing they acted legally. The
counsel stated the facts, to prove which Colonel Taylor was called; upon
which, the Court doubting the admissibility of the testimony directed the
question to be reduced to writing for their consideration. It cannot for
a moment be seriously contended, but that the Court had a right so to
do. As my respectable colleague (Mr. Key) has observed, the practice of
this honorable Court during this trial, hath perfectly sanctioned that
part of my client’s conduct. If at any time a question has been put,
the propriety of which hath been doubted, it has been directed to be
reduced to writing. It is true, that this has been, principally, when an
objection has been made by the counsel; but there can be no doubt, that
if any honorable member of this Court had apprehended the question to
be improper, the Court would have had a right, and would have directed
the question to be propounded in writing for their consideration. The
propriety, the principle, in each case is the same. On this part of the
charge I need not dwell any longer.

The _next instance_ of the judge’s conduct specified in this article
is his refusal to continue Callender’s case to the next term,
notwithstanding the affidavit filed, and the applications made. On
this subject, I shall not make many observations as to the law; but I
may venture to assert that the conduct of Judge Chase in this instance
also appears to have been free from any corrupt or oppressive motive or
design; no part of his conduct on this occasion has been produced to show
that he entertained a disposition to prevent Callender from obtaining
the testimony of his witnesses, or deprive him of the necessary time to
procure their attendance. Let it be recollected that the first affidavit
prepared and proposed to be filed in order to obtain a continuance of
the cause was a general affidavit. By the laws of England a general
affidavit is not sufficient to entitle the party to a continuance, and
upon principles of law as adopted in England and the United States, at
least in Maryland, a supplemental affidavit cannot in a case of this
nature be received.

If, then, Judge Chase had wished that Callender should have been, at all
events, prevented from a continuance of his cause, he would have suffered
them to file their general affidavit.

Why should capital cases, rather than inferior crimes, be tried at the
first court? The honorable Managers admit that it is the general rule
not to continue, but to try at the first term, capital cases. Surely if
indulgence, if delay is necessary in any case, it is in a capital case,
where life is at risk; where an injury, if done, is irretrievable!

There are many reasons which show the propriety that prosecutions of
every kind should be decided with as little delay as possible. One of the
principles as to criminal jurisprudence, as Governor Claiborne has justly
observed, is, that though punishments should be mild, yet they ought to
be _speedy_; by having an immediate decision there is a great certainty
that the criminal shall not elude justice by flight.

The next specification, in this article, of improper conduct in
the judge, is, that he “used _unusual_, _rude_, and _contemptuous
expressions_ towards the prisoner’s counsel; and insinuated that they
wished to excite the public fears and indignation, and to produce that
insubordination to the law, to which the conduct of the judge did at
the same time manifestly tend.” As to this part of the charge, there
is but little of a legal nature contained in it, I shall, therefore,
hastily pass over it. If true, it seems to be rather a violation of the
principles of politeness, than of the principles of law; rather the want
of decorum, than the commission of a _high crime and misdemeanor_. I will
readily agree that my honorable client has more of the “_fortiter in
re_,” than the “_suaviter in modo_,” and that his character may in some
respects be considered to bear a stronger resemblance to that of Lord
Thurlow than to that of Lord Chesterfield; yet Lord Thurlow has ever been
esteemed a great legal character, and an enlightened judge.

But let me ask this honorable Court whether there is not great reason
to believe that the sentiments my honorable client expressed with
respect to the conduct of the counsel, and their object, was just and
correct? What was the conduct of Callender’s counsel? Was it not such
as immediately tended to inflame the minds of the bystanders, and to
excite their indignation against the Court, and highly insulting to the
judges? In the first place, they endeavored to obtain a continuance of
the cause to the next court, merely with an intention to procure delay,
and to prevent the cause being tried before Judge Chase, acknowledging
that they had no hopes or expectation from _any testimony_ to save their
client if the law was determined to be constitutional; and yet they
brought forward their client to swear just what they pleased, in order
to procure this delay, with respect to the necessity of witnesses, whose
testimony they acknowledged they were conscious could be of no service
to them, and yet they wished the bystanders to consider the Court acting
highly _improper_ for not granting that continuance? Was this even to
serve Callender? No, they avow they did not appear to serve him, but to
serve _the cause_. Sir, it appears from their own evidence that Callender
would have submitted to the Court, but for their interference; that
they volunteered on the occasion not for _him_, but for _their cause_;
and yet the volunteers wanted the Court to give them to another term to
prepare themselves, and made Callender swear what they pleased to effect
their purpose. They said they were not well acquainted with the law upon
libels, and therefore wanted time to examine the subject; but surely when
persons undertake to volunteer their services on any subject, they ought
to be masters of it, and are entitled to no indulgence of delay. And as
they declare they had formed the determination, on the first instance of
an indictment under the sedition law, to come forward and volunteer their
services for the sake not of the man, but of their cause, common decency
to the Court, and a proper respect for themselves, ought to have dictated
to them in the interim to have made themselves fully acquainted with
all the law relative to that subject in which they had thus determined
officiously to interpose.

When my honorable client went from Baltimore to Richmond, to hold the
circuit court, he knew how violently that State was opposed to the
enforcement of this law; but he equally knew that it was his duty to
carry it into execution, without regard to the sentiments of any portion
of the community, or however disagreeable it might be to them. Under
these circumstances he went to Richmond, and found the counsel, from
the first step in this cause, attempting, as he could not but consider
it, to inflame the audience and excite their indignation against him.
My honorable client, who well knows mankind, and has been accustomed to
popular assemblies, appears to have been anxious, as his best security,
to keep the bystanders in good humor, and to amuse them at the expense
of the very persons who were endeavoring to excite the irascibility of
the audience against him. Hence the mirth, the humor, the facetiousness,
by which his conduct was marked during the trial; and which, most
fortunately, was attended with the happy consequence he hoped from it,
for it is admitted that he kept the bystanders in great good humor, and
excited peals of laughter at the expense of the counsel, as the witness
very justly concludes, for he says, “the counsel did not appear to join
in the laugh.” And this, sir, most satisfactorily accounts for the more
than usual exertion of his facetious talents on the trial of Callender;
and I doubt not was the real cause of that exertion.

But the judge is also charged with great rudeness in the manner in which
he replied in one part of the argument to Mr. Wirt, just at a time when
that gentleman had finished a syllogism, by replying that it was a _non
sequitur_. I will state the transaction: Mr. Wirt having, as he supposed,
established the position, that the jury had a right to decide the law as
well as the fact, he proceeded to state that the constitution was the
supreme law of the land, and, therefore, that since the jury had a right
to decide the law, and the constitution was also the law, the jury must
certainly have a right to decide the constitutionality of a law made
under it; and this conclusion was, as he declared, perfectly syllogistic.
As Mr. Wirt had assumed the character of a _logician_ in his argument,
nothing could be more natural than for the judge, in his answer, to
assume the _same character_; he therefore replied, like a logician,
“A _non sequitur_, sir”--the correct answer to a syllogism which is
rather lame in its conclusion. But it seems this answer was accompanied
by a _certain bow_. As _bows_, sir, according to the manner they are
_made_, may, like _words_, according to the manner they are _uttered_,
convey very different meanings; and as it is as difficult to determine
the merit or demerit of _a bow_ without having seen it, as it is the
expression of words without having _heard_ them; to discover, therefore,
whether there was any thing _rude_ or _improper_ in this _bow_, I could
have wished that the witness, who complained so much of its effect,
had given us a _fac simile_ of it. Had we been favored not only with
the answer, but also with a complete _fac simile_ of the _bow_, we
might have been enabled to have judged of the propriety of my honorable
client’s conduct in this instance. But it seems this _bow_, together
with the “_non sequitur_,” entirely discomfited poor Mr. Wirt, and down
he sat “and never word spake more!” If so, it was a saving of time.
But we have no proof that Mr. Wirt meant to have proceeded any further
in the argument, even had he not been encountered with this formidable
bow and non sequitur. And the presumption is, that having condensed the
whole force of his argument into a syllogistic form, and, finding his
syllogism did not produce the conviction intended, he took his seat
without wishing to spend more of his breath in what, after the failure
of his logical talents, he no doubt considered a fruitless attempt.
Mr. Nicholas followed Mr. Wirt. He is a gentleman mild and polite in
his manners; he was treated by the Court with politeness. He did not
_persist_ in addressing the jury contrary to the decisions of the Court;
he, therefore, met with no interruptions.

But, sir, there is another charge which has been made against my
honorable client, to justify that part of the article which accuses
him of _rudeness_. It is said that speaking of Callender’s counsel, or
addressing himself to them, he called them “_young gentlemen_.” To me
it appears astonishing that these expressions, if used by the judge,
should be thought reproachful to the counsel, or a proper subject of
a criminal charge; and it gave me real pleasure to find that Mr.
Nicholas, whose whole conduct marks him as a gentleman, did not consider
them as offensive. He has observed that he was young at the time, and
whoever has seen him as a witness, must be convinced of the truth of his
assertion. But we are told that Mr. Wirt was at that time about thirty
years of age, had been a married man, and was then a widower. It doth
not appear that Judge Chase knew of these circumstances; but if he had,
considering that Mr. Wirt was a widower, he certainly erred on the right
side, if it was an error, in calling _him_ a _young_ gentleman. But,
sir, let it be considered that my honorable client has been stated by
the honorable Managers, to be nearly threescore and ten, let also his
great legal attainments be considered, and let me ask, if any person can
think his addressing gentlemen, so much inferior to himself in age and
knowledge, by the epithet of “young gentlemen,” offensive to them, much
less criminal as to the public? But as another instance of his rudeness
we are told, that, addressing himself to Mr. Wirt, who observed that “he
was going on,” the judge replied, “No, sir, I am going on, therefore sit
down, sir.” This address was made by the judge to Mr. Wirt, when he (the
judge) was about to give a long opinion to him and the counsel employed
with him, which opinion, upon Mr. Wirt’s sitting down, the Court did
give; and pray, sir, was there the least impropriety in a situation of
that nature, that the Court should desire the counsel to be silent and to
take their seats?

Before Judge Chase went from Baltimore to hold the circuit court at
Richmond, he knew that the sedition law had been violated in Virginia.
I had myself put into his hands “The Prospect before Us.” He felt it
his duty to enforce the laws of his country. What, sir, is a judge in
one part of the United States to permit the breach of our laws to go
unpunished because they are there unpopular, and in another part to carry
them into execution, because there they may be thought wise and salutary?
And would you really wish your judges, instead of acting from principle,
to court only the applause of their auditors? Would you wish them to be
what Sir Michael Foster has so correctly stated, the most contemptible
of all characters, popular judges; judges who look forward, in all their
decisions, not for the applause of the wise and good, of their own
consciences, of their God, but of the rabble, or any prevailing party? I
flatter myself that this honorable Senate will never, by their decision,
sanction such principles! Our Government is not, as we say, tyrannical,
nor acting on whim or caprice. We boast of it as being a Government of
laws. But how can it be such, unless the laws, while they exist, are
sacredly and impartially, without regard to popularity, carried into
execution? What, sir, shall judges discriminate? Shall they be permitted
to say, “This law I will execute, and that I will not; because in the
one case I may be benefited, in the other I might make myself enemies?”
And would you really wish to live under a Government where your laws
were thus administered? Would you really wish for such unprincipled,
such time-serving judges? No, sir, you would not. You will with me say,
“Give me the judge who will firmly, boldly, nay, even _sternly_, perform
his duty, equally uninfluenced, equally unintimidated by the “_Instantis
vultus tyranni_,” or the “_ardor civium prava jubentium_!” Such are
the judges we ought to have; such I hope we have, and shall have. Our
property, our liberty, our lives, can only be protected and secured by
such judges. With this honorable Court it remains, whether we shall have
such judges!”


MONDAY, February 25.

Mr. HARPER.--It was greatly to be desired, Mr. President, and might have
been confidently expected, that in a case every way so important, where
it so greatly concerns the public happiness that the decision should
command the public confidence, nothing would be presented to the view
of this honorable Court in aid of the prosecution, except the law which
ought to govern the decision, and the proofs relied on for supporting the
allegations.

But it has not so seemed good to the honorable Managers. They have
thought proper to introduce into the discussion, the political opinions
and party connections of the respondent, for the purpose of throwing
a shade of doubt over his motives and of establishing inferences
unfavorable to his character. How far this conduct ought to be commended,
it is not for me to decide. My confidence in the justice and discernment
of this honorable Court forbids me to apprehend that it can be successful.

But since these opinions and connections have been introduced, permit me
to use them for a different purpose.

The duty imposed on judges is at all times delicate, and in criminal
cases, where life or liberty may be affected, where reputation, dearer
than both, depends on the issue, this duty becomes peculiarly arduous and
painful to an honorable and generous mind. But if there be a situation
more delicate, more embarrassing than every other to such a mind, it is
that of a judge sitting on the trial of a person who, from political
opposition, or any other cause, may have excited hostile or angry
feelings in his mind. It is then that he most fears to trust himself. It
is then that he most dreads the influence of his passions in misleading
his judgment. It is then that he feels the strongest alarm for his
reputation, lest he should possibly afford ground for the suspicion
that he had gratified his resentments under the semblance of executing
the law. Hence he constantly leans towards the side of the accused, and
requires the clearest conviction before he condemns. Hence he rejects
all doubtful or contradictory testimony, lays out of the case all little
indiscretions and slight shades of suspicion; and is rigid in requiring
from the prosecutors the unequivocal proof of unequivocal offences. That
his enemy is in his power, is always a reason for the utmost forbearance.
The fear that he may possibly be misled by his passions, is always a
reason for acquittal, where doubt can exist.

Need I invoke these noble and generous sentiments in the breasts of this
honorable Court? No! my heart tells me I need not. I see on those benches
distinguished soldiers and eminent statesmen, who have triumphed alike in
the fields of politics and war, and who always disdained to tarnish their
laurels by the blood or humiliation of a vanquished foe.

If, then, the person now arraigned at your bar be connected with a
political party in opposition to any of those who sit as his judges; if
it were possible that, in promoting the views of that party, he may have
excited feelings of anger or resentment in the mind of any member of this
honorable tribunal; if it were possible that any portion of the angry
passions engendered by the conflicts of party could find a place within
these hallowed walls, and could attach itself to him who stands upon his
trial at this bar, the existence of such a possibility would furnish
every member of this honorable Court with the strongest motives that can
operate on a generous and noble mind, for leaning constantly to the side
of the accused, and for pronouncing in favor of an acquittal, wherever
there remains a doubt of guilt.

Attempts have also been made to enlist the sympathy of this honorable
Court on the side of the prosecution, and for this purpose, a criminal
twice convicted, who did not hesitate to risk civil bloodshed in support
of political theories, and is now indebted for his life to the clemency
of that Government against whose laws he armed his ignorant and misguided
neighbors, is presented to view, decked out in all the ornaments which
rhetoric can bestow. We, Mr. President, disclaim the aids, and protest
against the interference of rhetoric and sympathy. However proper in
other situations, they ought to be excluded from courts of justice, whose
decisions should be governed by truth and not by feeling.

But if sympathy could find a place in this tribunal, what object more
fit to awake it than that now presented at your bar? An aged patriot
and statesman, bearing on his head the frost of seventy winters, and
broken by the infirmities brought upon him by the labors and exertions
of half a century, is arraigned as an offender, and compelled to employ,
in defending himself against a criminal prosecution, the few and short
intervals of ease allowed to him by sickness. Placed at the bar of a
court, after having sat with honor for sixteen years on the bench, he is
doomed to hear the most opprobrious epithets applied to his name by those
whose predecessors were accustomed to look up to him with admiration and
respect, and whose fathers would have been proud to have been numbered
among his pupils. His footsteps are hunted from place to place, to find
indiscretions which may be exaggerated into crimes. The jests which,
flowing from the gayety and openness of his temper, were uttered in the
confidence of private conversation; the expressions of warmth produced
by the natural impetuosity of his character, are detailed by companions
converted into spies and informers, and are adduced as proofs of criminal
intention.

This cup, so full of bitterness for one who has been accustomed for forty
years to fill the most honorable stations in his country, he drinks to
the dregs without complaining. In this sad reverse, he supports himself
with a calmness, a fortitude, and a resigned dignity which melt the
hearts of those who are not his enemies, and extort the respect of those
who are.

If sympathy must be excited, here let it find a nobler object. If from
generous breasts it cannot be excluded, let it be turned towards

    “A brave man struggling with the storms of Fate,”

and greatly supporting himself under a pressure of evils the most
afflicting that an elevated mind can know.

Not content with endeavoring to blow up a flame of party spirit against
the respondent, and to engage sympathy in the ungracious, and to her
unnatural, task of aiding a criminal prosecution, the honorable Managers
have resorted to a principle as novel in our laws and jurisprudence as
it is subversive of the constitutional independence of the judicial
department, and dangerous to the personal rights and safety of every
man holding an office under this Government. They have contended “that
an impeachment is not a criminal prosecution, but an inquiry in the
nature of an inquest of office, to ascertain whether a person holding
an office be properly qualified for his situation; or, whether it may
not be expedient to remove him.” But if this principle be correct--if
an impeachment be not indeed a criminal prosecution, but a mere inquest
of office--if a conviction and removal on impeachment be indeed not a
punishment, but the mere withdrawal of a favor of office granted--I ask
why this formality of proceeding, this solemn apparatus of justice,
this laborious investigation of facts? If the conviction of a judge on
impeachment is not to depend on his guilt or innocence of some crime
alleged against him, but on some reason of State policy or expediency,
which may be thought by the House of Representatives, and two-thirds
of the Senate, to require his removal, I ask why the solemn mockery of
articles alleging high crimes and misdemeanors, of a court regularly
formed, of a judicial oath administered to the members, of the public
examination of witnesses, and of a trial conducted in all the usual
forms? Why not settle this question of expediency, as all other
questions of expediency are settled, by a reference to general political
considerations, and in the usual mode of political discussion? No! Mr.
President! This principle of the honorable Managers, so novel and so
alarming; this desperate expedient, resorted to as the last and only
prop of a case, which the honorable gentlemen feel to be unsupported by
law or evidence; this forlorn hope of the prosecution, pressed into its
service, after it was found that no offence against any law of the land
could be proved, will not, cannot avail. Every thing by which we are
surrounded informs us that we are in a court of law. Every thing that we
have been three weeks employed in doing reminds us that we are engaged
not in a mere inquiry into the fitness of an officer for the place which
he holds, but in the trial of a criminal case on legal principles. And
this great truth, so important to the liberties and happiness of this
country, is fully established by the decisions of this honorable Court,
in this case, on questions of evidence--decisions by which this Court has
solemnly declared, that it holds itself bound by those principles of law
which govern our tribunals in ordinary cases. These decisions we accepted
as a pledge, and now rely on as an assurance that this cause will be
determined on no newly discovered notions of political expediency, or
State policy, but on the well settled and well known principles of law
and the constitution.

Having taken this view of these preliminary points, I now proceed, Mr.
President, to consider the various charges against our honorable client,
in the order in which they have been stated by the prosecutors. It is not
my design to go over the same ground which has been so recently trodden
by my able colleagues. The task assigned to me, is to range rapidly over
the first six articles; to present some views of the subject, which the
multiplicity of the matter induced my learned colleagues to omit; and
then to discuss at large the law and the facts, under the seventh and
eighth articles, which have not yet been touched.

Let the charge, Mr. President, be carefully examined, and it will be
found to have no object in view but to convince the people of Maryland,
by arguments drawn from reason and experience, of the danger of adopting
a change in their State constitution, which had been submitted to their
consideration, and the object of which was to abolish all their supreme
courts of law; to introduce a system entirely new and untried; and above
all, to destroy the independent tenure of judicial office, secured to
them by their existing constitution; and to leave the judges dependent
on the Executive for their continuance in office, and on the Legislature
for their support. The respondent, who had contributed largely to the
formation and establishment of the State constitution, was greatly
alarmed at these changes. He considered them as of the most destructive
tendency to the liberty and happiness of the State to which he belonged,
and he resolved to take this opportunity of warning his fellow-citizens
against them. This is the whole scope of his address to the grand jury,
to show the importance of an independent judiciary, the dangerous
tendency of changes already made, and the mischiefs which would result
from taking this additional step in the career of innovation. He did,
indeed, advert to the act of Congress for repealing the circuit court
law, and remarked that it had shaken to its foundation the independence
of the Federal judiciary; but the manifest and sole object of this was,
to show that the spirit of innovation had gone forth, and ought to be
carefully watched; that the public respect for great constitutional
principles had begun to be weakened; and that by how much the security
which might have been derived from an independent Federal judiciary
had been diminished, by so much the more vigilantly it behooved us to
guard our State institutions. No other object can be discovered in
the charge, or inferred from its general tenor, or from the language
in which it is expressed; neither is there any evidence which has the
most remote tendency to show that he had any other object in view. And
was not this an object which a citizen of this country might lawfully
pursue? Is it not lawful for an aged patriot of the Revolution to warn
his fellow-citizens of dangers, by which he supposes their liberties and
happiness to be threatened? Or will it be contended that a citizen is
deprived of these rights because he is a judge? That his office takes
from him the liberty of speech which belongs to every citizen, and is
justly considered as one of our most invaluable privileges? I trust
not. And if there could be any doubt on this point, I would remove it
by referring to a recent instance of two judges of the Supreme Court
of Maryland, who, in a late political contest, entered the lists as
champions for the rival candidates, and travelled over a whole county,
making political speeches in opposition to each other. Yet these
gentlemen justly possess the confidence and respect of the public; their
conduct in this instance has never been considered as a violation of
duty; and he who espoused the interest of the successful candidate has
been far from receiving any marks of displeasure from the Government of
this country.

If, therefore, a judge retain this right, notwithstanding his official
character; if it still be lawful for him to express his opinions of
public measures, to oppose by argument such as are still pending, and to
exert himself for obtaining the repeal, by constitutional means, of such
as have been adopted, I ask what law forbids him to exercise these rights
by a charge from the bench? In what part of our laws or constitution
is it written that a judge shall not speak on politics to a grand
jury?--shall not advance, in a charge from the bench, those arguments
against a public measure which it must be admitted he might properly
employ on any other occasion? Such conduct may perhaps be ill-judged,
indiscreet, or ill-timed. I am ready to admit that it is so; for I am one
of those who have always thought that political subjects ought never to
be mentioned in courts of justice. But is it contrary to law? Admitting
it to be indecorous and improper, which I do not admit, is every breach
of decorum and propriety a crime? The rules of decorum and propriety
forbid us to sing a song on the floor of Congress, or to whistle in a
church. These would be acts of very great indecorum, but I know of no law
by which they could be punished as crimes. Will they who contend that it
is contrary to law for a judge to speak of politics to a grand jury, be
pleased to point out the law of the land which forbids it? They cannot do
so. There is no such law. Neither is there any constitutional provision
or principle, or any custom of this country, which condemns this practice.

And will this honorable body, sitting not in a legislative but a judicial
capacity, be called on to make a law, and to make it for a particular
case which has already occurred? What, sir, is the great distinction
between legislative and judicial functions? Is it not that the former
is to make the law for future cases; and that the latter is to declare
it as to cases which have already occurred? Is it not one of the
fundamental principles of our Constitution, and an essential ingredient
of free government, that the legislative and judicial powers shall be
kept distinct and separate? That the power of making the general law
for future cases shall never be blended in the same hands, with that
of declaring and applying it to particular and present cases? Does not
the union of these two powers in the same hands constitute the worst of
despotisms? What, sir, is the peculiar and distinguishing characteristic
of despotism? It consists in this, sir, that a man may be punished for
an act which, when he did it, was not forbidden by law. While, on the
other hand, it is the essence of freedom, that no act can be treated as
a crime, unless there be a precise law forbidding it at the time when it
was done.

It is this line which separates liberty from slavery; and if the
respondent be condemned to punishment for an act, which far from being
forbidden by any law of the land, is sanctioned by the custom of this
country for more than twenty years past, then we have the form of free
government, but the substance of despotism.

Let the gentlemen, before they establish this principle, recollect
that it is a two-edged sword. Let them remember that power must often
change hands in popular governments; and that after every struggle the
victorious party come into power, with resentments to gratify by the
destruction of their vanquished opponents, with a thirst of vengeance
to be slaked in their blood. Let them remember that principles and
precedents, by which actions innocent when they were done, may be
converted into crimes, are the most convenient and effectual instruments
of revenge and destruction with which a victorious party can be
furnished. Let them beware how they give their sanction to principles
which may soon be turned against themselves; how they forge bolts which
may soon be hurled on their own heads. In a popular government, where
power is so fluctuating, where constitutional principles are therefore
so important for the protection of the weaker party against the violence
of the stronger, it above all things behooves the party actually in power
to adhere to the principles of justice and law, lest by departing from
them they furnish at once the provocation and the weapons for their own
destruction.

This charge, therefore, fails like the rest; and what remains of the
accusation? It has dwindled into nothing. It has been scattered by the
rays of truth, like the mists of the morning before the effulgence of
the rising sun. Touched by the spear of investigation, it has lost its
gigantic and terrifying form, and has shrunk into a toad. Every part
of our honorable client’s conduct has been surveyed; all his motives
have been severely scrutinized; all his actions have been brought to
the test of law and the constitution; his words and even his jocular
conversations, have been passed in strict review; and the ingenuity and
industry of the honorable Managers have proved unable to detect one
illegal act, one proof, or one fair presumption of improper motive.


TUESDAY, February 26.

The Court opened at about half past ten o’clock, A.M.; the Managers, the
House of Representatives, and the counsel of the respondent having taken
their seats.

Mr. NICHOLSON, as one of the Managers, addressed the Court in reply to
the counsel of the accused. He said the House of Representatives having
impeached Samuel Chase, one of the associate justices of the Supreme
Court of the United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors; the evidence
on their part having been adduced, and that on behalf of the accused,
and the arguments of his counsel having been fully and patiently heard,
it now became his duty to reply in support of the impeachment. To me,
Mr. President, this duty is an unpleasant one. Upon all occasions and
under all circumstances, the office of a public accuser is the most
painful that can be imposed on us; but it is more peculiarly so when the
object of accusation appears before us covered with age and infirmities.
I think I speak the sentiment of my brother Managers of the House of
Representatives, when I say, that this impeachment never would have been
instituted, that it never would have arrived at its present crisis, if we
had not believed that the best interests of our common country required
that the conduct complained of should not go unpunished. There is no
nation on earth, sir, in which the freedom of man and the consequent
happiness of society are not inseparably interwoven with the full, free
and impartial administration of justice.

    “Una salus ambobus erit commune periculum.”

It was to preserve this unity of safety, to avert this common danger,
that we thought ourselves bound by the most solemn obligation to bring
these charges before the highest tribunal of the nation. We may in vain
make laws to secure our property, to protect our liberty, and to guard
our lives, if those to whom we appeal, and to whose decrees we are bound
to submit, shall prove unfaithful in the discharge of their duty. If
our laws are not faithfully administered; if the holy sanctuary of our
courts is to be invaded by party feeling; if justice shall suffer her
pure garment to be stained by the foul venom of political bigotry, we may
indeed boast that we live in a land of freedom, but the boast will be
vain and illusory.

In this point of view, therefore, this cause may justly be called an
important one. I need not however urge its importance to the Court, for
the feelings of every honorable member will speak its importance more
forcibly than any thing that I can utter. But I do trust that those
frequent appeals which you have heard, those frequent instances in which
you have been reminded that posterity will pass between the accused,
his accusers, and his judges, will have no influence on your minds. A
desire to secure the approbation of posterity is an honorable feeling,
pervading every human breast, and is most inseparable from our nature:
but to secure the approbation of posterity, we must take care to pursue
the dictates of our own consciences, and, by doing justice here, trust to
posterity to do us justice too.

Our country, it is true, are now looking on with anxious solicitude for
the event of this cause; but the sentence which they shall pass will
not depend upon the judgment given here. To the world and to posterity
the conviction of the accused, by this Court, will not establish his
guilt; and I thank God, as the case has been put in issue between us,
his acquittal will not prove his innocence. The facts in the cause, sir,
those facts which we have proved by the most undeniable evidence, and
upon which your judgment must be given; those facts will be presented to
the eyes of the world and of posterity, and upon those only will they
decide. If it should ever be the fortune of my humble name to descend to
posterity, by the vote which I gave for instituting this impeachment,
and by my conduct in discharging the great duty now committed to me,
I cheerfully consent to be tried. To this awful tribunal I willingly
submit. If the judge is guilty, posterity will heap on him all that odium
which his guilt deserves; if he is innocent, let that odium be turned
upon his accusers.

Because Sidney and Russell bled upon a scaffold, have their names been
less the objects of veneration with posterity? and because Scroggs and
Jeffries escaped the punishment due to their crimes, have they therefore
been less the objects of universal execration? No, sir; and the honorable
counsel (Mr. Hopkinson) who first addressed you on behalf of the accused,
gave us himself a memorable example of the poor respect which posterity
will feel for the decisions of those who have gone before them. That
honorable gentleman told you that Warren Hastings was impeached for the
murder of princes and the plunder of empires, and yet he was acquitted.
But, is there any who hears me, that believes he was innocent? If we read
the history of that trial; if we look to the facts charged, and listen to
the unexampled eloquence by which they were supported, our only wonder
will be, that he was not condemned. Sir, it has been said that those
plundered millions were the best witnesses to prove his innocence; and
I greatly fear that the day will come when the crying blood of those
murdered princes will be the best witnesses to prove his guilt. The most
splendid action in Edmund Burke’s life was his accusation of Warren
Hastings; the foulest stain upon the national justice of England was his
acquittal.

We have been charged, sir, by one of the honorable counsel (Mr. Harper)
with having endeavored to enlist on our side the sympathies of the
Court. Permit me to ask, what sympathy have we endeavored to excite?
What feelings have we endeavored to engage? To what passion have we
addressed ourselves? None, sir. We came here to demand justice. The
constitution has placed in your hands the power of punishing guilt; we
have proved the guilt of the person accused, and at your hands we demand
his punishment. To your consciences and your understandings we appeal,
and not to your feelings. These have been assailed by our adversaries.
They have exhibited their client to you, covered, as they say, with the
frost of seventy winters, and have endeavored to hide the magnitude of
his crimes, in the length of his years, and the infirmity of his health.
In attempting to excite your compassion, they have wished to drown the
voice of justice, and have addressed you not as judges but as men. I do
trust, however, that if any sympathy is to be excited, it will be neither
for the accused, nor his accusers. Let your feelings be turned toward
the nation! Let your sympathy be awakened for those who are to come
after you, for by the sentence which you pronounce in this case, it must
ultimately be determined whether justice shall hereafter be impartially
administered, or whether the rights of the citizen are to be prostrated
at the feet of overbearing and tyrannical judges. We, who are engaged
in this prosecution, feel that our fathers handed down to us a glorious
birthright, and we appear at this bar to demand that it be transmitted
to our children unimpaired and unpolluted. Do the nation justice, and
you will do justice to us, to yourselves, and to posterity. We were also
told by the honorable counsel for the accused, that when we found the
accusation shrunk from the testimony, and that the case could no longer
be supported, we resorted to the forlorn hope of contending that an
impeachment was not a criminal prosecution, but a mere inquest of office.
For myself I am free to declare, that I heard no such position taken. If
declarations of this kind have been made, in the name of the Managers, I
here disclaim them. We do contend that this is a criminal prosecution,
for offences committed in the discharge of high official duties, and
we now support it, not merely for the purpose of removing an individual
from office, but in order that the punishment inflicted on him may deter
others from pursuing the baneful example which has been set them.

Nor do we mean to take another ground which the counsel for the accused
have thought proper to assign us, for we never entertained the most
distant idea that any citizen might be impeached. It was with no little
surprise that I heard such doctrines ascribed to us, and I was astonished
to hear the Attorney-General of Maryland combating positions which we had
not laid down, and searching for argument to prove that which we should
not have hesitated to admit.

But, sir, there is one principle upon which all the counsel for the
accused have relied, upon which they have all dwelt with great force, and
to the maintenance of which they have directed all their powers, that we
cannot assent to; we mean to contend against it, because we believe it to
be totally untenable, and because it is of the first importance in the
decision of the question now under discussion. We do not contend that,
to sustain an impeachment, it is not necessary to show that the offences
charged are of such a nature as to subject the party to an indictment,
for the learned counsel have said that the person now accused is not
guilty, because the misdemeanors charged against him are not of a nature
for which he might be indicted in a court of law.

To show how entirely groundless this position is, I need only pursue
that course which has been pointed out to us by the respondent himself,
and his counsel. I might refer to English authorities of the highest
respectability, to show that officers of the British Government have
been impeached for offences not indictable under any law whatever. But
I feel no disposition to resort to foreign precedents. In my judgment,
the Constitution of the United States ought to be expounded upon its
own principles, and that foreign aid ought never to be called in. Our
constitution was fashioned after none other in the known world, and if we
understand the language in which it is written, we require no assistance
in giving it a true exposition. As we speak the English language, we
may, indeed, refer to English authorities for definitions, as we should
refer to English dictionaries for the meaning of English words; but upon
this, as upon all occasions, where the principles of our Government are
to be developed, I trust that the Constitution of the United States will
stand upon its own foundation, unsupported by foreign aid, and that the
construction given to it will be, not an English construction, but one
purely and entirely American.

The constitution declares, that “the judges both of the supreme and
inferior courts shall hold their commissions during good behavior.” The
plain and correct inference to be drawn from this language is, that a
judge is to hold his office so long as he demeans himself well in it;
and whenever he shall not demean himself well, he shall be removed. I
therefore contend that a judge would be liable to impeachment under the
constitution, even without the insertion of that clause which declares,
that “all civil officers of the United States shall be removed for the
commission of treason, bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors.”
The nature of the tenure by which a judge holds his office is such that,
for any act of misbehavior in office, he is liable to removal. These acts
of misbehavior may be of various kinds, some of which may, indeed, be
punishable under our laws by indictment; but there may be others which
the law-makers may not have pointed out, involving such a flagrant breach
of duty in a judge, either in doing that which he ought not to have done,
or in omitting to do that which he ought to have done, that no man of
common understanding would hesitate to say he ought to be impeached for
it.

The words “good behavior” are borrowed from the English laws, and if I
were inclined to rest this case on English authorities, I could easily
show that, in England, these words have been construed to mean much
more than we contend for. The expression _durante se bene gesserit_,
I believe, first occurs in a statute of Henry VIII. providing for the
appointment of a _custos rotulorum_, and clerk of the peace for the
several counties in England. The statute recites, that ignorant and
unlearned persons had, by unfair means, procured themselves to be
appointed to these offices, to the great injury of the community, and
provides that the _custos_ shall hold his office until removed, and the
clerk of the peace shall hold his office _durante se bene gesserit_.
The reason for making the tenure to be during good behavior, was, that
the office had been held by incapable persons, who were too ignorant
to discharge the duties; and it was certainly the intention of the
Legislature that such persons should be removed whenever their incapacity
was discovered. Under this statute, therefore, I think it clear that the
officer holding his office during good behavior, might be removed for
any improper exercise of his powers, whether arising from ignorance,
corruption, passion, or any other cause. To this extent, however, we do
not wish to go. We do not charge the judge with incapacity. His learning
and his ability are acknowledged on all hands; but we charge him with
gross impropriety of conduct in the discharge of his official duties, and
as he cannot pretend ignorance, we insist that his malconduct arose from
a worse cause.

It has been alleged by the counsel for the accused, that my honorable
colleagues have argued this case upon the articles and not upon the
evidence; and this allegation contains an admission, that if the articles
are proved, the guilt of the party is established. It shall be my
endeavor to show that there is no material variance between the charges
as laid in the articles, and the evidence brought to support them; but
that they are amply and fully proved by the very best testimony which
could be adduced.

One of the learned counsel in commenting upon the first article, declared
that he discovered but a single truth in it, which was, that the judge
had formed and reduced to writing an opinion upon the law; and that
gentleman, as well as the Attorney-General of Maryland, labored with
great zeal and with much display of talent, to convince the Senate that
there could be nothing wrong in this. Unfortunately for these learned
gentlemen, even that truth is not to be found in it, for by recurring to
the article it will be found that the judge is not charged for having
formed an opinion, or for having reduced that opinion to writing, but for
“having delivered an opinion in writing on the question of law, on the
construction of which the defence of the accused materially depended,
tending to prejudice the minds of the jury against the prisoner before
counsel had been heard in his defence.”

In this we find no charge against him for having formed an opinion, or
for having reduced it to writing, and certainly the learned counsel might
have spared themselves the trouble of proving what I am sure every member
of the Court was fully convinced of before, that there was no impropriety
in a judge’s forming an opinion on any subject whatever, whether legal
or philosophical. It is not, however, usual for skilful advocates to
attempt to draw the attention from the material points in dispute, for
the purpose of fixing it on others of little or no importance. Such has
been the course pursued by our adversaries. But, Mr. President, the
real charge is, that Samuel Chase did, upon the trial of John Fries for
treason, endeavor to prejudice the minds of the jury against him, by
delivering an opinion to them upon the law before his counsel were heard;
and this too in a case of life and death, where the jury had an ample,
uncontrollable right, to decide as well the law as the fact. It is the
right and duty of judges to inform their minds upon all questions of law
whatsoever, but it is an unwarrantable proceeding, it is an unauthorized
assumption of power in them, to deliver that opinion to the jury in a
criminal cause before the jury is sworn, and before the counsel of the
prisoner have been heard in his defence.

Much has been said with a view to convince the Court that the opinion
thus delivered was a correct one, and it has therefore been argued that
his conduct was perfectly justifiable. For my own part, I consider it
totally immaterial in the present case whether the doctrine of treason,
as laid down by the judge, was correct or not; for even if it were
correct, the time and manner of delivering it, and the persons to whom
it was delivered, form the substance of the charge against him. It is a
misdemeanor, a high misdemeanor in a judge, wantonly to give an opinion
upon any case which is to come before him, previously to the swearing
of the jury, and the offence is made much greater by the opinion being
publicly declared in the presence of the jury, who ought to come to the
trial of every cause with minds wholly free from prepossession against
either party.

Although the judge has said in his answer, that no gentleman of
established reputation for legal knowledge would deliberately give a
contrary opinion, yet I have not the slightest apprehension that any
little reputation which I may possess, can in any manner be affected by
my expressing, as I now do, my entire conviction that the doctrine of
treason, as laid down in Fries’s case, is wholly repugnant to the spirit
and meaning of the constitution. It is not my intention at this time
to enter into an argument to prove this, for I have before said that
I consider it quite immaterial in the present discussion; but I will
offer some few observations, to demonstrate to the Senate that there
was nothing very unreasonable in the wish expressed by Mr. Lewis and
Mr. Dallas, to show that the constitution was susceptible of another
construction.

The constitution declares that “treason against the United States
shall consist only in levying war against them, or in adhering to
their enemies, giving them aid and comfort.” John Fries was indicted
for _levying war_ against the United States, and the facts I believe
were, that he, with some others, did, in a forcible manner, rescue some
prisoners from the marshal of Pennsylvania. This was called a resistance
to a law of the United States, and, by construction, was determined at
the former trial to be the treason of levying war. It was in opposition
to this construction of the constitution that Mr. Lewis and Mr. Dallas
wished to be heard. It was certainly not a very extravagant wish on their
part, for it ought to be recollected that we are a young nation, and
it is deeply interesting to us all that the Constitution of the United
States should not receive a construction unwarranted by its letter.
After the decisions had taken place in the courts upon the Western
insurrection, (I mean in the cases of Vigol and Mitchell,) Congress had
passed an act declaring that to resist a law of the United States should
be deemed a high misdemeanor, punishable by fine and imprisonment; and
they had before provided, by the act of 1789, that to rescue prisoners
from the custody of the marshal should also be punishable by fine and
imprisonment. Mr. Lewis and Mr. Dallas were desirous of showing that
Fries’s case came within the provisions of these laws, and that his
offence was not of such a nature as to forfeit his life. They also wished
to have an opportunity of proving that the terms _levying war_ ought
not to receive the same construction here as in England. To convince
the Senate that they were not singular in their ideas, and that the
construction given by the Court has not been unanimously assented to, I
shall take the liberty of referring to an author of merited reputation,
to whom I believe our adversaries will not refuse their respect.
Judge Tucker of Virginia, in his valuable edition of Blackstone’s
Commentaries, in the appendix to the fourth volume, under the title of
_treason_, after reciting that part of the constitution relating to the
subject, observes:

[Here the opinions of Judge Tucker were read.]

Such we find are the opinions of Judge Tucker, an able and upright
lawyer, who thinks that the constitution ought to be construed agreeably
to the plain import of its language, and ought not to be involved in
technical abstruseness. In that series of publications entitled the
Federalist, written at the commencement of the present Government, by
some of the ablest men in this nation, for the purpose of defending the
constitution, it is matter of boast, that treason was fully defined,
and not left to wild and arbitrary construction. But what avails the
definition, if the constructive treasons of England are to be drawn in as
precedents for us?

I before stated that I did not mean to enter into an argument against the
correctness of the Court’s opinion; nor have I done so, but have offered
these remarks to show that it was not unreasonable in Mr. Lewis and Mr.
Dallas to wish that another construction of the constitution might be
received. The counsel for Judge Chase seem to think it monstrous that
they should have wished to argue the point after the law had been settled
by three former decisions, which had taken place in the course of four
years. Let it be remembered that Sir Matthew Hale doubted, after the
lapse of one hundred and fifty years from the first of these constructive
treasons, and after, for aught I know, one hundred and fifty cases had
been decided. Mr. President, far from thinking their conduct on that
occasion extraordinary, I, as a free man of America, most cheerfully
accord them my thanks for the stand they made; and I do hope and trust,
that if ever a similar case should occur, in which the same doctrine of
constructive treasons shall be urged to a jury, men like Mr. Lewis and
Mr. Dallas will be found, men of exalted talents and extensive learning,
who will be bold enough to assert the rights of the citizen, and save the
constitution of their country from destruction.

Another justification of a peculiar nature is set up in defence of
Judge Chase, by a statement made in Keelyng’s Reports. It is there
said that “after the _happy_ restoration of King Charles the Second,
Sir Orlando Bridgman, chief justice of the King’s Bench, and some six
or eight others, judges, prosecutors, and King’s solicitors, assembled
for the purpose of determining in what manner the _regicides_ should be
tried, and they settled many points which it was supposed would occur
upon the trials.” This, sir, is an unfortunate period to refer to for
justification of the conduct of judges in our day. Never was there a
moment of such fawning servility; never was there a period of such
unbounded licentiousness. The hope of reward or the fear of punishment
brought almost every man crouching at the footstool of the throne, and
all united in singing hosannas to the King, and crying aloud for the
crucifixion of the miserable regicides. This conspiracy (which has been
quoted) against the wretched victims whose sacrifice was resolved on, was
headed by that most servile of all servile tools, Sir Orlando Bridgman.
His character and those of his brother judges who conspired with him,
may be recollected from the charge which he gave to the grand jury on
that occasion. It will be found in the fourth volume of State Trials,
and it will there be seen how flamingly he talked of the _divine right
of Kings_, whom he called _God’s vicegerents_ on earth; their persons he
said were too _sacred_ for their conduct to be inquired into: _they held
their power from God, and were accountable to him alone: it was treason
in their subjects to inquire into the propriety of what they did_; with
much more of the same cast. These are the times, these the men, and this
is the conduct now introduced for the justification of Judge Chase. If
they will afford him a justification he is welcome to it for me. They
were woful times indeed; one would have thought the Parliament which
the King found in session upon his return, was submissive enough; but
he was not satisfied, and finding the whole nation ready to bow at his
nod, he ordered a new one elected, and they proved so compliant to all
his wishes, that he continued them for eighteen years. This sufficiently
proves the servile spirit of those whom the King thought proper to
employ on this noted occasion, and it is not much to Mr. Keelyng’s honor
that he was one of them. The points which they did settle were of an
extraordinary nature, and one of them was read a few days since by one of
the counsel (Mr. Key) to show that Basset was a good juror in Callender’s
trial.

If, however, this famous precedent had been made in the best of times, it
does not apply to the present case. For these judges, bad as they were,
yet had modesty enough to keep their opinions to themselves, till after
the trials had commenced, and did not deliver them until the occasions
arose which called for them. Judge Chase, we have fully proved, delivered
his opinion beforehand, publicly, and in the hearing of the jury, so that
the authority of Mr. Justice Keelyng and Sir Orlando Bridgman does not
justify him. He outstripped even them.

Having thus, as I conceive, fully established the first specification
contained in this article, and having answered the only colorable
excuses advanced in favor of the judge, I shall proceed to the second
specification. This is a charge against him for “restricting Fries’s
counsel from recurring to such English authorities as they believed
apposite, and from citing certain statutes of the United States, which
they deemed illustrative of the positions upon which they intended to
rest the defence of their client.”

I must therefore be permitted to insist that Fries’s counsel were
prohibited from recurring to English authorities, and from citing
certain statutes of the United States. It is fully proved by Mr. Lewis,
and corroborated by Mr. Dallas. The latter was not in Court when the
conversation took place; but coming in immediately after, he was informed
of it by Mr. Lewis, and then stated to the Court what Mr. Lewis had told
him. The Court did not deny it, and certainly it is to be presumed, if
Mr. Lewis had made an erroneous statement of facts to Mr. Dallas, and
they had been repeated by Mr. Dallas, the Court would have contradicted
them. This was not done, and both these gentlemen now swear that they
were prohibited.

An attempt, however, is made to shelter the judge from this part of the
accusation, by saying that he declared counsel would be heard although
this opinion was given. Sir, this is another evasion. The opinion itself
carries with it internal, uncontrovertible evidence of the determination
of the Court that the counsel should not address the jury. What is the
principal ground of the defence? what is the leading reason urged for
giving this extraordinary opinion before the jury was sworn? It was,
as the judge says, and as his counsel have argued, to save time. They
state that there were more than one hundred civil causes then depending,
that the delay of business in Pennsylvania had been long a subject of
complaint, and the judge was anxious to make Fries’s trial a short one,
in order that they might have time to proceed with the other business.
Now suffer me to inquire how time was to be saved; how the trial of Fries
was to be shortened, if his counsel were to be allowed to address the
jury on the law which the Court had already decided? Was not the opinion
of the Court given for the express purpose of preventing them from
addressing the jury; or, if not for this, let me ask for what purpose it
was given? Was it to prejudice the minds of the jury; to close their ears
and their understandings against any arguments which might be offered
them? Gentlemen say no. Was it to save time? This was impossible, because
the time was still to be occupied by the counsel being permitted to
address the jury. Why then, let me ask, was the opinion given? The answer
is ready. It was intended to produce both these effects. The minds of the
jury were to be preoccupied by the imposing authority of the Court, and
in this manner it was expected to deter the counsel from addressing them
on the law. Nothing, therefore, can be clearer, than that the counsel
were prevented from addressing the jury, and that the judge “_endeavored_
(in the language of the article) to wrest from the jury their right
to hear argument, and determine upon the question of law.” But it is
said that the right of the jury to decide the law does not give them a
dispensing power over the law, and that therefore they are bound by the
opinion of the Court. Nor does the right of the _Court_ to decide the law
give _them_ a dispensing power over the law. The jury have a right to
decide the law, and are not bound by the opinion of the Court. In order
to enable them to decide correctly they have a right to hear argument,
and any attempt to prevent this, is an attempt to wrest from them their
right to decide the law, and is a high misdemeanor.

We are told, however, that if any thing wrong was done on the first
day, ample atonement was made on the second. It is true that the judge
exhibited some appearance of a wish that the counsel would proceed on
the second day, but Mr. Lewis well remarked, that although the papers
were withdrawn, the impression which had been made on the minds of the
jurors could not be removed. What sort of an atonement, too, was this? It
carried insult with it; and the language in which it was made had a still
greater tendency to strengthen the impression made the day before. The
counsel were publicly informed they might proceed as they pleased, _but
it must be at the hazard of their characters_, under the direction of the
Court. Is there a man of reputation on earth, possessed of the smallest
spark of feeling, that would consent to disgrace himself by addressing
a jury under such circumstances? This alone, if nothing else had taken
place, was sufficient to drive them from the defence of their client; and
if they thought that their abandoning him might eventually save his life,
they were fully justified in doing so.

The learned advocates for the judge have talked highly of the
independence of the judiciary, and have asked what inducements any judge
could have to act as we have charged Judge Chase with acting. Are there
then no inducements for a judge to swerve from his duty? Has he no
feelings to gratify, and is it impossible for him to become a partisan?
Does his character as a judge divest him of his ambition as a man? Is
he so incorruptible that temptation cannot assail him? Look through the
annals of other nations--read the history of England for the last forty
years. Judicial independence has been for a long time as well secured
there as here; and yet how many instances shall we find in that country
of prosecutions in which the feelings of the Ministry had been engaged,
and in which their influence over the judges has been too flagrant to be
mistaken? In Ireland, miserable Ireland, a still more gloomy prospect
presents itself. They, too, have boasted an independent judiciary; but an
overruling influence has crumbled it into ruins. The demon of destruction
has entered their courts of justice, and spread desolation over the
land. Execution has followed execution, until the oppressed, degraded,
and insulted nation has been made to tremble through every nerve, and to
bleed at every pore. Let us then be warned by the fate of Ireland. In
State prosecutions her judges look to the Castle; although they cannot be
put down, they may be elevated. Some of our judges have been elevated to
places of high political importance; splendid embassies have been given
to them. I will not say that they were given or accepted with improper
views; but they have been given, and surely they hold out inducement
enough for a judge to bend to the ruling party. It is our duty to prevent
party spirit from entering into our courts of justice. Let us nip the
evil in the bud, or it may grow to an enormous tree, bearing destruction
upon every branch. You have now an opportunity of doing it, and I trust
you will not suffer it to escape you. I therefore hope that you will not
only remove Judge Chase from the high office which he now fills, but that
by your judgment you will for ever hereafter disqualify him from holding
any office of profit or trust under the Government of the United States.

Mr. RODNEY.--Mr. President, and Gentlemen of the Senate: The present
trial exhibits a spectacle truly solemn and impressive. A man who holds
one of the highest judicial offices under the Government, who, from
the period of the Revolution, has filled many of the most important
public situations, and whose hairs have been bleached in the service
of his country, is charged before this dignified tribunal, by the
Representatives of the American people, with the commission of acts in
violation of his duty as a judge, and of the laws and constitution of the
land.

On one hand, the character of an aged and respectable individual, which
may be dearer to him than the small remnant of his life, is involved in
your decision; on the other, the most precious rights of free citizens,
and the dearest interests of society.

The mind which could contemplate, unmoved, such a scene, cannot feel
for the welfare of the people, or the honor of the nation, and must be
equally insensible to the finer sympathies of life, and the practice of
its charities and affections.

The public anxiety manifested by this deeply interesting trial must be
evident to all--a trial of the first importance, because of the first
impression--a trial not confined to a single act in the conduct of the
accused, but embracing a variety of transactions at different periods of
his life--a trial which departs from the ordinary mode of decision, whose
novelty and magnitude have excited so much interest and attention that
it seems to have superseded for the moment, not only every other grave
object or pursuit, but every other fashionable amusement or dissipation.

The task of prosecuting is always very unpleasant, and to me extremely
painful; but my rule has ever been not to suffer private considerations
or personal feelings to stand in the way of a firm and independent
discharge of public duty.

To this exalted tribunal I look with confidence for a display of that
dignified impartiality, which will do credit to their elevated situation,
and reflect honor on their country. You will raise yourselves, I am
convinced, above the common level of human prejudices, personal or
political, and will suffer no considerations but those which are
perfectly correct to be blended with your inquiries or mingled with your
decisions.

Party, it is true, is a spirit of so subtle a nature as to diffuse itself
almost imperceptibly over the human mind; it frequently pervades the
system without being felt, and sometimes warps the judgment when least
suspected. Against the influence of this spirit I need scarcely caution
the judges whom I have the honor to address. It cannot approach within
the pale of this Court, or enter their hallowed walls.

I have marked, Mr. President, in the questions which you have so
correctly put to the witnesses in the course of their examination, that
singleness of eye, which looks to the discovery of truth alone, without
reference to the party whose case it may affect; whilst your conduct
in maintaining that order and decorum suitable to the solemnity of the
occasion has exhibited an example worthy of imitation.

I have observed, with heartfelt pleasure and honest pride, the unwearied
and impartial attention paid by the members of this Court during the
progress of this momentous cause. To my mind it presages a decision
worthy of themselves, and serviceable to their country, and is a sure
pledge that their determination will be honest, upright, and independent.

If, after a fair and full inquiry into the facts, illustrated by the
arguments for and against the accused, and a careful examination of the
law, commented on by those whose duty it is to support the impeachment,
and those who are opposed to it, the Senate shall be of opinion that
the charges have not been substantiated, and pronounce a verdict of
acquittal, believe me, sir, I, as a citizen faithful, obedient, and
affectionate to the laws of my country, shall most cheerfully acquiesce
in the decision. But I do confidently trust that it will not take place,
on the principles or the precedent established in the case of Warren
Hastings, the Governor of Bengal, that plunderer of India, that destroyer
of the people of Asia, that devastator of the East, whose crimes were
without number, and whose enormities exceeded calculation. What fields
have been dyed, what streams have been tinged with the innocent blood
of victims sacrificed on the altar of his avarice or his ambition! An
obligation however solemn, a treaty however sacred, interposed but
a weak and feeble barrier to the views of his personal or political
aggrandizement. Even a zenana, the sacred retreat of women, holy and
consecrated to the fairest work of the creation, by the religious customs
of that country, has been violated whenever the silver and the gold, the
jewels and the diamonds, were sufficient objects to attract his attention
or gratify his rapacity.

The House of Representatives, so far from deserving blame, in my humble
opinion, merit commendation for the reluctance with which they proceeded
to accusation, and for the care, caution, and dignity which have marked
their steps. I have frequently heard an unbecoming zeal reprobated in a
prosecutor; but never before did I hear from the lips of a counsel for an
offender, a complaint of delay and remissness in charging his client with
guilt. What a striking contrast does their conduct furnish, compared with
that of the defendant! They betrayed no thirst for prosecution, but an
unwillingness to accuse; no eager appetite for conviction, but an anxious
desire that impartial justice should take place between the public and
an individual, whom irresistible evidence had compelled them to present
before the highest judicial authority of the nation. Not, it is true,
for the murder of despotic princes whose will was the law, and whose
laws perhaps were as sanguinary as those of Draco; nor for the plunder
of empires, swayed by an iron sceptre as oppressive as the dominion of
Hastings. Far other crimes are laid to his charge. The defendant, a
citizen of this free land, sworn to support our mild constitution and
our equal laws, and bound by his oath of office to administer justice
impartially, having a perfect knowledge of his duty, (for of ignorance
the whole world will acquit him,) stands charged with plundering, in the
holy habit of a judge, a jury of his country of their most sacred rights,
and injured and insulted freemen of their constitutional privileges.

He was indeed providentially prevented from imbruing his hands in the
blood of poor Fries, but he stands accused of shedding, with unfeeling
severity, the life-blood of the constitution itself.

Such are the crimes for which he is arraigned at your bar, and which
one of the gentlemen has been pleased to term petty offences. In the
dark catalogue of criminal enormities, perhaps few are to be found of a
deeper dye. If I were an advocate of the doctrines of constructive and
cumulative treasons, of which the learned judge appears to have been a
great admirer and a zealous supporter, I would say that he himself was
guilty of judicial treason against the constitution of the country and
majesty of the people.

The independence of the Judiciary, the political tocsin of the day,
and the _alarm bell of the night_, has been rung through every change
in our ears. They have played upon this chord until its vibrations
produce no effect. The sound is rather calculated to stun us into an
insensibility against real attacks, for the poor hobby has been literally
rode to death. To the rational independence of the Judiciary, I am,
and ever have been a firm and uniform friend. But I am no advocate for
the inviolability of judges more than of kings. In this country I am
afraid the doctrine has been carried to such an extravagant length, that
the Judiciary may justly be considered like a spoiled child. They are
here placed almost beyond the reach of the people, though not beyond
the immediate power and influence of the Executive. I wish not to see
them the slaves of any administration, but the faithful and impartial
executors of justice. My desire is that the laws, like the providence of
the Deity, should shed their protecting influence equally over all.

It will be allowed that the hopes of an individual are as powerful
inducements to action as his fears. Whether the Executive can depress
or exalt him, his influence is equally great. Whether he can punish his
errors or reward his faults, his dominion is the same. We all know that
an associate judge may sigh for promotion, and may be created a Chief
Justice, whilst experience teaches us, that more than one Chief Justice
has been appointed a Minister Plenipotentiary. These facts are staring us
in the face, when we talk of judges being independent of the Government.

What has been the natural effect of such conduct? Have the judges stood
aloof during the political tempests which have agitated the country--or
have they united in the _Io triumphe_ which the votaries and idolaters of
power have sung to those who were seated in the car of Government? Have
they made no offerings at the shrine of party; have they not preached
political sermons from the bench, in which they have joined chorus with
the anonymous scribblers of the day and the infuriate instruments of
faction? Let a recurrence to past events decide.

I wish to be understood as speaking on these topics in the abstract, and
not with a view of imputing improper motives to those concerned in the
arrangements which have taken place.

The people of the United States, on the other hand, have no offices of
profit and emolument to bestow. They have no post immediately in their
power to give, except a station in the House of Representatives, which
a judge would not accept from their hands. But, let me ask, was there
no vacancy in the gift of the Executive, to which the defendant could
aspire, and to which his conduct might furnish him with a passport or a
letter of introduction?

Some observations have been made on the independence of the judges in
England. In that country they are removable by an address of both Houses
of Parliament. By what a slight tenure, by what a slender thread, are
their offices held! The voice, nay, the whisper, or the breath of the
Minister for the time being, may remove them, and yet they have generally
manifested a spirit of real independence, even in the season of alarm
and terror, of which I fear our judges at a similar period cannot boast.
But in that country, a seat on the bench is considered as a place of
rest, and they look not beyond it. There the judges are not made Envoys
Extraordinary or Ministers Plenipotentiary.

We ought not to be imposed upon by names in this country. Give any human
being judicial power for life, and annex to the exercise of it the kingly
maxim “that he can do no wrong,”--you may call him a judge or justice,
no matter what is the appellation--and you transform him into a despot,
regardless of all law but his own sovereign will and pleasure.

Suffer me at this place to notice the remarks of the learned counsel who
spoke yesterday, (Mr. Harper,) with so much sensibility and feeling for
his client, on the change of parties in popular governments, and the
proscriptions, persecutions, and punishments, too frequently inflicted
by those who are triumphant, on the fallen victims of their authority;
when acts, innocent in themselves, because against no known law, have
been converted into crimes to gratify the vindictive passions of the
victorious against those whom the fortune of political war has placed
within their power. No man can deprecate more sincerely than I do, such a
state of things. To the situation of affairs in this country, I presume
these remarks cannot have the most distant application. If they were
made with reference to the present Administration, to the Executive or
Legislative Departments of the Government, the allusion may, perhaps,
have the light support of visionary imagination, but has no substantial
foundation in reality. It may be fancy, but is not fact.

The illustrious Chief Magistrate of the Union[22] has furnished a
precedent, by his liberal and enlightened conduct, of which the
lamentable annals of mankind afford no example. Under his wise and
his mild guidance, what auspicious beams of public sunshine have been
diffused over the whole face of the country! until, to the discontented
few, the language of the Latin poet might justly be applied--

    “O fortunati nimium sua si bona norint.”

This enlightened policy has been adopted in conjunction with the luminous
constellation of distinguished worthies, by whom he is surrounded; whose
exalted character and talents add to the usefulness, the dignity, and
splendor of his measures, and increase to an extent almost incalculable
the general sum of the happiness of this great and independent nation.

Turning our eyes to those who have exercised the high and responsible
functions of legislation, we find their acts equally deserving
commendation. Their proceedings are calculated to excite at once the
envy and the admiration of their opposers and the world. They breathe
not the fell spirit of resentment and persecution. To their honor be
it spoken, that, instead of enlarging the circle of offence, they have
reduced the scale of criminality. They have abolished an odious, and,
I believe, an unconstitutional sedition law, which had been executed
with a rigor and severity perfectly congenial with the passionate policy
which gave it birth. The decrees under it, if not written in the blood
of the sufferers, were written in their tears. A more dreadful engine of
persecution and oppression cannot well be conceived. With this instrument
in their hands, they could have smote their enemies and shielded
themselves. It would have been a sword and a buckler, but they disdained
the idea.

Actuated by the best motives, with the honest view of purifying the
fountain of justice, and restoring the characters of the American bench,
they are now engaged in the unpleasant, but indispensable task of
bringing to exemplary punishment a judge who has offended against the
letter and the spirit of the constitution, and the well-known statutes
of Congress; who has violated the bounden duties of his office, and
that high legislative act, which, to the sanction of a law, added the
solemnity and obligation of an oath.

In this important undertaking they are contending not for themselves,
but for posterity; not for those in power, but those whom power has
forsaken. Against all the wild theories of new-fangled opinions and the
monstrous iniquity of exploded doctrines, they wish to teach a lesson
of instruction to future judges that, when intoxicated by the spirit
of party, they may recollect the scale of power may one day turn, and
preserve the scales of justice equal.

It appears that Fries had been tried in the year 1799, before Judges
Iredell and Peters, and convicted of the crime of high treason. His
counsel afterwards moved for a new trial, on the ground that one of the
jury had been prejudiced against him--that he had not in fact been an
impartial juror in the case. The Court, consisting of the same judges,
upon argument, ordered a new trial to be had. A new trial, according to
the best authorities, is “a rehearing of the cause before another jury,
but with as little prejudice to either party as if it had never been
heard before.” In this light Judge Chase should have considered it. He
ought to have gone to Pennsylvania with a mind totally unprejudiced, and
viewed every circumstance of the case with the utmost impartiality. The
very circumstance which produced the second trial ought to have put him
sufficiently on his guard. When a new trial has been directed, to use the
language of the respondent in his answer, “solely on the ground that one
of the jury” (a single man out of twelve) “after he was summoned, but
before he was sworn on the trial, had made some declarations unfavorable
to the prisoner,” how ought an impartial judge to have felt and to have
acted? Mr. Chase, let it be recollected, presided in a court composed of
but two members. With this lesson before his eyes, we find the respondent
forming an opinion in his closet on the law of treason, applicable to the
case of poor Fries, and not satisfied with making up his own mind on this
subject, he took care to bind the judgment of his associate, by obtaining
his approbation of that opinion, which he reduced to writing for the
purpose. This irregular and reprehensible measure was adopted before the
hour of trial arrived, when the man whose life was at stake was to be
heard on a subject that involved his existence. This bold step in the
path to conviction, has been defended on plausible grounds, and by subtle
refinements.

The respondent in his answer and the learned counsel in their defence,
have endeavored to prove that this conduct was not only right, but
perfectly proper and correct. Among the various pretexts eagerly laid
hold of to justify this novel procedure, they urge as a reason for
prejudging and despatching a capital case, the multiplicity of civil
business pending in the same court! I will forbear to inquire into
the facts on this point, though I believe there is not a spark of
testimony to prove the allegation to its full extent, because, if the
docket had been loaded with civil suits, it would form no excuse for
hurrying through a criminal trial, on the issue of which the life of a
fellow-citizen depended. That cause must be bad indeed that requires to
be propped by such miserable expedients. When I first read this passage
in the answer, it struck me with astonishment, and excited a burst
of indignation which it is my duty to repress. “A multitude of civil
business is depending, and therefore I must make up my mind conclusively
on the law in a capital case, before the proper season arrives, without
hearing a single word from the prisoner or his counsel in defence!” The
learned judge certainly did not reflect on the effect of such an excuse,
which instead of palliating his conduct, aggravates it. That he was in a
great hurry, every part of his conduct proves. From the opinion, a copy
of which is annexed to his answer, it would appear that he did not intend
to make it public, at least until after the jury had been sworn and Fries
was on his trial. In that we find these expressions: “The Court heard the
indictment read on the arraignment of the prisoner some days past, _and
just now on his trial_, and they attended to the overt acts stated in the
indictment.”

This honorable Court will recollect that the whole current of the
testimony proves, and the defendant in his answer admits, that he
delivered the papers containing this _ex parte_ opinion before Fries’s
trial commenced. Such was his eagerness to despatch the case, with a
view, he says, of reaching expeditiously the civil list. As if gifted
with the spirit of intuition and with an infallible judgment, he seems
not to have proceeded on the principle of _castigatque auditque_, but to
have improved even upon that model, considering it not necessary for him
to hear arguments at any stage of a cause, for the purpose of forming a
correct opinion. His counsel ask us whether it be a fault in a judge to
have a profound knowledge of the law, which will enable him to decide
promptly any question that may occur; and the respondent said, on Fries’s
trial, that “he had an opinion in point of law as to every case which
could be brought before the Court, or else he was not fit to sit there.”
Yet, when Callender’s trial was progressing, we find this same judge,
upon a common point of practice relative to a challenge to the jury,
calling out for Coke on Littleton to be brought into court before he
could make up his mind on the subject.

The aid of precedent has been called in to justify this wide departure
from principle, and it is contended that the opinion was correct in
point of law. My honorable friend (Mr. Randolph) has detected and
exposed the fallacy of this species of justification. I will remark that
a great and respectable character (Lord Mansfield) has observed, that
he is a most unrighteous and wicked judge who decides without hearing
both sides--even when he decides correctly--because his judgment is the
effect of chance or accident, and not the result of a fair, full, and
impartial investigation. Precedents, let me observe, do not make the
law, they are merely evidence of it; nor is the law to be absolutely
decided by precedents, _judicandum est legibus, non exemplis_. “If a
judge conceives that a judgment given by a former court is erroneous,
he ought not in conscience to give the like judgment, he being sworn
to judge according to law,” says Lord Chief Justice Vaughan. But Judge
Chase declares that, had he differed in opinion from former precedents,
even in a capital case, he should have held himself bound by them. But
here let me ask, what are those precedents to which he subscribes? It is
not my intention to go at full length into the discussion of them, or
comment at large on the law of treason. My object is, on this interesting
occasion, to enter a solemn protest against doctrines which would entail
on us all the constructive treasons of another country, and to assign in
a few words the reasons of my opinion. I am not to be deterred from my
duty by the assertion that no counsel of eminence would controvert the
principles laid down by the respondent in his _ex parte_ opinion, more
especially when characters of such high standing at the bar as Mr. Lewis
and Mr. Dallas, have honorably and conscientiously opposed such monstrous
doctrines. The Western insurrection in Pennsylvania was materially
different from the momentary disturbances in the counties of Bucks and
Northampton. The precedents which arose from one could not be applicable
to the other, and the cases of Mitchell and Vigol, which have been cited,
are readily distinguished from that of Fries.

In the first, the combination was formed and organized to seize _all_
records and papers, and to destroy _all_ offices, to expel _all_ officers
in the whole survey. The insurgents traversed the country armed, seized
papers, attacked offices, and drove officers out of the country.

They seized and imprisoned the marshal, who escaped and returned to
Philadelphia by a circuitous route.

They assembled at Cooche’s fort, consulted on the attack upon Colonel
Neville’s house, marched thither in military array, summoned him to
surrender by a flag, set fire to his house, and destroyed his records.
They assembled at Braddock’s field; deliberated on taking the garrison
at Pittsburg; marched thither with that avowed object; but finding the
garrison prepared for defence they filed off.

They assembled after the proclamation, and after the militia were
ordered to march. They avowed an intention to resist. They compelled the
Government to negotiate. The leaders, Bradford and Marshal, fled on the
approach of the army, and the insurgents generally accepted the terms of
amnesty, as in a case of treason. The army was, however, maintained for
some time in the country.

In the last, the people were illiterate, ignorant of the laws and
language. They did not conspire to act themselves, but to prevent
_particular_ inferior officers from acting, by making the assessments in
_particular_ townships.

They acted like a mob, in obstructing the progress of the officers by
threats, hooting, &c., and once they took an officer’s tax list or
papers, but immediately returned them.

They assembled expressly to release or rescue a _particular_ set of
prisoners whom they called their neighbors.

They rescued the prisoners, and withdrew without injuring or attempting
to injure the marshal, or the tax officers who were at Bethlehem.

They never suggested the idea of resisting the army. They dispersed as
soon as the proclamation was issued, and they never met afterwards.

The distinctions are striking and obvious.

In the insurrection of 1794, the object was general; in the riot of 1799,
it was particular.

In 1794, the insurgents _acted_ as assailants; the rioters of 1799 stood
on the defensive, and only obstructed the officers in attempting to act.

In 1794, the design of attacking a fort and resisting the army was
deliberately formed, and overt acts committed to carry it into effect;
in 1799, the idea of attacking or resisting the military power of the
Government never was suggested.

In 1794, the sedition act had not provided for combinations to impede the
execution of a particular law. In 1799 that act was in existence.

In 1794, the outrage extended to the seizure of the marshal to prevent
his executing any process. In 1799, it was confined to the release of a
particular set of friends and neighbors.

The precedents, therefore, of Mitchell and Vigol, which have been so
much relied upon, did not, I humbly submit, apply to the case of poor
Fries. But the defendant has dwelt much on the opinion expressed by
Judge Iredell, in his charge to the petit jury on the former trial of
Fries, notwithstanding the verdict was set aside, which was given on that
occasion, and Judge Chase should have proceeded on the second trial, as
little prejudiced by any opinions on the former, as if such trial had
never taken place. It appears from the testimony of Mr. Dallas, that so
confident was he of the broad difference between the cases of 1794 and
1799, that in the first trial he did not advert to the former, little
suspecting that they would be considered as precedents for the latter.
When he found, by the charge of Judge Iredell, that he did unexpectedly
rely upon them, his intention was, in the second trial, to direct his
arguments to the manifest distinctions between them. In this, however, he
was disappointed by the arbitrary conduct of the defendant. Under these
circumstances, can this case be considered binding and obligatory; or, is
a single precedent to make the law, and absolutely prevent counsel from
controverting it?

The case of Fries was succeeded by that of Callender. There is seldom
one act of crying injustice without being followed by another. It is the
misfortune, if not the fault, of the respondent, that his conduct compels
us to unfold more than one solitary case, in which he grossly violated
his duty and the laws of the land.

Callender had written a book, which I never saw until since the
commencement of this trial--a wretched performance, which ought never
to have excited in the breasts of the honest supporters of the late
Administration any passion but contempt. They should have applied to it
the memorable declaration of one who once figured in political life, “a
wise and virtuous Administration is not to be battered down by mere paper
shot.” The respondent, it appears, was furnished by one of his present
counsel, (Mr. Martin,) when in the act of setting off for the district
of Virginia, with a copy of this formidable work, which threatened
destruction, in his opinion, to the Federal fabric. The book was ready
scored to his hands, so that, with a single glance, he might discover
the fatal passages. With this volume for a “_vade mecum_, or travelling
companion,” he proceeded to Richmond to hold a circuit court. Soon after
his arrival a presentment was made and an indictment found against
Callender. The miserable object of persecution was hunted up and down
the country. At length he was discovered by the marshal and brought into
court. To the indictment he pleaded not guilty, and able and eminent
counsel appeared to defend him.

Callender not being prepared with the testimony necessary to substantiate
his defence, an affidavit was filed in due form, which stated ample
grounds to postpone the trial of the cause, and upon which the Court
ought certainly to have granted a continuance.

What are the objections raised against the motion to postpone, founded
on this affidavit, and the reasons urged in support of the respondent’s
refusal to put off the trial? They are truly singular. One is a refined
technical objection to the form of the affidavit, because it does not
state in strict legal language that Callender expected to be able to
procure at a future time the attendance of the witnesses. But he states
facts which prove on the face of them, that by postponing the trial
he could obtain the benefit of their testimony, for he mentions the
places of their residence, all of them within the United States. I say
the case is stronger than if, _secundum formam_, he had sworn that he
could procure their attendance. When he tells where they lived, the
Court must have been satisfied on this point. However, the respondent
assigns a curious reason to be sure, for his conduct. If the witnesses
who were absent were actually before the Court, and were to prove all
that Callender had stated or expected, it would riot have justified all
the libellous passages that had been selected from the book and thrown
into the indictment. How was Judge Chase to know but that Callender had
testimony as to those points on which his absent witnesses would not have
deposed?

The respondent, it seems, was willing to postpone it for a particular
period, provided he would be present at the trial. Nay, he would go all
the way to Delaware, and return again to accomplish an object he seems to
have had so much at heart. In my humble opinion this part of the Judge’s
conduct proves stronger than almost any other of his acts, the motives
which influenced him. If I were to select any one circumstance to prove
that his intentions were improper, I would lay my hand on this. “I will
not postpone this important trial until the next term, because, according
to the arrangement, I shall not then be on this bench, but I will agree
to delay it for a shorter period, and travel three or four hundred miles
in order to accommodate Mr. Callender with my presence on the trial.”
Did any lawyer ever hear of such conduct? Did they ever hear of a court
adjourning to a particular time, to try a single solitary case of a
common misdemeanor?

I do respectfully submit, for the reasons assigned, that the conduct of
the learned judge, in refusing to postpone the trial of Callender, was a
most manifest violation of the principles of law, and was attended with
such circumstances as render it highly improbable that it proceeded from
a mere error in judgment.

From Virginia, flushed with success and elated with his triumph over
Callender, the respondent hastened to Delaware. The night preceding the
day on which the respondent was to hold the court, he lodged at the
village of Christiana, about five miles distant from the court-house.
From this place he rode into Newcastle the next morning with Dr. William
McMechin, who was summoned as a grand juror to the court, and it is in
evidence, was actually sworn on the panel. This is the very man, who,
it is represented, gave the respondent the information relative to the
seditious printer. As a grand juror it was his duty to communicate to
his fellows any offences against the laws of the land which had come to
his knowledge, and it was the duty of the grand jury to present every
criminal act punishable by the laws of the United States. We are bound to
pronounce that Mr. McMechin put the rest of the grand jury, for he was
sworn so to do, in complete possession of all the information which he
communicated to the respondent. With these circumstances, the respondent
was perfectly well acquainted. He saw with his own eyes the very man
impanelled on the inquest who had opened the budget to him, and knew it
was his duty to unfold the intelligence to his brethren. The respondent
proceeds to deliver an appropriate charge to the jury--a charge free
from all those blemishes which stain a subsequent performance of the
same kind. He presented to their view in chaste and eloquent language
the proper subjects for their inquiry. In my humble opinion it may have
been equalled but never excelled. I considered it, according to my poor
judgment at the time, a perfect model; the most finished piece in style
and substance that I ever heard addressed to a grand jury. Had he stopped
here he would have been an object of praise rather than complaint. Had
he been contented with discharging his official duty, he would have been
entitled to our thanks, rather than merited an accusation.

The grand jury retire to their chamber, and after some time return to
the box. To the credit of the then marshal of the Delaware district, I
must observe, that he had manifested on that occasion, (as I know him
uniformly to have done, even when the storm of party raged with the
greatest violence,) in the selection of his jurors, an independence
becoming the responsible station which he filled. They were not men of
pliant tempers, nor were they carefully culled from the ruling sect,
but chosen without respect to party, from the most respectable of both
sides. It gives me great pleasure to speak of such conduct, because I
wish to hold it up as an example. The grand jury were asked by the clerk
in the usual form, “Have you any bills or presentments to make?” Their
foreman respectfully answered they “had not.” On this, the judge could
no longer bridle his temper. He had anticipated perhaps a treat from the
prosecution of an obnoxious printer, and expected to regale his palate
with a favorite dish. Provoked by disappointment, his passion burst into
a flame, and he condescended to stoop from his bench, for the purpose of
seizing on his prey. It was at this period he betrayed emotions so highly
reprehensible, and so very unsuitable to the dignity of his situation.
In a tone, well adapted to the exceptionable language, he observed to
the grand inquest, “What! no bills or presentments?” This was matter
of astonishment to him, and he proceeded to make the observations so
correctly described by Mr. Read, the District Attorney of Delaware, a
gentleman of irreproachable life and manners, whose character is not
only unimpeached but unimpeachable, and Mr. Lea, one of the grand jury
themselves, to whom part of the observations were addressed, a merchant
of established reputation, and as a man respected by all who are
acquainted with him. Sir, after the observations I have made on positive
and negative testimony, I will not stop to demonstrate that every thing
stated by Mr. Read and Mr. Lea was said, though not recollected by some
other witnesses. I will barely mention that all the extra-judicial
remarks of the respondent were addressed to the grand jury or to the
district attorney. They must, therefore, naturally be presumed to have
paid the strictest and closest attention to all that fell from the
learned judge, and we have produced one of the grand inquest themselves,
and the district attorney, to prove the language he used. I feel
confident, under these circumstances, that implicit credit will be given
to them. I am also convinced that the statement made by the respondent
is scarcely more favorable to his cause. The grand jury repeat, to the
interrogatory put to them by the respondent, the answer which they gave
to the previous question of the clerk, and request additionally that they
may be discharged, as many of them were farmers, and it was hay harvest,
a very busy season with them. But no matter for that, the business of the
persecution, for I will not say prosecution, must go on if possible. The
judge would not discharge the grand jury on the first day, agreeably to
general practice, as proved by Judge Bedford, though pressed so to do.
He proceeds to give them information of the seditious temper which had
manifested itself in the State, and particularly in Newcastle County: a
county, which, suffer me to say, is well known from its old and unshaken
patriotism from the Revolution to the present day. But he did not stop
here; he proceeds to mention a seditious printer, point out the place
where he lived, and the borough of Wilmington, justly celebrated for
its uniform attachment to the cause of republicanism, and, according to
his own answer, to specify the title of his paper, and just as his name
was escaping from his lips, a returning sense of propriety checked his
speech. Sensible how deeply he had committed himself already, he paused
for reflection. But he had gone too far to effect a safe and honorable
retreat. He calls on the district attorney to know if a file of the
papers cannot be had. Some officious person offers to procure them, and
the respondent directs the district attorney to examine them and lay them
before the grand jury, who are ordered to attend the next morning. They
do accordingly attend, the file of the papers is laid before them and
examined. Behold, after all his exertions, the respondent had his labor
for his pains; after all this noise and bustle _montes parturiunt_, and
not even _ridiculus mus nascitur_. The grand jury return once more to
the box without any bills or presentments, and the learned judge with
admirable address covers his defeat.

The conduct of the learned judge at the circuit court in Maryland,
furnishes, I consider, one of the strongest articles of impeachment. I
had intended to have dilated very much at length on this charge, but
the fatigue of yesterday has really indisposed me, and I have already
trespassed too much on your time.

Every member of this Court must have been sensible of the impropriety
of the respondent’s conduct on that occasion. Every reflecting man must
be decidedly opposed to the idea of blending political discussion with
the legal observations which ought to proceed from the bench. A party
harangue little comports with the temperate and learned charges to be
delivered by the president of a court. The character of an electioneering
partisan, whose rostrum is a stump, or whose stage is the head of a
hogshead, is utterly inconsistent and incompatible with that of a grave
and upright judge. The duty of a judge is to expound the laws, and not
to exercise the office of a censor over them, and much less to disgrace
himself by reprobating them in a manner calculated to excite groundless
alarm and apprehensions in the minds of the people, and to alienate their
affections from the Government. Every man in his individual capacity
possesses the undoubted right to advocate the political principles
which he believes most beneficial to his country. The respondent
as an individual is entitled to this privilege in common with his
fellow-citizens, and to the free exercise of his splendid talents in such
a case. But does this justify him as a judge in his judicial character,
and from the judgment seat, to preach political sermons, and impose
his private dogmas on the people, under the garb of administering the
laws? Sophistry may for a moment confound two things perfectly distinct
in their nature and effect, but the mist vanishes before the light of
argument.

It will be conceded that there yet exist State jealousies against
the General Government, the acts of which are closely watched and
scrutinized. When the Constitution of the United States was framed, it
was the legitimate offspring of a liberal spirit of accommodation, which
reconciled jarring interests, _discordia semina rerum_. It requires
the patriotic exertion of every good man to preserve and to promote a
reciprocal cordiality between the General and State Governments. The
officers particularly of each should manifest a respect and reverence
which would inspire at once confidence and attachment. What language can
express the criminality of the respondent, when from the bench of the
United States he undertook to thunder anathemas against the act of the
Legislature of an individual State? Was this a part of his duty, or was
it not? Can there be a doubt, sir, but that it was a gross violation of
his duty, and that the respondent well knew it at the time? Yet such were
his unbridled passions and his uncontrolled prejudices, that, regardless
of the station which he held, and the dignified post which he occupied,
he did not hesitate to commit the character of the United States by
conduct which must have irritated the audience against the government
of Maryland and its officers. If ever a _mobocracy_ take place in this
country, it will be brought about by such instruments and such conduct.
Let those clothed with the laws become the violators of them, let the
judges of the United States issue fulminations against the measures of
individual States, and the judges of the different States retaliate,
by declaiming against the acts of the General Government, and the
consequences are easily foreseen.

When a poor miserable object like Callender, without character and
without influence, censures the measures of our Administration, or
reprobates an unconstitutional law, the respondent considered him guilty
of a crime and deserving of punishment. But a man elevated to the bench
may declaim in the strongest language against any measure or law of
the United States, or of an individual State with perfect impunity!
Recollect, sir, that if the defendant be justified in reprobating a
single law of the United States, he has the right to reprobate them
all indiscriminately. It is without question the duty of a judge to
inculcate a respect and a reverence for the laws of the land. But, sir,
the respondent, so far as he was able, has endeavored to excite the
indignation of the people against them, and to terrify them into an
opposition to measures which he has chosen from the bench to denounce,
by the dread of a _mobocracy_ and other alarming stories unworthy the
columns of a common newspaper, and scarcely equalled since the days of
the Rye House, and of Titus Oates.


WEDNESDAY, February 27.

Mr. RANDOLPH.--Mr. President: The course which has been pursued by my
learned colleagues and right excellent friends leaves but a barren field
in which to glean after them. I shall, therefore, present you with the
most condensed view that I can take of the subject, endeavoring, as far
as possible, to avoid the ground which has been already trodden; and
should I fail in this attempt, I hope to be pardoned, as having been
absent during a great part of this discussion. Very far indeed is it from
my intention, by tiresome repetitions, yet more to weary the patience of
the Court, and prolong that decision which is anxiously awaited by all.
I was not present when the defence was opened, in a style so honorable
to himself, by the junior counsel of the respondent, (Mr. Hopkinson.) I
was then ill abed. I regret the loss of the very able argument which he
is said to have urged against the first article. God forbid that the time
shall ever come with me when merit shall be disparaged because found in
an adversary. Report speaks fairly of the gentleman’s performance, and I
am willing to credit her to the utmost extent.

Suffer me to say a few words on the general doctrine of impeachment,
on which the wildest opinions have been advanced--unsupported by the
constitution, inconsistent with reason, and at war with each other.
It has been contended that an offence, to be impeachable, must be
indictable. For what then I pray you was it that this provision of
impeachment found its way into the constitution? Could it not have said,
at once, that any civil officer of the United States, convicted on an
indictment, should (_ipso facto_) be removed from office? This would be
coming at the thing by a short and obvious way. If the constitution did
not contemplate a distinction between an impeachable and an indictable
offence, whence this cumbrous and expensive process, which has cost us so
much labor, and so much anxiety to the nation? Whence this idle parade,
this wanton waste of time and treasure, when the ready intervention of a
court and jury alone was wanting to rectify the evil? In addition to the
instances adduced by my right worthy friend, (Mr. Nicholson,) who first
addressed the Court yesterday, permit me to cite a few others by way of
illustration. The President of the United States has a qualified negative
on all bills passed by the two Houses of Congress, that he may arrest
the passage of a law framed in a moment of legislative delirium. Let us
suppose it exercised, indiscriminately, on every act presented for his
acceptance. This surely would be an abuse of his constitutional power,
richly deserving impeachment; and yet no man will pretend to say it is
an indictable offence. The President is authorized by the constitution
to return any bill presented for his approbation, not exceeding ten
days, Sundays excepted, within which period he may return it to the
House wherein it originated, stating his reasons for disapproving it.
Now let us suppose that, at a session like the present, which must
necessarily terminate on the third of March, (and that day falls this
year on a Sunday,) the President should keep back until the last hour of
an expiring Congress, every bill offered to him for signature during the
ten preceding days, (and these are always the greater part of the laws
passed at any session of the Legislature,) and should then return them,
stating his objections, whether good or bad is altogether immaterial.
It is true that a vote of two-thirds of each branch may enact a law in
despite of Executive opposition; but, in the case I have stated, it would
be physically impossible for Congress to exercise its constitutional
power. Indeed, over the bills presented to the President within nine days
preceding its dissolution, the Legislature might be deprived of even the
shadow of control, since the Executive is not bound to make any return
of them whatever. Now, I ask whether such misconduct in the President
be an indictable offence? And yet is there a man who hears me who will
deny that it would be a flagrant abuse, under pretence of exercise of his
constitutional authority, for which he ought to be impeached, removed,
and disqualified? Sir, this doctrine, that impeachable and indictable are
convertible terms, is almost too absurd for argument. Nothing but the
high authority by which it is urged, and the dignified theatre where it
is advanced, could induce me to treat it seriously. Strip it of technical
jargon, and what is it but a monstrous pretension that the officers of
Government, so long as they steer clear of your penal statutes--so long
as they keep without the letter of the law--may, to the whole length of
the tether of the constitution, abuse that power, which they are bound to
exercise with a sound discretion, and under a high responsibility for the
general good?

Mr. President, through every stage of this transaction you perceive
every symptom of guilt--trepidation, remorse, and self-abasement. Look
at the consultation at Rawle’s, who was followed home by the judges as
soon as the Court rose. Recollect the conversation which ensued, and
the conduct of the Court on the following day, when the respondent is
said to have atoned for his misbehavior; although, in the same breath,
you are told there was no offence to expiate. Do you recognize in that
procedure an honorable and manly acknowledgment of unintentional error,
which, from a sense of justice, the respondent was anxious to rectify? Or
do you behold the sullen perverseness of guilt, half ashamed to confess
its offences, yet trembling at their consequences?--now soothing, now
threatening its adversary--every characteristic of conscious crime? Sir,
I blush for the picture which the gentleman has drawn of his client; and
I ask you, Mr. President, if such a character is fit to preside in a
court of justice?--a man whose violent temper and arbitrary disposition
perpetually drives him into acts of tyranny and usurpation, from which,
when vigorously opposed, he must disgracefully recede; equally ready to
take an untenable position, or meanly to abandon it. To-day, haughty,
violent, imperious; to-morrow, humble, penitent, and submissive;
prostrating the dignity of his awful function at the feet of an advocate,
over whom, but the day before, he had attempted to domineer. Is this
a character to dispense law and justice to this nation? No, sir! It
demands men of far different stamp--firm, indeed, but temperate; mild,
though unyielding; neither a blustering bravo, nor a timid poltroon. I
speak not of private character; with it I have nothing to do. It is the
official conduct only that concerns me. I have no hesitation in saying
that such men are not fit to preside in your judiciary; and that the
greatest abilities, when joined to such tempers, serve but still more to
disqualify their possessors.

I must here reiterate my regret at losing the argument of the gentleman
who opened the defence. I understand him to have said, (speaking of
Fries,) “Could that man be ‘innocent,’ who had been twice convicted
of treason? Could he be ‘illiterate,’ who pretended to expound the
constitution? Could he be ‘friendless,’ who had arrayed his numerous
followers in opposition to the laws of his country?” Sir, this is a very
pretty specimen of antithesis; but, unfortunately for itself, it proves
too much, whilst, as to the question before the Court, it proves nothing.
Does the gentleman believe the London mob, in 1780, to have been among
the most influential men in England? or, because their discontents grew
out of religion, that they were more deeply read in canon law than any
other body of men in that kingdom? They far surpassed the Northampton
rioters in depth and intricacy of research. They undertook to expound
the Constitution of the Church of England. But, unfortunately for this
gentleman, the guilt or innocence of his honorable client is in nowise
affected by the guilt or innocence of this poor German and his comrades.
The respondent stands charged with a departure from the principles of the
constitution and the established forms of law, in conducting the trial
which was to ascertain the guilt or innocence of John Fries. What has
this to do with his character? How does that affect the question? Guilty
or innocent, he was entitled to a fair and impartial trial, according to
the known usage and forms of law; for, be it remembered in such cases,
_form_ is _substance_. It is the denial of this sacred right, which
the constitution equally secures to the most hardened offender as to
persecuted virtue--this daring outrage on the free principles of our
criminal jurisprudence, that constitutes the respondent’s crime. If Fries
was innocent, what language can sufficiently reprobate the conduct of
the judge? An innocent man, by his procurement, iniquitously consigned
to an ignominious death. If guilty, he ought to have expiated his guilt
upon a gibbet. But what was the fact? The President of the United States,
in consequence of the arbitrary and unprecedented conduct of the Court,
was, in a manner, _compelled_ to pardon him. The public mind would never
have brooked the execution of any man thus tried and condemned. By the
misdemeanor of the respondent, then, to rescue the administration of
justice from the foulest imputation, to make some atonement for the
offended majesty of the constitution, the Executive was reduced to the
necessity of turning loose upon the country, again to sow the seeds of
disaffection and revolt, a man represented by the adverse counsel to be
every way desperate and daring--a traitor and a rebel. Upon what other
principle, sir, can you account for the President’s application to the
prisoner’s counsel, and his subsequent pardon? I repeat, Mr. President,
that it is wholly immaterial to the question before you, whether John
Fries was or was not a traitor. Either alternative is fatal to the
respondent. He is charged with oppression and injustice on the trial, and
you have not only the clearest testimony of the fact, but it is in proof
before you that such was the President’s motive in issuing the pardon. He
must have believed that the sentence was in itself unjust, (which serves
but to aggravate the respondent’s guilt,) or he must have acted (as I
am unwilling to concede he appears to have done) on the ground that,
however deserving of punishment, the prisoner had been unfairly tried,
and his condemnation illegally obtained. Whichsoever of these positions
be _true_, the defence set up on behalf of the respondent is _false_.
What have you seen? A man condemned to death, unheard, by a prejudiced
jury and an unrighteous judge, thirsting for his blood; the Executive
demanding to hear that defence, to which the Court would not listen,
and extending the arm of its protection to snatch the victim from the
oppressor’s grasp. And will you now turn this man loose upon society,
armed with the terrors of the law and secure in impunity, to perpetrate
similar offences?

But our opponents have not only resorted to the practice in civil cases,
which here is totally inapplicable, but they have brought forward English
precedents before the Revolution, and decisions of the court of _Star
Chamber_! Precedents drawn from the worst periods of their history,
from hard, unconstitutional times--decisions from the most flagitious
tribunals, whose very name has passed into a proverb of corrupt,
unfeeling tyranny. For an account of this Star Chamber I would refer you
to John, Lord Somers, of whom it has been said, not with more elegance
than justice, that, “like a chapel in a palace, he alone remained
unpolluted, whilst all around was profanation and uproar.”

“We had a privy council in England (says this great constitutional
lawyer) with great and mixed powers; _we suffered under it long and
much_. All the rolls of Parliament are full of complaints and remedies;
but none of them effectual till Charles the First’s time. _The Star
Chamber was but a spawn of our council_, and was called so only because
it sat in the usual council chamber. It was set up as a formal court in
the third year of Henry VIII., _in very soft words_, ‘to punish great
riots, to restrain offenders too big for ordinary justice; or, in modern
phrase, to preserve the peace.’ ‘_But in a little time it made the nation
tremble._ The privy council came at last _to make laws by proclamation,
and the Star Chamber ruined those that would not obey_. At last they fell
together.’” (Hatsell’s Precedents, vol. 4, page 65, Note.) Is this the
court whose adjudications are to justify the decisions of an American
tribunal in the nineteenth century? And in a case of _treason_, too? Is
this vile and detestable tribunal (whose decisions, even in England, are
scarce suffered to be drawn into precedent) to furnish rules of conduct
for the courts of this great confederate Republic? Yes, sir, you have not
only been obliged to listen to Star Chamber doctrines, but you have been
referred to one most arbitrary magistrate to justify the oppressions of
another. I allude to Chief Justice Keelyng. Who he was may be seen in the
same volume of Hatsell, page 113.

“On the 16th of October, 1667, the House being informed, ‘that there
have been some innovations of late in trials of men for their lives
and deaths;’ [the very offences charged upon the respondent;] ‘and in
some particular cases restraints have been put upon juries, in the
inquiries’--this matter is referred to a committee. On the 18th of
November, this committee are empowered to receive information against
the Lord Chief Justice Keelyng, for any other misdemeanors besides those
concerning juries. And on the 11th of December, 1667, this committee
report several resolutions against the Lord Chief Justice Keelyng, of
illegal and arbitrary proceedings in his office.” The first of these
resolutions is: “That the proceedings of the Lord Chief Justice, in
the cases now reported are innovations in the trial of men for their
lives and liberties: and that he hath used an arbitrary and illegal
power, which is of dangerous consequence to the lives and liberties of
the people of England, and tends to the introducing of an arbitrary
government.” The respondent’s own case. The second resolution is,
“that in the place of judicature”--[how does this bear upon the eighth
article?] “the Lord Chief Justice hath undervalued, vilified, and
contemned Magna Charta, the great preserver of our lives, freedom, and
property.” And the authority of this infamous judge, the minion of
Charles II.,--of judges in the most corrupt period of English history,
from the restoration of that king to the revolution, is relied upon by
his counsel to absolve the respondent from guilt. Permit me to do their
client more justice. I do believe that the man who is held up here as a
revolutionary patriot, of 1776, although in a moment of human infirmity
he hath imitated their crimes, would blush to be justified by their
example. For his sake I rejoice in that visitation of God which hath
saved him this last degradation: from seeing his defence rested upon the
authority of those infamous times, and yet more infamous men, with whom,
with all his weakness and all his infirmities upon him, he would yet
(I am persuaded) disdain a comparison. Yes, I do feel relieved that he
hath been spared the disgraceful spectacle of beholding himself defended
by his friends on principles more unjust and iniquitous, if possible,
than have ever been imputed to him by his enemies: that he hath not been
reduced to see those very decisions, prior to the revolution, cited in
his defence, which he himself denied to a fellow-creature put in jeopardy
of life! The benefit of these decisions (it seems) can be taken only by
the powerful oppressor--they offer no shelter to his victim. I thank God,
sir, that I have indeed studied at the feet of far different Gamaliels
from the honorable Attorney-General of Maryland, or those by whom, it
would appear, he has been brought up; that I have drawn my notions of
justice and constitutional law from a far different source--not from
the tribunals of Harry VIII., nor the tools and parasites of the house
of Stuart, but from the principles, the history, and the lives of those
illustrious patriots and their disciples, who brought the Star Chamber to
ruin, and its abettors to the block.

But I cannot consider the able Attorney-General of Maryland quite sincere
in the doctrine which he has advanced. He shines indeed a luminary in
this defence. Mr. President, there is an obliquity in human nature that
too often disposes us rather to applaud the brilliant, though pernicious
ingenuity that can “make the worse appear the better reason,” than
the humble but useful efforts of a mind engaged in an honest search
after truth. There is something fascinating in such a display of the
powers of the human mind. The vanity of the whole species soothes
itself with the excellence of an individual. We yield to the illusions
of self-love--“_we_ lay the flattering unction to our souls”--and are
cheated and abused. It is under this perverse bias of our nature that I
render to the honorable Attorney-General of Maryland the willing tribute
of my admiration. But, he will pardon me, I cannot suppose him serious. I
will not do him the injustice to believe that to a noble motive, to long
habits of political and social intercourse, a friendship of thirty years’
standing, he has refused what he himself tells you is done, every day,
nay in nine hundred and ninety-nine cases in a thousand, by persons of
his profession, for a mercenary consideration. What has he said? “That,
in defence of their clients, lawyers are in the daily habit of laying
down as law what they know not to be law.” Mr. President, when I see a
man of his unrivalled resources reduced to the miserable shift of Star
Chamber doctrines and precedents before the revolution--and, conscious,
no doubt, of the actual weakness of his defence, calling to his aid all
the force of wit, ingenuity, repartee, pleasantry, and good humor, what
inference must I draw? and what must be the conclusion of this honorable
Court?

On the subject of Mr. Taylor’s testimony, its rejection is attempted
to be defended by a solitary precedent, _in a civil case_, drawn from
a reporter, who, I am informed by gentlemen of the first professional
character, is far from being considered as very good authority. I mean
McNally. In support of this article I might urge as well the admissions
of the honorable Attorney-General of Maryland, as the universal practice
of our courts. What said Mr. Robertson--and what said the Chief Justice
of the United States, on whose evidence I specially rely? He never knew
such a case occur before. He never heard a similar objection advanced
by any court, until that instance. And this is the cautious and guarded
language of a man placed in the delicate situation of being compelled to
give testimony against a brother judge. What more could you expect from
a person thus circumstanced? What does it prove but that the respondent
was the first man to raise, to invent such an objection to a witness?
Can any one doubt Mr. Marshall’s thorough acquaintance with our laws?
Can it be pretended that any man is better versed in their theory or
practice? And yet in all his extensive reading, in his long and extensive
practice, in the many trials of which he has been spectator, and the yet
greater number at which he has assisted, he had never witnessed such a
case. It was reserved for the respondent to exhibit, for the first, and
I trust, for the last time, this fatal novelty, this new and horrible
doctrine that threatens at one blow all that is valuable in our criminal
jurisprudence.

Against the fourth article the Attorney-General of Maryland hath adduced
a similar and doubtful authority, in defence of his client. And here
again I bottom myself upon the testimony of the same great man, yet
more illustrious for his abilities than for the high station that he
fills, eminent as it is. He declares that he has never known a similar
requisition made by any court; that where the propriety of questions
verbally propounded, has been denied, or for the sake of precision,
(where they were intricate,) they have been reduced to writing, at the
request or order of the Court; but in the first instance, and before they
had been stated verbally, _never_, within the compass of his experience.
And what inference can any candid, unprejudiced mind draw from these
repeated, and, until then, unprecedented acts of interference by the
judge, on behalf of the prosecution, but that, instead of an umpire, he
was a partisan?

With regard to his deportment toward the counsel, I shall call the
attention of the Court not to the statement made by themselves--because
I question it in the slightest degree? God forbid--I know those able
and honorable men too well--but because I would deprive our opponents
of their almost sole argument--the personal irritation which they
allege those witnesses must have felt. Waiving then any remarks on
their testimony, powerful as it is, I again ask you, what said the
Chief Justice? And, if I may say so, _what did he look_? He felt all
the delicacy of his situation, and as he could not approve, he declined
giving any opinion on the demeanor of his associate. What does Mr.
Robertson say? In substance, every thing that has been deposed by
other witnesses: “That the judge always spoke in the first person
singular.” And here I will remark, that the short hand report which
this gentleman made of the trial, and which he has given in evidence,
was published, in the first instance, as a defence of Mr. Chase against
alleged misrepresentations of his conduct on that occasion. It cannot
be considered, therefore, as an _un_favorable view of the transaction,
at least so far as the respondent is concerned. What says Mr. Gooch?
That the judge was very ‘_yearnest_’ with the counsel; that they were
much abashed; that he set them down; that they appeared alternately red
and pale; that he exhibited their confusion to the mirth of all the
bystanders: and Colonel Taylor tells you, “that the conduct of the judge
had the full effect it seemed intended to produce--to abash the counsel
for the prisoner, and turn them into ridicule, for that every body
laughed but themselves.”

But the ingenious Attorney-General of Maryland, whose fruitful invention
is never without resource, has endeavored to persuade you, that this
conduct was not merely justifiable, but even meritorious. That the
design of the counsel was to irritate and inflame the people; and the
respondent, dreading a riot, had no object but to keep the audience in a
good humor; and that, by a seasonable exertion of his acknowledged wit
and pleasantry, he completely succeeded in turning their weapons upon
themselves, and totally defeated their purpose. This apology reflects
credit on the inventive faculty of him who makes it, and yet what is
it but an admission of the charge? Look to the evidence. You will see
nothing to support the twist which has been attempted to be given to
it--no apprehension of disorder and confusion but what grew out of the
insufferable tyranny and insolence of the judge. Where was the respondent
at this time? In some obscure corner of the Union--some remote district
notorious for disaffection, infamous for its spirit of insurrection, far
removed from the protection of State or Federal authority? No, sir, he
was in the enlightened capital of Virginia, a country never disgraced by
rebellion--unless the epithet be applied by some squeamish politician
to our glorious revolutionary struggle--a State whose soil has never
been stained by insubordination to law. No, sir, he was sitting within
a stone’s throw of the residence of the Governor of Virginia, a man of
whom I shall say nothing. Let the exalted stations he has more than
filled, the high public trusts on which he has seemed rather to confer
honor than receive it, his unshaken constancy in the worst of times, the
dismay and confusion of his enemies, whose vain aspersions have passed
him like the idle wind--let the confidence of a united people speak his
eulogium. The respondent was sitting within musket-shot of a cantonment
of Federal troops. Why were these troops placed there at that time, and
why were they kept there for some time afterwards, belongs not to my
present purpose. It is enough to say that they were a part of our famous
provisional army--“_fruges consumere nati_”--to ascertain their readiness
to protect, in any outrage on the law or constitution, (then practised,
or meditated,) the government that maintained them in dissolute idleness.
Governor Monroe was more interested in the respondent’s safety than he
himself appears to have been. He trembled lest the indignation of the
people should get the better of their good sense, and hurry them into
some act of violence, that would cast an odium on the State, and afford
matter of triumph to her enemies. That the respondent’s object was to
goad her citizens to some outrage, which might justify the humiliation
that was preparing for her, there is too much reason to believe, and that
he would have succeeded, but for the intervention and influence of that
excellent man, and the persuasions of the counsel themselves, whom the
Attorney-General of Maryland would represent as endeavoring to excite
public commotion, that he may find some shelter for the enormities of his
client.

But our doctrine, it is said, goes to prostrate the rights of the
accused--where?--at the feet of juries. There may they for ever lie, but
never at the foot of a judge. The gentleman from South Carolina (I beg
his pardon) deprecates the placing of criminal law solely in the power
of juries. He would not have the life of a man depend on their decision
of a point of law. But it is the glorious attribute of jury trial, that
the question of guilty or not guilty, involving both law and fact, _that_
law as well as _that_ fact the jury alone is competent to determine.
It is the necessary consequence of the general verdict which they are
required to find. The very able and learned Attorney-General of Maryland
indeed says that this is an incidental _power_, rather than a _right_ of
the jury. But, sir, what is that power which no man may question, but a
right? For, whether incidental or direct, the exercise of it is final and
complete, if in favor of the accused; and the power of the Court to award
him a new trial is further protection to the prisoner against abuse.
There is no specific power given, in so many words, by the constitution,
to Congress, to punish robberies of the mail; but it is incidental to
the right of establishing post offices and post roads, and necessary to
carry the specified power into effect. This curious distinction between
“_right_ and _power_, _direct_ and _incidental_,” is an _ignis fatuus_
of the learned gentleman’s composition to bewilder and mislead us from
our object, that we may be lost and led astray over a wide moor of
absurdities. The right of the jury is not the less, whether immediate,
or derivative; as Congress possess the power to pass all laws necessary
to carry any delegated power into effect, in like manner juries possess
every power necessary to the general verdict which they have a right to
give. The violation on the part of the judge of the incidental power, as
much subjects him to punishment, as if he had invaded the original right
over the fact, to which it is appendant. What would he say to a robber
of the mail claiming impunity because the power to make the offence
penal was incidental, and not specified in the constitution? But, say
gentlemen, we admit the _power_ in the jury, we only deny the _right_:
and in this tissue of self-contradictions they declare, that whilst a
jury is bound by the exposition of the law, as laid down by the Court,
yet they have not the right to determine whether the facts come within
the law. Can there be a greater absurdity?

“Whilst the jury have no right to decide the law, they must decide
whether the facts come within the law!” If the jury is tied down by the
Court’s construction of the law, is it not plain that _they_ do _not_
decide whether the fact is, or is not, embraced by the law? but that
whilst they find naked fact, it is the _Court_ that decides whether that
fact does, or does not, come within the law? Gracious God! is it come
to this? Are the great principles for which our forefathers contended,
and many of yourselves have bled, now to be frittered away by technical
sophistry? Is the same doctrine to be established here in capital
offences--in cases of treason--that Lord Mansfield attempted to impose
on the people of England as the law of libel, and which they would not
endure? Shall principles of criminal law which they have scouted, even
in cases not capital, be established here for the decision of capital
offences? that whilst the jury finds the facts, their application to the
law shall depend solely on the will of the Court? I deny the gentleman’s
law; and assert that, as an American citizen, I would refuse to be
bound by it. A man is charged with having committed certain treasonable
acts. The constitution has defined treason to consist “in levying war
against the United States, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them
aid and comfort.” But the Court, assuming to themselves a more than
Papal infallibility--the exclusive exposition and construction of the
constitution--tell me, as a juror, to surrender into their hands my
conscience and my understanding; that, as a levying of war is treason, so
is the picking up of a pin a levying of war; that I, an unlearned layman,
must not presume to expound the holy scripture of the constitution, but
must leave that to the elect; and, if the fact of his having picked up
the pin be proved to my satisfaction, I am bound to find the prisoner
guilty of levying war against his country--to convict him of treason.
Sir, the parallel runs on all-fours; for there is nothing to uphold this
monstrous judicial assumption, but that which supported the pretensions
of the Roman Pontiff--the willing obedience of ignorant superstition. If
the jury is contumacious, if, whilst they confess their entire conviction
of the truth of the fact charged in the indictment, they deny the legal
doctrine and acquit the prisoner, the Court is without redress. They
may bully and look big--there is no help. Put the case of murder. A
killing with malice aforethought is charged upon the prisoner--there is
no dispute about facts--it is admitted that the party arraigned did kill
the deceased. Shall I, a juror, contenting myself with deciding a fact
that nobody disputes, surrender to the Court the question of law, should
they attempt to usurp it, (as that killing with a particular weapon is
a killing with malice prepense,) and find a man guilty of murder whom I
believe to have acted in self-defence?--in defence of life, or, what is
dearer than life, of reputation? No, sir; I will not find him guilty,
although all the courts in the universe should instruct me to do so. I
will look to the great precept, “do as you would be done by,” and say, “I
would have done so too, and, therefore, I will not say, that man ought
not so to have done.” And what is there, sir, in the words, “_levying of
war_” more unintelligible than in the words, “_malice prepense_?” The
first, being altogether a matter of fact, would appear more exclusively
the province of the jury than the last, which rather partakes of a
question of opinion. If you leave the law in criminal cases to the jury,
(as well as the fact,) you are safe; but if your decision should sanction
the opposite doctrine, you set all our liberties, fixed by the decisions
of ages, afloat on an ocean of uncertainty and contention. We have no
beacon, no compass, no polar star to direct our course. If you suffer
the rights of a jury to be thus invaded on a criminal trial--on a trial
for life and death--you bind us in conclusions more fatal than those of
the Church of Rome. You force us one moment to say whether such a fact
amounts to such a crime, and, the next, you will not permit us to know
what the crime is. I hope the marshal will never summon me on such a
jury. I give him warning; I will never surrender the constitution, my
understanding, and my oath to the “_grim gribber_” of a court of law.
I should consider myself as much entitled to decide the law for the
judge in a civil case, as bound by his decision of it in a criminal one.
Vain and futile is the attempt of the constitution to settle and define
treason, if that definition is to mean any thing or nothing at the option
of a corrupt judge. If this doctrine, sir, be denied by any member of
this honorable Court, let him, in his legislative capacity, move for a
bill “to render juries more obedient to the judges, and _especially in
criminal cases_.” Until that is done, I shall refuse obedience to their
dictates, and act as a juror upon the principles which I have avowed.

Mr. President, much as I regret the trespass that I have already
committed on your patience, I must (painful as it may be to you, and it
is not less so to myself) attempt something like a review of the conduct
of this judge. In May, 1800, you find him in Philadelphia, engaged in
propagating and establishing the detestable doctrine of constructive and
implied treason, which, in England, has proved the dreadful engine of
persecution and murder. From thence you trace him to Annapolis; (not by
the blood of John Fries--no thanks, however, to him for that;) you hear
his declaration in presence of Mr. Mason. But this, his counsel tell you,
was all a joke, nothing but humor, sir; like his conduct at Richmond. If
you listen to them, you must become a Pythagorean, and believe that the
soul of Yorick himself has transmigrated into the body of this judge. It
is true he could not be the king’s jester, because, _unfortunately_, we
have no king, we have not yet reached that stage of civilization; but,
sir, he is the jester of the sovereign people, a jester at your laws
and constitution, and it is for you to say whether he shall continue
to exercise his function. This jocular conversation is likely to prove
a bitter and biting jest to the respondent. So serious did that most
intelligent and respectable witness deem it to be, that he locked it up
in his own bosom, without venturing to mention it to any human being.
He did not consider himself authorized to play with the fame of the
respondent, however disposed _he_ might be to sport with the feelings and
rights of others. This merry fit lasted a long time. He indulges the same
humor in the stage with Mr. Triplett, an entire stranger; and here let
me observe, in justice to this gentleman, that never did any man deliver
a more clear and unimpeachable testimony in a court of justice than this
witness. It is conclusive. When the judge made personal declarations
against Callender, could he be said to administer justice without respect
to persons? But, sir, one of our adversaries (Mr. Harper) protests
against this sort of evidence, and deems it highly inadmissible. Why?
Because, forsooth, it violates the sanctity of private conversation, and
wounds the feelings of gentlemen who may be called on as witnesses. Thank
God! sir, we live in a country where the law is open to all, and knows no
distinction between _gentlemen_ and _simple-men_. No man, I trust, has a
greater respect for the real gentleman than myself. When Francis I., the
accomplished monarch of the most gallant people of Europe, deemed it his
first distinction to be ranked as the first gentleman of his kingdom, he
did not hold that sacred character in higher reverence than I do. But
the respondent himself has told you that a court of justice is a coarse
sort of thing, blind to these nice discriminations; that the polished
address of a Chesterfield, and the rugged scowl of a Thurlow, in the eye
of the law are equal. Suppose a person killed, will not the Court hear
evidence of a previous declaration by the prisoner, of ill-will to the
deceased, as “that he would be the death of him,” &c.? or, will they stop
to ask whether it was uttered in a tippling-house, or a drawing-room; by
a ruffian in rags, or in ermine? and yet we are accused of lying in wait
for the respondent, of watching his unguarded and convivial hours, of
wounding the nerve of social intercourse to the quick. We are ministers
of justice, and as such, we know nothing of these delicate distresses,
equally unknown to our forefathers, to the framers of our free and manly
institutions. Their composition was of sterner stuff than this modern,
flimsy, fashionable ware. To their robust constitutions and strong
common-sense, these qualmish megrims, these sickly sensibilities of
modern refinement were happily unknown.

Follow the respondent, then, with the steady and untired step of justice,
from Philadelphia to Annapolis, from Annapolis to Richmond, and back
again to Newcastle. You see a succession of crimes each treading on the
heel, galling the kibe of the other--so connected in time, and place, and
circumstance, and so illustrated by his own confessions, as to leave no
shadow of doubt as to his guilt. You are to take the facts, not, as his
counsel would have you, isolated and dismembered, but embodied; a series
of acts indissolubly linked together, each supporting, each animated by
the vital principle of guilt that pervades and gives life to the whole.
God hath joined them; no man shall or can put them asunder. Carry your
mind back to the state of things in 1800; then advert to the testimony in
the case of Fries. Lewis, Dallas, Tilghman, and _even Rawle_, declaring
that they had never witnessed such a proceeding before; pronouncing the
conduct of the judge, on that occasion, to be altogether novel in the
annals of our criminal jurisprudence. The same spirit pervades his whole
career. But you are warned by the counsel (Mr. Harper) not to tarnish the
laurels of your political victory by an unmanly triumph over a fallen
adversary. He implores the tribute of a sigh for the mournful yew and
funeral cypress that bedecks the hearse of his political reputation.
Dreading the decision of your judgment, your sympathies are enlisted for
his client. An aged patriot, whose head is whitened with the hoar of
threescore and ten years, is presented to your afflicted imaginations:
broken with disease, compelled to employ his few and short intervals
from pain and sickness, to spend the last moments of a life devoted to
a thankless country’s service, in defending himself against a criminal
prosecution. Do we thirst for his blood? yet, even there, English
authorities would bear us out. Do we seek to lead him to Tower Hill? If
his heart will fly in his face, is it we who cast it there? Do we even
ask his disfranchisement? No, sir, we only demand the removal of a man,
whom the very suspicion of such crimes unfits for the high station which
he fills. A man bent with age and infirmity, struggling with misfortune,
is a venerable object, entitled to your sympathy, even although he were
not a patriot. Mine shall never be denied to such a character. But, sir,
mark the difference between Samuel Chase, powerful and protected, and
John Fries, feeble and oppressed. Look at the one lodged in a sumptuous
hotel, partaking of the best cheer, surrounded and supported by every
comfort of life, by a large and respectable circle of friends, indulged
with ample time for his defence, assisted by counsel second to none in
the land, unrestricted in the conduct of their cause. When I give a man
so situated my sympathy, it is not of so jejune a cast as to refuse
itself to the victim of his injustice--a hardy yeoman wrestling with
indigence and persecution--selling his last bit of property to support
a long imprisonment and meet the expenses of this very prosecution; a
soldier of the Revolution, with whom the words “stamp act” and “window
tax” were synonymous with slavery; who, in a moment of political
delirium, perhaps of intoxication, had instinctively raised his hand
against what he deemed an oppressive tax--immured in a dungeon, listening
only to the clanking of fetters; snatched from the bosom of his family,
to whom no doubt he was a kind parent and an affectionate husband--for be
it remembered he was popular and beloved among his neighbors--this man,
caught in the trap of judicial and constructive treason, at which common
sense revolts, laid by the heels, trembling at the charge, ignorant of
the extent of the law, without a friend to comfort and console him, no
counsel in his defence; such a man, so situated, is as much entitled to
my sympathy as any king that ever wore a crown, and he shall have it; he
shall have more, he shall have justice from this honorable Court. Yes,
sir, to my shame I confess, that my sympathy is not of this exclusive
sort. It is not scared by the homely garb of poverty and wretchedness. It
can feel for misfortune, even if it be not sumptuously arrayed.

We are asked to assign any rational motive for the conduct imputed to the
respondent. His object might have been to court the Administration which
he upheld and supported, to recommend himself to the President of the
United States, to obtain the Chief Justiceship. Those who are anxious to
attract the notice and favor of the powers that be, are not apt to put
their light under a bushel. The fulsomeness of sycophants, who always
overact their part, is proverbial. Sir, he might be aspiring to the
Presidency itself, and anxious to engage the favor of the leaders of his
party. Let it be remembered, the triumph of that day was complete, and
the reckoning of this day too remote from probability to be taken into
the account. Here, sir, you have a key to his whole conduct. It becomes
you, then, Mr. President and gentlemen of the Senate, to determine
whether a man whose whole judicial life hath been marked by habitual
outrage upon decorum and duty, too inveterate to give the least hope of
reformation, interwoven and incorporated with his very nature, shall
be arrested in his career, or again let loose upon society, to prey
upon the property, liberty, and life of those who will not rally around
his political standard. We have performed our duty; we have bound the
criminal and dragged him to your altar. The nation expects from you that
award which the evidence and the law requires. It remains for you to
say whether he shall again become the scourge of an exasperated people,
or whether he shall stand as a landmark and a beacon to the present
generation, and a warning to the future, that no talents, however great,
no age, however venerable, no character, however sacred, no connections,
however influential, shall save that man from the justice of his country,
who prostitutes the best gifts of nature and of God, and the power
with which he is invested for the general good, to the low purposes of
an electioneering partisan. We adjure you, on behalf of the House of
Representatives and of all the people of the United States, to exorcise
from our courts the baleful spirit of party, to give an awful memento to
our judges. In the name of the nation, I demand at your hands the award
of justice and of law.


FRIDAY, March 1.

The Court being opened by proclamation, the Managers, accompanied by the
House of Representatives, attended.

The counsel for the respondent also attended.

The consideration of the motion, made yesterday for an alteration of one
of the rules in cases of impeachments, was resumed: Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That in taking the judgment of the Senate upon the articles
of impeachment now depending against Samuel Chase, Esq., the President
of the Senate shall call on each member by his name, and upon each
article, propose the following question, in the manner following: “Mr.
----, how say you; is the respondent, Samuel Chase, guilty or not guilty
of a high crime or misdemeanor, as charged in the ---- article of
impeachment?”

Whereupon, each member shall rise in his place, and answer guilty or not
guilty.

The PRESIDENT rose, and addressing himself to the members of the Court,
said:

Gentlemen: You have heard the evidence and arguments adduced on the trial
of Samuel Chase, impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors: you will now
proceed to pronounce distinctly your judgment on each article.

The Secretary then read the first article of impeachment, as follows:

    ARTICLE 1. That, unmindful of the solemn duties of his office,
    and contrary to the sacred obligation by which he stood bound
    to discharge them “faithfully and impartially, and without
    respect to persons,” the said Samuel Chase, on the trial of
    John Fries, charged with treason, before the circuit court
    of the United States, held for the district of Pennsylvania,
    in the city of Philadelphia, during the months of April and
    May, one thousand eight hundred, whereat the said Samuel Chase
    presided, did, in his judicial capacity, conduct himself in a
    manner highly arbitrary, oppressive, and unjust, viz:

    1. In delivering an opinion, in writing, on the question of
    law, on the construction of which the defence of the accused
    materially depended, tending to prejudice the minds of the jury
    against the case of the said John Fries, the prisoner, before
    counsel had been heard in his defence:

    2. In restricting the counsel for the said Fries from recurring
    to such English authorities as they believed apposite, or from
    citing certain statutes of the United States, which they deemed
    illustrative of the positions upon which they intended to rest
    the defence of their client:

    3. In debarring the prisoner from his constitutional privilege
    of addressing the jury (through his counsel) on the law, as
    well as on the fact, which was to determine his guilt, or
    innocence, and at the same time endeavoring to wrest from the
    jury their indisputable right to hear argument, and determine
    upon the question of law, as well as the question of fact,
    involved in the verdict which they were required to give:

    In consequence of this irregular conduct of the said Samuel
    Chase, as dangerous to our liberties as it is novel to our
    laws and usages, the said John Fries was deprived of the
    right, secured to him by the eighth article amendatory of the
    constitution, and was condemned to death without having been
    heard, by counsel, in his defence, to the disgrace of the
    character of the American bench, in manifest violation of law
    and justice, and in open contempt of the rights of juries, on
    which ultimately rest the liberty and safety of the American
    people.

When the PRESIDENT took the opinion of the members of the Court
respectively, in the form following:

“Mr. ----, how say you; is the respondent, Samuel Chase, guilty or not
guilty of a high crime or misdemeanor, as charged in the first article
of impeachment?”

Those who pronounced guilty, are:

    Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit,
    Ellery, Franklin, Howland, Logan, Maclay, Moore, Stone, Sumter,
    Worthington, and Wright--16.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Bayard, Bradley, Dayton, Gaillard, Giles,
    Hillhouse, Jackson, Mitchill, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer,
    Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of
    Vermont, Tracy, White--18.

The second article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 2. That, prompted by a similar spirit of persecution and
    injustice, at a circuit court of the United States, held at
    Richmond, in the month of May, one thousand eight hundred,
    for the district of Virginia, whereat the said Samuel Chase
    presided, and before which a certain James Thompson Callender
    was arraigned for a libel on John Adams, then President of the
    United States, the said Samuel Chase, with intent to oppress
    and procure the conviction of the said Callender, did overrule
    the objection of John Basset, one of the jury, who wished to
    be excused from serving on the said trial because he had made
    up his mind as to the publication from which the words charged
    to be libellous in the indictment were extracted; and the said
    Basset was accordingly sworn and did serve on the said jury, by
    whose verdict the prisoner was subsequently convicted.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Cocke, Condit, Ellery, Giles,
    Howland, Maclay, Moore, and Sumter--10.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Bayard, Bradley, Brown, Dayton,
    Franklin, Gaillard, Hillhouse, Jackson, Logan, Mitchill,
    Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New
    York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Stone, Tracy, White,
    Worthington, and Wright--24.

The third article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 3. That, with intent to oppress and procure the conviction
    of the prisoner, the evidence of John Taylor, a material
    witness on behalf of the aforesaid Callender, was not permitted
    by the said Samuel Chase to be given in, on pretence that the
    said witness could not prove the truth of the whole of one of
    the charges contained in the indictment, although the said
    charge embraced more than one fact.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit,
    Ellery, Franklin, Giles, Howland, Jackson, Logan, Maclay,
    Moore, Smith of Maryland, Sumter, Worthington, and Wright--18.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Bayard, Bradley, Dayton, Gaillard, Hillhouse,
    Mitchill, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Smith of New York, Smith
    of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Stone, Tracy, and White--16.

The fourth article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 4. That the conduct of the said Samuel Chase was marked,
    during the whole course of the said trial, by manifest
    injustice, partiality, and intemperance; viz:

    1. In compelling the prisoner’s counsel to reduce to writing,
    and submit to the inspection of the Court, for their admission
    or rejection, all questions which the said counsel meant to
    propound to the above-named John Taylor, the witness:

    2. In refusing to postpone the trial, although an affidavit was
    regularly filed, stating the absence of material witnesses on
    behalf of the accused; and although it was manifest, that, with
    the utmost diligence, the attendance of such witnesses could
    not have been procured at that term:

    3. In the use of unusual, rude, and contemptuous expressions
    towards the prisoner’s counsel; and in falsely insinuating that
    they wished to excite the public fears and indignation, and to
    produce that insubordination to law to which the conduct of the
    judge did, at the same time, manifestly tend:

    4. In repeated and vexatious interruptions of the said counsel,
    on the part of the said judge, which at length induced them
    to abandon their cause and their client, who was thereupon
    convicted and condemned to fine and imprisonment:

    5. In an indecent solicitude manifested by the said Samuel
    Chase for the conviction of the accused, unbecoming even a
    public prosecutor, but highly disgraceful to the character of a
    judge, as it was subversive of justice.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Anderson, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit, Ellery,
    Franklin, Giles, Howland, Jackson, Logan, Maclay, Moore, Smith
    of Maryland, Stone, Sumter, Worthington, and Wright--18.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Baldwin, Bayard, Bradley, Dayton, Gaillard,
    Hillhouse, Mitchill, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Smith of New
    York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Tracy, and White--16.

The fifth article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 5. And whereas it is provided by the act of Congress,
    passed on the 24th day of September, 1789, entitled “An act to
    establish the judicial courts of the United States,” that for
    any crime or offence against the United States, the offender
    may be arrested, imprisoned, or bailed, agreeably to the
    usual mode of process in the State, where such offender may
    be found: and whereas it is provided by the laws of Virginia,
    that upon presentment by any grand jury of an offence not
    capital, the Court shall order the clerk to issue a summons
    against the person or persons offending, to appear and answer
    such presentment at the next court; yet the said Samuel Chase
    did, at the court aforesaid, award a capias against the body
    of the said James Thompson Callender, indicted for an offence
    not capital, whereupon the said Callender was arrested and
    committed to close custody, contrary to law in that case made
    and provided.

All the members pronounced not guilty on this article.

The sixth article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 6. And whereas it is provided by the 34th section of the
    aforesaid act, entitled “An act to establish the judicial
    courts of the United States,” that the laws of the several
    States, except where the constitution, treaties, or statutes
    of the United States shall otherwise require or provide, shall
    be regarded as the rules of decision in trials at common law,
    in the courts of the United States, in cases where they apply;
    and whereas by the laws of Virginia it is provided, that in
    cases not capital, the offender shall not be held to answer any
    presentment of a grand jury until the court next succeeding
    that during which such presentment shall have been made, yet
    the said Samuel Chase, with intent to oppress and procure the
    conviction of the said James Thompson Callender, did, at the
    court aforesaid, rule and adjudge the said Callender to trial
    during the term at which he, the said Callender, was presented
    and indicted, contrary to law in that case made and provided.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Breckenridge, Cocke, Howland, and Maclay--4.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Bayard, Bradley, Brown,
    Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Franklin, Gaillard, Giles, Hillhouse,
    Jackson, Logan, Mitchill, Moore, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer,
    Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Ohio, Smith
    of Vermont, Stone, Sumter, Tracy, White, Worthington, and
    Wright--30.

The seventh article was read by the Secretary, as follows:

    ART. 7. That at a circuit court of the United States, for the
    district of Delaware, held at Newcastle, in the month of June,
    one thousand eight hundred, whereat the said Samuel Chase
    presided--the said Samuel Chase, disregarding the duties of his
    office, did descend from the dignity of a judge and stoop to
    the level of an informer, by refusing to discharge the grand
    jury, although entreated by several of the said jury so to do,
    and after the said grand jury had regularly declared, through
    their foreman, that they had found no bills of indictment,
    nor had any presentments to make, by observing to the said
    grand jury, that he, the said Samuel Chase, understood
    “that a highly seditious temper had manifested itself in
    the State of Delaware, among a certain class of people,
    particularly in Newcastle county, and more especially in the
    town of Wilmington, where lived a most seditious printer,
    unrestrained by any principle of virtue, and regardless
    of social order--that the name of this printer was”--but
    checking himself, as if sensible of the indecorum which he
    was committing, added, “that it might be assuming too much to
    mention the name of this person, but it becomes your duty,
    gentlemen, to inquire diligently into this matter,” and that
    with intention to procure the prosecution of the printer in
    question, the said Samuel Chase did, moreover, authoritatively
    enjoin on the District Attorney of the United States the
    necessity of procuring a file of the papers to which he
    alluded, (and which were understood to be those published under
    the title of “Mirror of the Times and General Advertiser,”)
    and by a strict examination of them to find some passage which
    might furnish the groundwork of a prosecution against the
    printer of the said paper; thereby degrading his high judicial
    functions, and tending to impair the public confidence in, and
    respect for, the tribunals of justice, so essential to the
    general welfare.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Breckenridge, Cocke, Franklin, Howland, Jackson,
    Maclay, Smith of Maryland, Stone, Sumter, and Wright--10.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Anderson, Baldwin, Bayard, Bradley, Brown,
    Condit, Dayton, Ellery, Gaillard, Giles, Hillhouse, Logan,
    Mitchill, Moore, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Smith of New
    York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Tracy, White, and
    Worthington--24.

The eighth article was read by the Secretary as follows:

    ART. 8. And whereas mutual respect and confidence between the
    Government of the United States and those of the individual
    States, and between the people and those Governments,
    respectively, are highly conducive to that public harmony,
    without which there can be no public happiness, yet the said
    Samuel Chase, disregarding the duties and dignity of his
    judicial character, did, at a circuit court, for the district
    of Maryland, held at Baltimore, in the month of May, one
    thousand eight hundred and three, pervert his official right
    and duty to address the grand jury then and there assembled,
    on the matters coming within the province of the said jury,
    for the purpose of delivering to the said grand jury an
    intemperate and inflammatory political harangue, with intent
    to excite the fears and resentment of the said grand jury, and
    of the good people of Maryland, against their State government
    and constitution--a conduct highly censurable in any, but
    peculiarly indecent and unbecoming in a judge of the Supreme
    Court of the United States; and, moreover, that the said
    Samuel Chase, then and there, under pretence of exercising his
    judicial right to address the said grand jury, as aforesaid,
    did, in a manner highly unwarrantable, endeavor to excite
    the odium of the said grand jury, and of the good people of
    Maryland, against the Government of the United States, by
    delivering opinions, which, even if the judicial authority were
    competent to their expression, on a suitable occasion and in
    a proper manner, were at that time, and as delivered by him,
    highly indecent, extra-judicial, and tending to prostrate the
    high judicial character with which he was invested, to the low
    purpose of an electioneering partisan.

Those who pronounced guilty on this article, are:

    Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Breckenridge, Brown, Cocke, Condit,
    Ellery, Franklin, Giles, Howland, Jackson, Logan, Maclay,
    Moore, Smith of Maryland, Stone, Sumter, Worthington, and
    Wright--19.

Those who pronounced not guilty, are:

    Messrs. Adams, Bayard, Bradley, Dayton, Gaillard, Hillhouse,
    Mitchill, Olcott, Pickering, Plumer, Smith of New York, Smith
    of Ohio, Smith of Vermont, Tracy, and White--15.

The PRESIDENT rose and said, on the first article, sixteen gentlemen
have pronounced guilty, and eighteen not guilty; on the second article,
ten have said guilty, and twenty-four not guilty; on the third article,
eighteen have said guilty, and sixteen not guilty; on the fourth article,
eighteen have said guilty, and sixteen not guilty; on the fifth article,
there is a unanimous vote of not guilty; on the sixth article, four have
said guilty, and thirty not guilty; on the seventh article, ten have said
guilty, and twenty-four not guilty; and on the eighth article, nineteen
have said guilty, and fifteen not guilty.

Hence, it appears that there is not a constitutional majority of votes
finding Samuel Chase, Esq., guilty, on any one article. It, therefore,
becomes my duty to declare that Samuel Chase, Esq., stands acquitted of
all the articles exhibited by the House of Representatives against him.

Whereupon the Court adjourned without day.




EIGHTH CONGRESS--SECOND SESSION.

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.


MONDAY, November 5, 1804

This being the day appointed by law for the meeting of the present
Session, the following members of the House of Representatives appeared
and took their seats, to wit:

    _From New Hampshire_--Silas Betton, Clifton Claggett, David
    Hough, and Samuel Tenney.

    _From Massachusetts_--Jacob Crowninshield, Thomas Dwight, Nahum
    Mitchell, Ebenezer Seaver, William Stedman, Joseph B. Varnum,
    and Lemuel Williams.

    _From Rhode Island_--Nehemiah Knight and Joseph Stanton.

    _From Connecticut_--John Davenport and John Cotton Smith.

    _From Vermont_--William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, James
    Elliot, and Gideon Olin.

    _From New York_--Gaylord Griswold, Josiah Hasbrouck, Henry
    W. Livingston, Andrew McCord, Samuel L. Mitchill, Beriah
    Palmer, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons, David Thomas, Philip Van
    Cortlandt, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, and Daniel C. Verplanck.

    _From New Jersey_--Adam Boyd, Ebenezer Elmer, James Sloan, and
    Henry Southard.

    _From Pennsylvania_--Isaac Anderson, David Bard, Joseph Clay,
    Frederick Conrad, William Findlay, Joseph Heister, Michael
    Leib, John Rea, Jacob Richards, John Smilie, John Stewart, and
    John Whitehill.

    _From Maryland_--John Archer, Wm. McCreery, Nicholas R. Moore,
    and Thomas Plater.

    _From Virginia_--Thomas Claiborne, John Dawson, John W. Eppes,
    Thomas Griffin, David Holmes, John G. Jackson, Joseph Lewis,
    jun., Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., John Randolph, Thomas
    M. Randolph, John Smith, James Stephenson, and Philip R.
    Thompson.

    _From Kentucky_--George Michael Bedinger, John Boyle, and
    Thomas Sanford.

    _From North Carolina_--Willis Alston, jun., William Blackledge,
    James Gillespie, James Holland, William Kennedy, Nathaniel
    Macon, (Speaker,) Richard Stanford, and Joseph Winston.

    _From Tennessee_--George W. Campbell, William Dickson, and John
    Rhea.

    _From South Carolina_--John B. Earle.

    _From Georgia_--Peter Early and David Meriwether.

    _From Ohio_--Jeremiah Morrow.

    _Delegate from the Mississippi Territory_--William Lattimore.

Several new members, to wit: from Massachusetts, SIMON LARNED, returned
to serve in this House as a member for the said State, in the room of
TOMPSON J. SKINNER, who has resigned his seat; from New York, SAMUEL
RIKER, returned to serve as a member for the said State, in the room of
JOHN SMITH, appointed a Senator of the United States; and from Virginia,
CHRISTOPHER CLARK, returned to serve as a member for the said State, in
the room of JOHN TRIGG, deceased; appeared, produced their credentials,
and took their seats in the House; the oath to support the Constitution
of the United States being first administered to them by Mr. SPEAKER,
according to law.

And a quorum, consisting of a majority of the whole number, being present,

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate, to inform them that a
quorum of this House is assembled, and ready to proceed to business; and
that the Clerk of this House do go with the said message.

The following committees were appointed pursuant to the standing rules
and orders of the House, viz:

_Committee of Elections._--Mr. FINDLAY, Mr. VARNUM, Mr. LIVINGSTON, Mr.
KENNEDY, Mr. EPPES, Mr. CLAGGETT, and Mr. ELMER.

_Committee of Ways and Means._--Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, Mr. JOSEPH CLAY, Mr.
GAYLORD GRISWOLD, Mr. BOYLE, Mr. DAVENPORT, Mr. NICHOLAS R. MOORE, and
Mr. MERIWETHER.

_Committee of Commerce and Manufactures._--Mr. SAMUEL L. MITCHILL, Mr.
CROWNINSHIELD, Mr. MCCREERY, Mr. LEIB, Mr. NEWTON, Mr. EARLY, and Mr.
CHITTENDEN.

_Committee of Claims._--Mr. JOHN COTTON SMITH, Mr. HOLMES, Mr. PLATER,
Mr. CHAMBERLIN, Mr. Bedinger, Mr. STANFORD, and Mr. STANTON.

_Committee of Revisal and Unfinished Business._--Mr. TENNEY, Mr. DICKSON,
and Mr. EARLE.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Governor of the State
of Maryland, enclosing a certificate of the election of ROGER NELSON, to
serve in this House as a member for the said State, in the room of DANIEL
HEISTER, deceased; which was referred to the Committee of Elections.


TUESDAY, November 6.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, MANASSEH CUTLER; from
Connecticut, SAMUEL W. DANA and ROGER GRISWOLD; from New Jersey, JAMES
MOTT; from Pennsylvania, JOHN A. HANNA, JOHN B. C. LUCAS, and ISAAC VAN
HORNE; from Maryland, JOHN CAMPBELL; from Virginia, JOHN CLOPTON; and
from South Carolina, THOMAS LOWNDES, appeared, and took their seats in
the House.

Another new member, to wit: ROGER NELSON, from Maryland, returned to
serve in this House as a member for the said State, in the room of DANIEL
HEISTER, deceased, appeared, produced his credentials, was qualified, and
took his seat in the House.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH moved for the appointment of a committee on the part of
the House to join a committee of the Senate to wait on the PRESIDENT and
inform him that a quorum of both Houses is formed, and ready to receive
his communications.

Mr. DANA inquired if a quorum of the Senate was formed? That
circumstance, he thought, ought to be ascertained before the House
adopted the gentleman’s resolution.

Mr. RANDOLPH did not know whether or no the Senate had formed a quorum,
but he saw no objection on that account to proceeding with their own
business. He, however, had understood that the Senate would form a quorum
this day.

The resolution was carried, and Messrs. J. RANDOLPH and R. GRISWOLD
appointed the committee.


WEDNESDAY, November 7.

Several other members, to wit: from Maryland, JOSEPH H. NICHOLSON; from
Virginia, WALTER JONES; from South Carolina, THOMAS MOORE; and from
Georgia, JOSEPH BRYAN, appeared, and took their seats in the House.

Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, from the joint committee appointed to wait on the
President of the United States, and inform him that a quorum of the
two Houses is assembled, reported that the committee had performed
that service, and that the President signified to them he would make a
communication to this House, in writing, to-morrow at twelve o’clock.


THURSDAY, November 8.

Several other members, to wit: from New Hampshire, SAMUEL HUNT; from
Massachusetts, SAMUEL TAGGART; from Connecticut, SIMEON BALDWIN and
CALVIN GODDARD; and from North Carolina, SAMUEL D. PURVIANCE, appeared,
and took their seats in the House.

A Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, by Mr.
BURWELL, his Secretary, as follows:

    _Mr. Speaker_: I am directed to hand you a communication, in
    writing, from the PRESIDENT to the two Houses of Congress.

The communication was read, and, together with the documents accompanying
the same, referred to the Committee of the whole House on the state
of the Union. [See Senate proceedings of this date, page 164, for the
Message.]


_Sword to Decatur._

Mr. J. CLAY moved the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to present, in the name of Congress, to Captain
    Stephen Decatur, a sword, of the value of ---- dollars, and
    to each of the officers and crew of the United States ketch
    Intrepid, ---- months’ pay, as a testimony of the high sense
    entertained by Congress of the gallantry, good conduct, and
    services, of Captain Decatur, the officers, and crew, of the
    said ketch, in attacking and destroying a Tripolitan frigate,
    of forty-four guns, late the United States frigate Philadelphia.

_Ordered_, That the said motion be referred to a Committee of the Whole
to-morrow.


FRIDAY, November 9.

Two other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, WILLIAM EUSTIS; and from
Pennsylvania, ROBERT BROWN, appeared, and took their seats in the House.


_Frigate Philadelphia._

Mr. J. CLAY’s motion relative to Captain Decatur and the officers and
crew of the ketch Intrepid, was taken up in Committee of the Whole.

On motion of Mr. CLAY, the resolution was altered, by striking out after
the word “sword,” the words “the value of ---- dollars,” and filling up
the other blank with the word “two,” thereby giving the officers and crew
two months’ pay.

Mr. C., with a view of showing the propriety of the measure, read
extracts of letters written by Commodore Preble and Lieutenant Decatur,
which had been obtained from the Secretary of the Navy; they contained an
account of the circumstances attending this honorable exploit, which have
heretofore been printed in the public newspapers.

The committee rose and reported the resolution as amended.

Mr. GRISWOLD presumed the object of this step was to pay a tribute of
respect to those brave men who had so gallantly achieved this glorious
and dangerous enterprise. He wished to do this in a manner the most
honorable and notorious, and perhaps the best course would be to
obtain from the Head of the Navy Department, a list of the names of
the officers and the number of the crew, together with a detail of the
circumstances attending the event. With this view, he moved to postpone
the consideration of the resolution reported by the Committee of the
Whole, till to-morrow, in order to introduce a resolution to this effect:

    _Resolved_, That the Secretary of the Navy be directed to
    communicate to this House the name of the officers and the
    number of the men employed in the destruction of the frigate
    Philadelphia in the harbor of Tripoli, together with a
    statement of the circumstances attending that event.

The postponement was agreed to without opposition, and the resolution of
Mr. GRISWOLD was adopted, with a small variation, suggested by Mr. J.
RANDOLPH, and acquiesced in by the mover, to wit: “That the President of
the United States be requested to cause to be laid before this House,”
etc.

Mr. J. CLAY and Mr. T. M. RANDOLPH were appointed a committee to wait on
the PRESIDENT and communicate the request of the House.


MONDAY, November 12.

Several other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, PELEG WADSWORTH; from
New Jersey, WILLIAM HELMS; from Delaware, CÆSAR A. RODNEY; from Virginia,
MATTHEW CLAY; from North Carolina, MARMADUKE WILLIAMS and THOMAS WYNES;
and from South Carolina, LEVI CASEY and RICHARD WINN, appeared, and took
their seats in the House.


_British Treaty._

Mr. J. RANDOLPH informed the House that the Committee of Ways and
Means had received a communication from the Treasury Department,
stating that the appropriation of $50,000, for carrying into effect
the seventh article of the British Treaty, had not been sufficient to
discharge the second instalment upon all the awards made in pursuance
thereof, and suggesting the propriety of making, as early as possible, a
further appropriation for that object. The Secretary of State estimated
the amount unpaid at $60,000, and that, in order to prevent any
disappointment, it would be eligible to make the appropriation $70,000.
Mr. R. hereupon moved that the Committee of Ways and Means have leave to
report a bill on this subject. Leave being granted,

Mr. J. R. reported a bill accordingly, which was read a first and second
time, and referred to a Committee of the Whole to-morrow.


TUESDAY, November 13.

Two other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, RICHARD CUTTS; and from
South Carolina, WILLIAM BUTLER, appeared, and took their seats in the
House.

No quorum being present, the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 14.

Another member, to wit, PHANUEL BISHOP, from Massachusetts, appeared, and
took his seat in the House.


THURSDAY, November 15.

Two other members, to wit: from Massachusetts, SAMUEL THATCHER; and from
Pennsylvania, ANDREW GREGG, appeared, and took their seats in the House.

A Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, as
follows:

    _To the House of Representatives of the United States_:

    Agreeably to your resolution of the ninth instant, I now lay
    before you a statement of the circumstances attending the
    destruction of the frigate Philadelphia, with the names of the
    officers and the number of men employed on the occasion; to
    which I have to add, that Lieutenant Decatur was, thereupon,
    advanced to be a Captain in the Navy of the United States.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    NOV. 15, 1804.

The said Message and the papers referred to therein, were read, and
ordered to lie on the table.


MONDAY, November 19.


_Sword to Decatur._

The House proceeded to consider the resolution reported, on the ninth
instant, from the Committee of the whole House, to whom was referred a
motion relative “to Captain Stephen Decatur, the officers, and crew, of
the United States ketch Intrepid;” and the said resolution being twice
read, and amended at the Clerk’s table, was agreed to by the House, as
follows:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled_, That the
    President of the United States be requested to present, in
    the name of Congress, to Captain Stephen Decatur, a sword;
    and to each of the officers and crew of the United States
    ketch Intrepid, two months’ pay, as a testimony of the high
    sense entertained by Congress of the gallantry, good conduct,
    and services of Captain Decatur, the officers, and crew, of
    the said ketch, in attacking, in the harbor of Tripoli, and
    destroying a Tripolitan frigate of forty-four guns.

_Ordered_, That the said resolution be engrossed, and read the third time
to-day.


TUESDAY, November 20.

Another member, to wit, GEORGE TIBBITS, from New York, appeared, and took
his seat in the House.


WEDNESDAY, November 21.


_Louisiana Lead Mines._

The engrossed resolution authorizing the President to appoint an
agent, who shall be instructed to collect all the material information
respecting the actual condition, occupancy, and title of the lead mines
in Louisiana, was taken up on its third reading.

Mr. LUCAS entertained a doubt as to the propriety of this measure;
indeed, the gentleman from New York (Mr. MITCHILL) seemed to admit
that it was superfluous, for he had said that the President, under
proper authority, had already appointed agents to explore generally
the Territory of Louisiana; that they have been some time engaged in
that service at the Missouri, Arkansas, Red River, and about Detroit,
and indeed Major Lewis had been some time in St. Louis, a post in the
neighborhood of these very lead mines, and from his known enterprise and
minute inquiries, there was good reason for believing that the subject
which was the object of the proposed resolution, would be narrated in his
general report of discoveries. But in addition to this expectation, the
document accompanying the President’s Message sheds considerable light.
The information as to the condition of the lead mines, their number,
names, and value, were explained, and as he had heard no gentleman
suggest a doubt as to the accuracy of the narrative, he was inclined to
give it full credit, from the general character of the gentleman who
made the communication, and the particular knowledge he must necessarily
have acquired by a long residence in the country. From this view of the
subject he was compelled to acknowledge that he had altered his idea of
the resolution, and could not now vote in its favor.

Mr. MITCHILL had hoped that the gentleman from Pennsylvania, after the
explanation of yesterday, would consent to the resolution; he would now
add but a few explanatory words. The object of the resolution was simply
to appoint an agent to inquire into the occupancy and titles of the
present holders and claimants; this required a civilian versed in the
municipal laws of the nations who had heretofore held that territory;
not a natural historian, or mineralogist, not one who was acquainted
with the art of mining, or smelting and testing ores. Neither did Mr. M.
believe it would be necessary to send the agent to the mines themselves,
but to the place where the deeds and conveyances constituting the
title-papers of the proprietors, or pretended claimants, are recorded or
preserved. Whether these were at New Orleans, or what other place, he
did not know. As to the expense, it was not likely to exceed $1,000 or
$2,000, even if the agent were sent from this city; but he imagined if
the business could be as well conducted by the appointment of an agent
in Louisiana, the President would instruct the Governor how to act. It
might be seen too, from the words of the resolution, that it was a mere
temporary employment, not likely to be of longer duration than three or
four months, for the report is instructed to be made before the next
meeting of Congress. Mr. M. concluded, that if Mr. LUCAS would reconcile
himself to vote for the present motion upon this explanation, and
should he hereafter desire a more extensive examination into the actual
circumstances of the newly-acquired Territory, he might rely upon his
earnest co-operation.

Mr. L. observed in reply, that Louisiana had been held alternately by
three or four nations: each of which in sequence had granted titles
to more or less of the lands in question. An examination into those
titles would at this time excite a high degree of sensibility among the
inhabitants, who, he thought, ought in their youthful state to be treated
by Congress with tenderness and delicacy. The titles were various,
some derived from the Governors of the country, some from commanders
of posts. Many of the latter he believed might be considered by the
agent illegal; especially as he had learned that the commander of St.
Louis, in North Louisiana, held paramount authority over the subordinate
posts, and that without his approbation the lands so granted would not
be allowed; yet these persons held under such title, and by occupancy
and improvement consider themselves the _bona fide_ proprietors of the
lands. He feared that the inquiry intended by the resolution might create
great dissatisfaction, while a postponement for the present could do no
possible evil.

Mr. EARLY said, if Mr. L. had made a correct statement of the condition
in which the titles in that country really stood, and he had no reason
to doubt it, it would operate as the strongest reason on his mind to
pass the resolution: though it would be perceived that the agency to
be given on the present occasion extended no farther than to the lead
mines. The gentleman, Mr. L., had yesterday mistaken his friend, Mr.
MITCHILL’s object, supposing a general agency was intended to be raised.
He had mistaken him again to-day, by thinking the agent was to go into
the Territory of Louisiana to decide upon the titles he might have an
opportunity of examining. This was not the case. He was merely to inquire
into the actual condition of the lead mines, the occupancy and title,
for the information of Congress. We are not going to send a Board of
Commissioners, or a Judiciary Establishment, for the purpose of hearing
and determining upon the claims set up, but to procure for ourselves that
information which will enable the Government to decide, without their
instrumentality. If the gentleman (Mr. L.) views the subject in this
point of light, he will find it freed from his objection.

The question was now put, and the resolution passed, 74 members voting in
its favor.


THURSDAY, November 22.

Two other members, to wit: PETERSON GOODWYN and EDWIN GRAY, from
Virginia, appeared and took their seats in the House.


MONDAY, November 26.

_Preservation of Peace._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for
the more effectual preservation of peace in the ports and harbors of the
United States, and in waters under their jurisdiction.

The first section authorizes the President and other proper officers to
call in the aid of the militia, regular troops, or armed vessels, to
execute civil process upon offenders who take refuge on board foreign
armed vessels.

On motion of Mr. NICHOLSON, any commanding officer refusing to obey a
requisition to this effect was subjected to a fine not exceeding five
thousand dollars.


_Remission of Duties._

Mr. RANDOLPH called for the order of the day on the report of the
Committee of Ways and Means respecting the remission of duties on
books imported for the use of colleges and seminaries of learning--the
resolution declaring it to be inexpedient to allow the same.

The House taking the subject into consideration--

Mr. J. RANDOLPH observed that the Constitution of the United States was
a grant of limited powers for general objects, which Congress had no
right to exceed, although they might think the powers too limited. This
position he considered as of primary importance. Its leading feature was
an abhorrence of exclusive privileges; it might be called the key to that
instrument; every thing which rose up in the shape of privilege, was
repressed in a peculiar manner, whether it related to orders or classes
of men. Whenever they have touched the doctrine of privilege, the framers
of that instrument, and the people of the United States adopting it, have
been careful that nothing should be got by inference, or construction;
the privileges of this House even have been precisely defined, and
nothing is left for its extension, whatever may be the wishes or
disposition of its members. The principle that this constitution is
but a limited grant of power occurs, if not directly, yet frequently
and effectually, so that it cannot be mistaken. On the privilege asked
for, to permit colleges and universities to import their books free of
impost, we refer to the eighth section of the first article, where it
is declared that Congress shall have power to levy and collect taxes,
duties, imposts and excises; but all duties, imposts and excises, shall
be uniform throughout the United States. The impost shall be uniform. It
is a lamentable fact, but nevertheless it is a fact, and cannot be too
much dwelt and insisted upon, nor too well known, that the ambiguity of
language gives our constitution that character which leaves it in the
power of civilians to say it means any thing or nothing. Whatever may
have been said on other points, I think in this instance the language is
so definite that it cannot possibly be mistaken. They shall be uniform,
that is to say, there shall be but one quantum, one mode of collecting,
and one manner; there shall not be two measures to mete with. If Congress
undertake to exempt one class of people from the payment of the impost,
they may exempt others also. If they begin with colleges and universities
for the advancement of learning, surely they may go on to exempt the
clergy and congregation for the advancement of religion; they may exempt
their own members. Indeed, it cannot be seen where they are to stop,
having once overleaped the constitutional barrier and entered on the wide
field of privilege. The duties must be uniform! Nobody can be exempted:
the President, if he chooses to import books, must pay the duty as well
as any private citizen. In this country we have no privileged class,
all must fare alike, every man must bend to the law, and the tax must be
uniform whether on land or books.

Mr. FINDLAY observed, that in addition to the constitutional objections
urged, he had others on the ground of expediency. The country colleges
and seminaries whose funds were small, had seldom or never an opportunity
of importing books; they were happy to receive them in the country
as donations, or by cheap editions; they would therefore receive no
corresponding accommodation, and yet they were more useful and their
use more universally felt than those called higher institutions, which
claim to be exempted from paying impost. There are only a few of the
well-endowed academies that can afford to procure foreign books, and when
they have them, their circulation is extremely confined; to say nothing
more, these reasons would engage me to support the resolution.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD.--The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH) must have
misunderstood me when he supposed I objected to the report because the
committee had assigned no reason for the resolution: I mentioned the
circumstance merely to show that we ought not then to decide. With
respect to the constitutional objection he has set up, I acknowledge
it is new to me. Such an inquiry may be of great weight, but it does
not appear so to me. The paragraph quoted from the eighth section of
the first article, “that Congress shall have power to levy and collect
taxes,” has never struck me in the way it has that gentleman. The words
are, “levy and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises;” but it drops
the word _taxes_, it being settled in another part of the constitution,
and declares that duties, imposts, and excises shall be uniform. The
one speaks of direct taxes, the other of indirect--meaning that if an
indirect tax is laid, it shall be uniform. No one State is to have an
excise laid upon its inhabitants unless it extends to the citizens of
every other: one part is not to be excised and another excused. This has
always been the construction of that section of the constitution till
the present moment, and I think it the true one. It is now said that
Congress can only promote science and literature in one way. Why, have
not Congress made grants of lands to promote those objects in the Western
country? They have. I believe the power of Congress adequate to promote
literature in the way applied for; and it has been frequently the case
that, even after duties have been paid into the Treasury upon the uniform
system, yet individuals have had those duties returned. I do not want to
detain the House; but I am well persuaded that the constitution forms no
impediment, and the expediency must be apparent.

Mr. J. CLAY said he was one of the committee, and had agreed to the
report. Since reasons had been called for, he would in a few words assign
those which influenced him. The gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. DANA)
mistakes in thinking that a denial to exempt books from impost is a tax
on literary institutions, and therefore not uniform, as the constitution
requires all imposts should be; but he did not make his stand on the
ground of the constitution--he rested the question upon its expediency.
Giving literary institutions the privilege of exemption from imposts
would open a wide door for fraud: we should soon have them importing
books for sale duty free, rivalling the booksellers, who are subjected
to the payment of impost, and vending them in every street and avenue of
the nation. But why privilege colleges and universities to accommodate
the rich; for we may believe that the rich, and the children of the rich,
are the only persons who have access to these collections? The poor have
little leisure and less opportunity to improve the advantage which even
_neighborhood_ would give them to peruse works of the kind alluded to;
and sure it would be thought unjust to tax their pittance of imported
articles, in order to enable gentlemen to read the classic authors, or
the sublime and beautiful of the modern writers.

Mr. FINDLAY spoke of colleges, not of universities. We have three
in Pennsylvania--one of them, to be sure, has also the title of
university--but two of them have not funds to import books on their own
account. It is only rich institutions that have this advantage: the
poorer class of seminaries buy of booksellers, and pay them the impost as
well as their retail profit. Indeed, this remission of duties will rather
tend to create disgust than give satisfaction; and those seminaries which
have large collections of books would be induced to sell them at their
present price in order to procure new ones cheaper, as they have had to
pay the duty on the former, but would have none to pay upon those they
should hereafter import.

The question being called for, it was put on agreeing to the report of
the Committee of the Whole, that it is inexpedient to remit the duty on
books, and carried in the affirmative--seventy-nine members voting in the
affirmative.

The House then adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, November 28.

_Potomac River._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
authorizing the corporation of Georgetown to make a dam or causeway from
Mason’s Island to the western shore of the river Potomac.

Mr. MACON (Speaker) moved to strike out the first section of the bill,
with a view of trying its merits.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH seconded the motion of his respectable friend, (the
Speaker.) The river Potomac was the joint property of the States of
Maryland and Virginia under compact between those States. This property,
at least on the part of Virginia, had never been relinquished. Congress,
in his conception, had no right to pass the law in question; but if they
had, there was another objection. The corporation of Georgetown were
empowered to lay a tax which would be unequal and oppressive, since the
property on which it was to be levied would not be equally benefited by
deepening the harbor, supposing that effect to be accomplished. He hoped
a prompt rejection of the bill would serve as a general notice to the
inhabitants of the District to desist from their daily and frivolous
applications to Congress, to the great obstruction of the public business.

Mr. SMILIE understood there was a rival interest between the towns of
Alexandria and Georgetown, and as this rivalry had been exhibited on many
former occasions, he deemed it proper, before they passed any bill for
the encouragement of either place, that the parties should be obliged
to publish their intentions some weeks before the application, that if
there were any objections to the measure contemplated, they might be
before the House at the same time. He stated this merely as a ground of
postponement, not saying whether he was in favor or against the measure.

Mr. GREGG thought the House bound to legislate for these people, until
they relinquished the claim to the jurisdiction, either by authorizing
them to legislate for themselves, or retroceding them to the States to
which they originally belonged. He approved of the idea of publishing, as
expressed by his colleague, (Mr. SMILIE,) which he considered absolutely
necessary. If Alexandria were opposed to the bill, it is probable they
would have sent in a memorial on the subject before this time; their not
having done so inclined him to believe that they were satisfied that the
measure should go into operation. He did not think the bill perfect, but
nevertheless he should not oppose its progress.

Mr. LEWIS said the landholders of Georgetown had very generally signed
the petition to Congress. And no person out of the walls of this House
gave it opposition. The people of Alexandria were content, and the owner
of the island and the west shore of the river was the person most likely
to be affected, yet he had given it his hearty assent. He was well
persuaded that no injury would be done to the navigation of the Eastern
branch, or to the port of Alexandria; if, therefore, they could render a
benefit to Georgetown, without injuring any other property, he trusted
the House would agree to the bill.

Mr. SLOAN felt interested in the result of this measure. The people here
have nobody to look to but Congress to make legislative provision for
their well-being; he therefore considered it a duty to attend to their
desires; but he wished the applicants to give notice of their intentions,
in order that any person conceiving himself likely to be aggrieved should
have an opportunity of being heard. This was the usual course pursued in
the State where he resided.

Mr. CLAIBORNE was by no means satisfied that the removal of the mud bank
would do no injury to the Eastern branch and to Alexandria.

Mr. NELSON said that on a question so important to the upper parts of
Maryland and Virginia, he could not refrain from stating some reasons in
favor of the measure, and against the motion of the Speaker, which was
intended to destroy the bill. It had been urged that the sediment which
now obstructed the navigation to Georgetown, if set afloat by increasing
the current and volume of water across it, would impede the navigation of
the Eastern branch or fill up the harbor of Alexandria. Those who would
take a view of the Eastern branch would be convinced it could make no
deposit there, it being intercepted or turned aside by the point which
projected into the Potomac; and as the water of the Eastern branch was
more rapid than the Potomac, the breadth of the latter being much wider
than the former, there certainly was no danger to be apprehended in that
quarter. As to Alexandria, it was not to be supposed that the solid
mass of sediment was to be taken off the bar at once and lodged in that
harbor; the probability was, it would remove gradually and deposit at the
eddy on each side of the river, while the union of the Eastern branch
with the Potomac would increase the celerity of the current and carry it
far below Alexandria.

The compact mentioned by the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH)
between the States of Maryland and Virginia, he acknowledged to exist;
but as the measure contemplated the improvement of the navigation of the
Potomac, instead of obstructing it, the right of each State to the free
navigation thereof remained unimpaired. He imagined that the inhabitants
of Alexandria and the citizens of Virginia wished success to the measure.
He knew his constituents had it much at heart, knowing that a choice of
markets is a great accommodation to farmers; and if defeated, it would be
as much to their advantage to bring their produce to a shipping port at
once by land, as to use the canal recently constructed at such prodigious
expense, having afterwards to go with their produce to Alexandria by land.

Mr. SMILIE should not be against the bill, if upon full and fair inquiry
it was found proper to pass it. But he could not agree to be hurried
along without allowing time to acquire information. He therefore moved
that the committee rise and report progress.

Mr. MACON (Speaker) opposed the rising of the committee, because it
was leaving the business exactly where it stood, unless it was meant
to recommit it to a select committee for modification. But as he was
determined to vote against it in any and every shape, he was prepared to
decide now. As to the mode he had taken to come at his object, he should
only say it was a fair one, and such as had been the uniform practice of
the House since he had a seat in it.

The gentlemen in favor of this dam or causeway, say it will do no harm;
but where is the demonstration? On the other side, serious apprehensions
are entertained of its injurious effects upon the United States navy
yard in the Eastern branch, and its causing obstructions in the harbor
of Alexandria. He would assure the committee he was ready to promote the
welfare of any of the citizens; but it must in justice be done, without
injuring any other portion whatever.

At the last session, an application was made for a permanent bridge
across the Potomac, with a draw for the passage of vessels; the
petitioner urged the general utility of the measure to all persons
travelling North or South, but particularly the vast benefit accruing to
the inhabitants of the district, by affording a solid and secure means
of intercourse between its several parts. This measure was opposed by
the present petitioners, on the ground of the compact between Maryland
and Virginia securing the right of free navigation to the river, and
also alleging that their navigation to Georgetown would be impeded. The
argument which they applied then, now applies against them, and it ought,
in the minds of the same legislators, to apply with equal success.

Mr. FINDLAY was rather in favor of the bill, believing the mode proposed
would be successful in deepening the channel, which would certainly
improve the navigation to and from Georgetown, and in that object the
citizens of some of the western counties of Pennsylvania were materially
interested; several of their boatable creeks nearly interlocking
with those of the Potomac. He would, however, agree to the committee
rising, with a view to postpone the bill, until gentlemen acquired the
information they asked for.

Mr. GODDARD hoped the committee would rise, and the subject be postponed
until sufficient light was obtained to guide their votes to a proper
decision. He also hoped that no member might be considered as the friend
or the foe of the present bill, until he became such by an examination
into its merits or demerits. He narrated the course the business had
taken since its introduction into this House, and inferred that the same
deliberate mode ought to be pursued to the end. Whether the measure was
good or evil could only be determined in that way, and gentlemen ought
not to object to doing positive good, unless it was demonstrated that
positive evil would result to counterbalance the good that was intended.
He conceived the members ought to inquire for themselves on this point,
and legislate accordingly. He would on all occasions endeavor to promote
the interests of the district; and as it had no immediate representative
on the floor, he considered every representative bound to serve them,
while the seat of Government remained among them.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL would not declare whether he should vote for the final
passage of the bill or not. But he was disposed to take notice of the
applications made from time to time by the inhabitants of the district;
whether to redress grievances, or procure benefits. But he by no means
approved of the principles of legislation without representation. He
regretted that they were placed in this unfortunate situation; but he
should decide on the present question according to its merits; and if it
was found to be of great consequence to the petitioners, and not likely
to work an injury to others, he presumed the bill would finally pass.
But he wished the committee to rise, in order to give further time to
obtain information. It had been alleged that the friends of the measure
ought to demonstrate that the erection of a causeway would do no injury
to any one. This was not a fair position; it was requiring them to prove
a negative. The burden of proof should lie on those who oppose the
bill, and it was for them to demonstrate that injury would result. The
gentleman from Virginia (Mr. J. RANDOLPH) has stated that the boats from
the western country have a choice of passing by the western or eastern
channel to the market below Georgetown, and this, it is presumed, he
means they should be still entitled to under the compact between Maryland
and Virginia. Let us hear from those persons also, and then ascertain
whether they have any objection to the project on that account. This was
also an argument in favor of the rising of the committee, and perhaps it
may be added, that a little delay will enable the House so to modify the
bill as to render it less exceptionable than at present.

Mr. SOUTHARD had not considered this subject of much consequence in the
outset, but he found that its importance increased as it toiled along.
He thought this morning it would have occupied but a short portion of
their time; in that he found himself deceived; and he believed he was not
singular in these opinions. He suspected many other members were in the
same predicament. He therefore would vote for the committee’s rising.
That navigable waters are considered as highways, is a matter of great
notoriety; but he did not know that to deepen a channel, by contracting
its surface, was considered as obstructing the free navigation of a
river, nor could he conceive that the body of sediment meant to be
removed, would descend _en masse_ and deposit itself at the confluence
of the next stream it met. On the contrary, he imagined it would be
separated by the force of the current giving it action into millions of
particles, some of which would settle promiscuously on either side, while
a part would ultimately be deposited in the ocean.

The committee hereupon rose and reported progress, and asked leave to sit
again. On the question, Shall the committee have leave to sit again?

Mr. J. RANDOLPH requested that the act of cession by Virginia might
be read, by which it would clearly appear that she had not ceded, or
intended to cede to the United States any right acquired under her
compact with Maryland. [The act was read.]

It is plain from the preamble, said Mr. R., that the intention of the
State was to make a cession above the tide water; that the expected seat
of Government would be fixed in some place contiguous to the limits of
Maryland and Pennsylvania. It is not contended that the United States
were bound to select any particular spot. This circumstance is mentioned
only to show what was contemplated at the time by the Legislature of
Virginia. Her act of cession was more broad. It extended to any tract
of country not exceeding ten miles square, “to be located within the
limits of the State.” Over this she had relinquished to Congress her
jurisdiction as well of soil as of persons. But her limits did not extend
beyond high water mark on the western bank of the Potomac. Her right of
highway on the river was a natural right acknowledged and secured by
convention with Maryland. Her civil jurisdiction over its waters was a
conventional right, entirely derived from compact with that State, was a
jurisdiction not within her limits, and which the words of the act just
read could not embrace or convey.

Mr. DAWSON would vote against the committee having leave to sit again. He
was convinced that the objection made by his colleague (Mr. J. RANDOLPH)
was conclusive: the fact was, that neither Maryland nor Virginia had
ceded their joint rights to this river, nor could they do so, by their
separate acts; the terms of the compact requiring that any thing done
respecting the navigation of the Potomac, should be done by their joint
act. It was worthy of remark, that the petitioners for the causeway were
the identical persons who petitioned against the bridge as a violation of
the compact between the two States, and denied the authority of Congress
to legislate on the subject of the navigation of the Potomac. He thought
them right then, and he voted against the bridge. His opinion had not
changed with their opinions, and, therefore, he should vote against the
causeway now.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD said that from the vote just taken, he presumed that
the question of expediency had been settled. But it is now objected
that Congress have no exclusive jurisdiction over the Potomac. In reply
he would submit a few observations. By the constitution, Congress were
empowered to exercise exclusive jurisdiction over any place not exceeding
ten miles, which might be ceded by particular States. The States of
Maryland and Virginia had ceded this district to Congress, and the
cession had been accepted. But the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH)
had said that Virginia did not cede the jurisdiction of the Potomac,
because she did not own it separately. To this he would answer, that the
river Potomac must have been under the jurisdiction of either Maryland
or Virginia, or both. And as both allowed Congress to accept of any part
of their territory not exceeding ten miles square, and Congress had
chosen to accept of part from one and part from the other, he presumed
the jurisdiction of the Potomac, let it have been held by either of the
States, or jointly, must have passed to the United States. He was of
opinion, that if Congress had no jurisdiction over the Potomac, they had
none over the district. The constitution provides only for the cession
of one district of country not exceeding ten miles square. The act of
Congress, made in pursuance of the constitution, had also provided for
the laying out one district. If the arguments of the gentleman from
Virginia were correct, and Congress had no jurisdiction over the Potomac,
the Commissioners and the then President of the United States, under
whose direction the district was laid off, had been mistaken, and had
taken two districts of territory instead of one. This being the case,
Congress had no jurisdiction in the district, because it not being
laid off conformably to the constitution and the law of Congress, the
acceptance by Congress was absolutely void. If this was correct, there
was an absolute necessity for giving leave to the committee to sit again,
for the purpose of deliberating whether Congress had jurisdiction or not.
If they had not, and were legislating for the people of the district
without authority, the sooner they put an end to such an assumption of
power, the better.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH declared that the opinion which he had just given was the
result of his most deliberate judgment. To what it might lead he should
not at that time undertake to determine; but when that question should
come before the House he was not sure that he should deny the corollary
of the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. R. GRISWOLD,) at least as far as
related to the testimony on the other side of the river. The question,
however, then was, whether Congress possessed exclusive jurisdiction
over the Potomac. How could they acquire it? From Maryland? It was more
than she had to give. At farthest she could only grant her own qualified
right. Had they obtained it from Virginia? Not at all. She had granted
a jurisdiction exclusively her own, over a tract of country within
her limits. And could any man pretend to say that this was a grant of
her concurrent jurisdiction over the Potomac, confessedly without her
limits? She had, to use the expression, issued her warrant to Congress,
to be located somewhere within the State, and, under this pretext, her
property out of the State was about to be usurped. Suppose the gentleman
from Connecticut were to convey by deed his exclusive property, by
certain metes and bounds, would his joint interest in other property
not contained within those bounds pass by such a deed? Surely not. To a
person setting up a claim to such property he would probably say, produce
the evidence of your title; and in like manner Mr. R. demanded to be
shown the conveyance by which Virginia had relinquished her concurrent
jurisdiction over the Potomac? And in answer to this, gentlemen refer to
a conveyance relinquishing something else in nowise connected with it,
and tell us we always believed that we had a grant for this jurisdiction;
we shall be grievously disappointed if we have not; it will be a great
inconvenience to us to do without it, and, therefore, we must have it.
And Virginia is to be forcibly dispossessed of her right, to suit the
convenience of Congress.

Mr. NELSON said, it was with diffidence he again troubled the House
after the lengthy discussion which had taken place. But doubts having
been originated as to the authority of Congress to pass the bill in
question, he felt compelled to remove those doubts, as far as lay in
his power. As the House had decided the expediency of the measure by
a large majority, if upon an investigation it should be demonstrated
that Congress possessed ample power to pass the bill, he trusted the
same majority would still be found in favor of it. He would proceed to
examine the power which Congress possessed to pass the bill, and he
trusted that he should be able to satisfy a majority of the House, that
they had sufficient power. Previous to the compact between Virginia and
Maryland, which had been so much talked of, Maryland claimed the sole
jurisdiction of the Potomac river, and Virginia claimed Cape Henry and
Cape Charles, also the jurisdiction of the Pocomoke as her property. In
order to prevent any duties from being imposed upon their vessels at
either of those places, the two States entered into a compact by which
Maryland agreed that the navigation of the Potomac should be free to the
people of Virginia, and Virginia contracted not to impose duties on the
vessels of Maryland coming by Cape Henry, or navigating the Pocomoke.
By this compact, the Potomac became the joint property of Maryland and
Virginia as to the free navigation, but all the islands were under the
jurisdiction of Maryland. This being the situation, each of these States,
by a law, ceded to Congress any part of their territory not exceeding ten
miles square, which they might choose to accept. Congress chose to accept
of part from one and part from the other; and, among the rest, this joint
property the river Potomac. There was no exception made in the act of
cession as to the water courses, and it would be needless to inform the
members that a grant of land necessarily carried with it a grant of the
waters thereon, unless an exception was made.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--The gentleman asks in the body of what county is the
river Potomac passing through the District of Columbia? Will he take it
for an answer that its jurisdiction is within the bodies of the same
counties it was in before the acceptance of the territory on each side?

In addition to the observations made on passing joint property with
exclusive property, suppose England and France to hold Malta in joint
possession, and that they cede to Germany, for her acquiescence in that
measure, some of the exclusive property held by each within the German
empire, will they say that their joint property in Malta passed by the
treaty?

Mr. CLARK was unwilling to trouble the House at that late hour with
any remarks, and would have entirely forborne, was not the question on
which we were about to decide, and which had become extremely important,
susceptible of a position which it had not assumed. It had been stated,
and generally agreed to, and he supposed was correct, that the State of
Maryland, previous to her compact with Virginia, rightfully claimed the
whole river Potomac to the high-water mark on the western bank. Virginia
owned the Capes. This collision of interest produced, in the year 1786,
an adjustment of their interfering interests, and it was expressly
stipulated that the river Potomac should remain a highway, free for the
navigation of each State. In the year 1799, the Legislature of Virginia
passed a law making a cession to the United States of a territory ten
miles square, or any less quantity that should be accepted for the seat
of the General Government, to be located and laid off within her limits;
thus by the terms of her cession confining it to her territory. Maryland,
nearly at the same period, made a similar cession. Out of these two
cessions is the present Columbian Territory made. It is contended by
the gentleman from Maryland, (Mr. NELSON,) that the two States uniting
in the cession makes the grant complete, and the right in the United
States predominant and exclusive. He acknowledges, at the same time,
this correct principle that they could grant no greater right than they
possessed. This doctrine I hold incontrovertible, that the alienee
can have no greater or better title than the alienor, otherwise the
derivative would be superior to the original title, a principle not to be
admitted.

Let it be distinctly recollected that, prior to the cession, Virginia had
purchased a right out of the soil of her sister State, distinct from the
land--an incorporeal hereditament, a franchise which she had the right of
exercising, unconnected with the use of the soil--so that, while Maryland
owned the land, Virginia owned the right of way. She never passed this
right by the terms of her cession or by any other act. Maryland could
not, having already parted from it. No strength of argument can be
derived from the terms of the constitution; for, if Virginia never parted
with her right, the United States could never have acquired it. I trust
I have shown that Virginia purchased a right in the navigation of the
Potomac, which she never parted from, and, of course, retains to this
moment. We, therefore, cannot constitutionally legislate on this subject.

Let it not be said that the object is improvement and not obstruction.
Is not building the wall from Mason’s Island to the Virginia shore an
obstruction, and the improvement at best problematical? But, this is
begging the question. On a fair admission of my construction, I contend,
and have endeavored to prove, that we possessing no jurisdiction over
the river, it cannot be touched by any legislative act of ours in any
point whatever. For, if it be touched in one way, it may be in another,
and may finally end in whatever arrangement Congress may think expedient
to make.

Mr. JACKSON did not stop to inquire whether it was proper for Congress to
retain the jurisdiction over this district, but he was willing to remove
a grievance which the people complained of and required to be done.
He was not one of those who was disposed to guard the people against
their worst enemies, themselves, as he did not believe the doctrine to
be true. The objection that Virginia and Maryland had only ceded their
exclusive property, and not the joint property of the free navigation of
the Potomac, might, perhaps, be extended further than gentlemen wished,
or were aware of. By the Treaty of Paris, France had ceded Louisiana in
full sovereignty to the United States, but expressly reserved the right
of free navigation of the Mississippi; if, then, the United States were
disposed to shorten the navigation by cutting through the bend of that
river, or in any other way improve the same, will it be necessary for the
United States to consult and obtain the assent of France to the measure
before they ventured to put it in execution?

Mr. NICHOLSON had but few observations to make upon the question before
the House. His opinion was the same as at the last session, when a
petition was presented for the erection of a bridge. He then thought
that the erection of a bridge over the Potomac would tend much to the
improvement of the place. He thought so still. But he then thought that
Congress had no right to interfere in the least with the free navigation
of the Potomac, and, of course, was opposed to the bridge. The same
reason operated, in his mind, against the bill now in question. Neither
of the States of Maryland or Virginia could have passed such a law
previous to the cession of the district to Congress. The question to
be determined, then, was “whether the jurisdiction of the Potomac was
ceded to Congress.” If this should be answered in the negative by the
committee, all questions as to the expediency of the measure would be
at an end. Previous to the compact between Virginia and Maryland, the
latter claimed the river Potomac as its exclusive property. By that
compact it was declared that the navigation of the said river should be
free. Virginia, therefore, acquired a kind of property in the river,
inasmuch as she acquired the right to the free navigation thereof. The
question, then, to be inquired into, was, Had Virginia parted with this
right? He conceived she had not. By the act authorizing the cession of
ten miles square or less to the United States, this could not have been
done; Virginia had no power to make the cession of the Potomac, because
she had not the jurisdiction over it, and could not grant more than she
possessed. After this grant by Virginia, the State of Maryland granted
to Congress a portion of territory not exceeding ten miles square for
the seat of Government. Had Maryland the sole property in the river, it
could have passed in this grant, provided Congress accepted that part
of her territory. But she had not this sole property, because the State
of Virginia had a right by compact to the free navigation thereof. How,
then, had the United States acquired the jurisdiction over the Potomac?
Would it be contended that they had acquired it from Maryland? This did
not appear from the act of cession. Had they acquired it from Virginia?
That could not be, because Virginia had no power to make such a grant.
So long as he had the honor of a seat in the House, he would hold up his
hands against any measure like the present, which would go to affect the
rights of any of the States. If Congress had a right to interfere in the
least with the free navigation of the Potomac, they had a right to stop
it altogether. He conceived they had no right to pass any law on the
subject; and, believing so, he would certainly vote against the committee
having leave to sit again.

On motion the committee rose and the House adjourned.


THURSDAY, November 29.

_Recession of the District of Columbia._

On a motion made and seconded that the House do come to the following
resolutions:

    _Resolved_, That it is expedient for Congress to recede to
    the State of Virginia the jurisdiction of that part of the
    Territory of Columbia which was ceded to the United States
    by the said State of Virginia, by an act passed the third
    day of December, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
    eighty-nine, entitled, “An act for the cession of ten miles
    square, or any lesser quantity of territory within this State,
    to the United States in Congress assembled, for the permanent
    seat of the General Government;” provided the said State of
    Virginia shall agree thereto.

    _Resolved_, That it is expedient for Congress to recede
    to the State of Maryland the jurisdiction of that part of
    the Territory of Columbia within the limits of the City of
    Washington, which was ceded to the United States by the
    said State of Maryland, by an act passed on the nineteenth
    day of December, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
    ninety-one, entitled, “An act concerning the Territory of
    Columbia and the City of Washington;” provided the said State
    of Maryland shall consent and agree thereto:

_Ordered_, That the said motion be referred to a Committee of the whole
House on Wednesday next.


THURSDAY, December 6.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Governor of the State
of Virginia, enclosing a return of the election of ALEXANDER WILSON, to
serve in this House, as a Representative for the said State, in the place
of ANDREW MOORE, appointed a Senator of the United States; which was
referred to the Committee of Elections.


FRIDAY, December 7.

_Post Roads._

Mr. JACKSON, from the committee appointed on the sixteenth ultimo,
presented a bill making provision for the application of the money
heretofore appropriated to the laying out and making public roads
leading, from the navigable waters emptying into the Atlantic, to the
Ohio river; which was read twice and committed to a Committee of the
Whole on Monday next.

On a motion made and seconded, that the House do come to the following
resolution:

    _Resolved_, That a post road ought to be established from
    Knoxville, in the State of Tennessee, by the most direct and
    convenient route that the nature of the ground over which it is
    to pass will admit, to the settlements on the Tombigbee river,
    in the Mississippi Territory, and from thence to New Orleans;
    and that a post road ought also to be established from ---- in
    Georgia, to the said settlement on the Tombigbee, to intersect
    the former road at the most convenient point between Knoxville
    and the Tombigbee.

_Ordered_, That the said motion be referred to a Committee of the whole
House on Monday next.


_Duty on Salt._

Mr. THOMAS said, he rose with a view to propose an inquiry relative to
the duty on salt. On this article a duty of six cents per bushel was
first laid, in the year 1790 it was raised to twelve cents, and in the
year 1797 eight cents more were added, making the duty twenty cents per
bushel of 56 lbs.; at which rate it now stands. But, as every measured
bushel of good strong salt which is imported into this country will weigh
80 or 90 lbs., this is in reality a duty of 30 cents per bushel.

Three years ago, when the repeal of the stamp act, excise, and other
internal tax laws, were before Congress, an attempt was made to reduce
the duty on salt, and retain a part of that system.

At that time, although he was conscious the duty on this article of real
necessary consumption was too high, and fell extremely heavy on the
agricultural part of the community, particularly those living back from
the seaboard, who were obliged to use large quantities of it, for their
black cattle and other beasts of pasture, notwithstanding the increased
price at which it came to them, in consequence of the transportation, and
the profits charged on the amount of duty as well as original cost by the
several merchants or traders through whose hands it passed, yet he did
believe it better to allow this duty to remain as it was a while longer,
rather than not be enabled to abolish that expensive, inconvenient and
anti-republican system of internal taxation.

And should it now be found, on due inquiry, that a reduction of the duty
on this article, at this time, would be incompatible with the great
object of paying off the national debt and meeting the other exigencies
of Government, for his part he would not urge it; but he was persuaded
this was not the case--he believed our finances are amply sufficient to
authorize the measure.

On examining the report of the Secretary of the Treasury he found,
that besides meeting all the calls of Government, including the sum
appropriated annually towards the reduction of the public debt, there was
a surplus of $4,882,225 in the Treasury, and although there are several
payments to be made out of this sum, there will still be a large balance
remaining.

It also appears, from a comparative view of the bonded duties of the
present with former years, that there will be an increase of revenue
coming into the Treasury the ensuing year, and he believed there was no
reasonable probability of any new causes for expenditure.

This being the case, he flattered himself it would not be deemed
unseasonable or improper to propose a reduction of the duty, on this
article of necessary consumption, at this time.

With this object, however, said Mr. THOMAS, I wish to couple another
which I consider of equal importance, as it respects the reputation of
our beef, pork, fish, and butter, put up for exportation, as well as the
health of our seaport towns, and seamen employed on foreign voyages.

He said, by the Treasury accounts it appears that the aggregate amount
of salt imported into the United States during the year, ending the 30th
September last, was 3,858,195 bushels of 56 lbs. each, of this about
one-fourth part, or 868,355 were imported in foreign vessels. All this
salt was brought from foreign places, and no part of the salt prepared
from the briny waters near the Onondaga, in New York, the various springs
in the Western States, and the sea water of Cape Cod, Portsmouth, &c., is
taken into this calculation.

Of this salt some parts came from the Swedish, Danish, and Dutch West
Indies--other parts were imported from the British West Indies, and
other British colonies, from the French West Indies, from Spain, from
Teneriffe, and the other Canaries, and the Spanish West Indies; parcels
of the same salt were likewise brought from Portugal, Madeira, Cape de
Verd Islands, and Italy, and about 20,000 bushels of a similar kind has
heretofore annually been brought from Louisiana, which is now a part of
the United States.

But notwithstanding all this trade in salt, to so many parts of the
earth, the commerce in that article between the United States and Great
Britain is very extensive and important. During the year he before
mentioned, the proportion of imported salt which was furnished by England
alone, and of the manufacture of that country, amounted to 1,271,537
bushels of 56 lbs. So that it is evident at least one-third of the salt
consumed in our country is exported from that part of Great Britain
called England, and chiefly from those countries of which Liverpool is
the mart.

This salt, as he understood, was prepared by the process of boiling the
brine of the rock salt from Cheshire, and the water of the sea; and on
account of the great plenty and cheapness of coal in Lancashire, there
being also, as he believed, no export duty laid on it, this salt was
produced in abundance and sold on very low terms; it is employed as
ballast for British ships coming into our ports, and when arrived is sure
to sell and pay the freight and frequently afford a profit; our own ships
also very commonly take it in for ballast, and often as part of the cargo.

This traffic would be perfectly fair and convenient if English salt was
of a strength and quality fit to preserve animal flesh for provisions.
But he was clearly of opinion, from his own knowledge, this was not the
fact, and he had lately observed a discussion on this subject in the
British Parliament which confirmed that opinion.

The British Government long ago made a distinction between English salt
and foreign salt on their importation into Ireland. To encourage the
introduction of salt from the Bay of Biscay and the Portuguese dominions,
they permitted it to be imported into that kingdom at the rate of 84 lbs.
the bushel, while Liverpool salt was charged with the same duty of two
shillings on the bushel of 56 lbs. The reason of this distinction was
undoubtedly wise and cogent; experience had proved that British salt, as
brought to the market, was destitute of that purity and strength which
was necessary to preserve animal flesh from taint and corruption, and fit
for human food in hot climates and on long voyages.

The trade of Ireland in beef, pork and butter, was of great importance,
not only to that country itself, but to the whole navy and army of
Britain. To keep up the character and wholesomeness of their provisions
was a matter of immense national importance, and this could only be done
by attention to have it preserved with salt of purity and strength.
Experience had proved that the salt formed by crystallization in the open
sunshine on the western shores and islands of Southern Europe, was vastly
better than that produced by artificial concretion, in a boiling heat
over a fire in the North. And the Government had with prudent discernment
favored the introduction of Bay salt into Ireland, by permitting 84 lbs.
to be imported for the same duty that was paid on the introduction of 56
lbs. of Liverpool salt.

The people of Liverpool have lately expressed uneasiness at this
partiality, and an attempt has been made in Parliament, so to equalize
the duty, as to give to both Bay and English salt a fair competition
in the Irish market. This, however, was repelled by the Irish members,
with manly discernment and spirit, on the ground that Bay salt was of a
stronger quality, less easy to dissolve, and indispensable to the salters
of meats; that English or Liverpool salt would not answer for this
extensive and important branch of business; that the discrimination in
favor of Bay salt was politic and proper, especially connected with the
provision trade and the health of the fleets and armies.

It is my wish, said Mr. T., that such a distinction should be made on
the introduction of English salt into the United States, as has been
made by the British laws themselves, on its importation into Ireland.
There certainly exists the same causes for it. Like Ireland, our country
abounds in provisions--beef, pork, fish and butter, are great and staple
articles of export; but their quality is very far inferior to the
provisions of Ireland. The putrefaction of beef, pork and fish, to a very
serious extent, has often occurred; the loss of the property thereby was
great, and the reputation of our provisions materially affected. But that
was not the greatest evil; there is no doubt but that the exhalation from
tainted and corrupted meats and fish, in our towns as well as on board
our vessels, poison the atmosphere and excite malignant fevers and other
diseases.

His object was to retrieve and establish the reputation of our salted
provisions in foreign markets--to prevent the loss of property by those
who put up provisions for exportation, and also to prevent the evils
resulting to our citizens and seamen from tainted and spoiling meats
and fish. With this view of the subject he should propose, in the first
place, an inquiry into the expediency of reducing the duty on salt
generally; and, in the second, the propriety of making a distinction, so
as to encourage the importation of strong and pure salt, in preference to
the weak and impure salt manufactured in England.

He, therefore, moved the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the Committee of Ways and Means be instructed
    to inquire into the expediency of reducing the duty on salt,
    and also into the propriety of making a distinction in the
    duty, so as to encourage the importations of salt from the
    dominions of Denmark, Sweden, the United Netherlands, Spain,
    France, Portugal, and the British West Indies, in preference to
    any other place or places; and that they report thereon by bill
    or otherwise.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said, that the resolution which the gentleman from New
York had submitted, and in relation to which he had favored the House
with such copious details, embraced two objects: the reduction of the
duty on salt, generally, and the encouragement of the importation of a
particular description of that article. The last subject belonging to a
class which was consigned to the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures,
he should confine himself to the first branch of the resolution; nor
should he have troubled the House at all were not the motion of the
gentleman from New York calculated to excite an expectation, which he
wished to repress, because he feared it could not be gratified. It was
not to oppose inquiry, but to apprise the mover and the public that the
result was likely to prove unpropitious to his wishes, that he had
risen. The country on which the salt duty fell with peculiar force was
that middle region, near enough to the seaboard to be supplied altogether
by importation, but too remote to have its consumption diminished by
vicinage to the sea. Those whose stock had access to salt water felt
the duty but partially; those whose situation obliged them to use salt
of home manufacture only, not at all. As an inhabitant of that district
of country by which the duty was principally paid, and as a friend to
agriculture, he had at an early period of the session, in conjunction
with his friend the Speaker, turned his attention to the practicability
of reducing the duty on salt, and you well know, sir, (said Mr. R.)
that the result of our inquiry satisfied us that this desirable object
was not at present attainable. He mentioned this to show that other
members felt an interest in this subject, as well as the gentleman
from New York, although they had not brought it before the House. The
Treasury statements on which that gentleman relied for the support of his
position, that we can dispense with a portion of our existing revenue,
establish the opposite opinion, beyond controversy.


MONDAY, December 10.

Two other members, to wit: MATTHEW WALTON, from Kentucky, and NATHANIEL
ALEXANDER, from North Carolina, appeared, and took their seats in the
House.


TUESDAY, December 11.

_Recession of District of Columbia._

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter addressed to him from George
Washington Parke Custis, chairman of a meeting of the inhabitants of
the county of Alexandria, in the District of Columbia, enclosing sundry
resolutions of the said inhabitants, expressive of their disapprobation
of so much of a motion now depending before the House, as relates to a
recession of jurisdiction to the State of Virginia, of that part of the
District of Columbia which is contained in the county of Alexandria,
aforesaid.--Referred.


_Potomac River._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill
authorizing the Corporation of Georgetown to make a dam or causeway from
Mason’s Island to the western shore of the river Potomac.

Mr. MACON gave it as his opinion that it would be improper at this time
to take up the subject, as there was a motion on the table to recede the
territory of the district back to the jurisdiction of the States out of
which it had been carved. If it is intended to recede the territory,
it would certainly be better to recede with as few encumbrances or
alterations as possible; indeed, the striking propriety of the business
taking the course he had just mentioned, had led him to expect that the
present bill would not be again agitated until the question of recession
had been investigated and decided. He would therefore move that the
committee rise and report progress.

Mr. SMILIE voted against going into a Committee of the Whole, on
the ground mentioned by the Speaker. If it be the intention of the
Legislature to recede this territory, there was certainly no necessity
of discussing the propriety of erecting a causeway; if it be not the
intention, when this is manifest it will be time enough to consider
the bill before them. From what he had observed on the part of
the inhabitants of the District of Columbia, there seemed to be a
disposition, if not a determination, to give Congress as much trouble
in legislating for them as they had for all the rest of the Union.
During the present session, this single ten miles square had occupied as
much of the time of the House as the whole of the United States, whose
general and important business was daily caused to be suspended for the
local concerns of this place. From observing this to be the settled
course of proceeding, he was convinced that Congress must do one of two
things, either recede them to their respective States, or put them in a
situation capable of managing their own affairs, in their own way. The
daily pay of the members amounted to a considerable sum, and the length
of time consumed on every trifling application for want of some member
able to explain the true situation of the district, occasioned by its
unrepresented state on this floor, were evils much to be lamented, if
they could not be remedied. He thought members could hardly justify the
waste of time, intended to be devoted to the public, whatever they might
think of the expense it occasioned. He hoped the committee would agree to
rise.

Mr. LEWIS did not think it fair to anticipate the opinion of the House on
the subject of recession, which he considered would be the effect of the
committee’s rising. If, however, the committee shall determine that they
would not, at this time, discuss the present bill, he had no objection to
enter on the consideration of the other subject.

Mr. NELSON thought this the proper time to discuss this question, even
in preference to that of recession. It appears from the petition of the
inhabitants of Georgetown, that the channel of the river, on which the
salvation of that town depends, is filling up daily; that the mass of mud
would soon increase to such a degree as totally to ruin the navigation
to that port. If even it should be agreed by Congress to recede the
territory to the States of Virginia and Maryland--which he wished and
hoped in God would not be the case--it would be late in the session, and
in all probability, at a time when neither of those State Legislatures
will be in session. Supposing both States were willing to accept the
recession, which he believed would not be found to be the case, the
petitioners could not apply to the Virginia Legislature until next
December, as their session began in that month, nor to Maryland until
next November. A twelvemonth’s delay might defeat the object altogether,
for the petitioners assert that it requires immediate exertions to
prevent the channel filling up altogether.

Mr. SLOAN reminded the committee of an old saying: “The time present only
is in our power, the future we know not of.” The time present, then,
is the time to redress the grievances of the suffering part of this
community, and as the citizens of Georgetown were really embarrassed, and
their apprehensions excited of greater danger, he hoped the committee
would proceed with the business.

Mr. STANFORD seldom troubled the House with any motion; but the one
alluded to by his colleague, (Mr. SPEAKER,) he had brought forward from
a sense of duty. The reiterated applications of the inhabitants of this
district for legislative provisions, he had always listened to with
attention, and he had no objection to proceeding in the discussion of the
present bill, convinced that it would only serve to show the necessity
of receding the territory. From all that had hitherto been done, it was
apparent that they could not attempt to accommodate one part of the
district without drawing forth petitions against the same from another
part. Counter-petitions were constantly coming in. He was willing to hear
every thing, but he did not believe the House could agree to any thing,
and it was not to be wondered at when the inhabitants could not agree
among themselves; or, if the House agreed at this time relative to the
objects of the bridge company and the causeway petitioners, it would be,
he suspected, to do nothing in either case. All this tended to evince the
propriety of adopting the resolution he had laid on the table to recede
the territory to the States of Virginia and Maryland, who would then have
competent powers to gratify both parties, if they deemed it expedient, of
which he was convinced they were better judges than this, or any future
Congress was ever likely to be.

The question on the committee rising was taken, and lost--only
forty-three members voting in the affirmative.

Mr. MACON then proposed to amend the bill in such a way as to provide for
regulating the ferries that might be established across the eastern part
of the stream to the causeway, and applying the fund arising from the
same for the purpose of keeping the causeway in repair.

Mr. LEWIS did not consider it useful to travel over the ground assumed on
a former occasion, but would confine himself to state to the committee
some information he had acquired since, in respect to the damage the
Eastern Branch or the port of Alexandria was likely to sustain, as had
been alleged. Before the year 1784, the channel on the western side was
so shallow that vessels only of very ordinary burden could pass, while
on the Maryland side vessels of great draught of water could easily pass
up to Georgetown. The uncommon hard winter of 1783-’4 was followed
in the spring by the greatest torrents ever known in the Potomac. The
bodies of ice were of immense magnitude, and many of them lodged upon the
island, and under the rocks of its bed, prizing with a force beyond all
credibility: it tore the rocks asunder and pressed them over into the new
channel, occasioning a rise of thirty or forty feet on the Georgetown
shore. On the Virginia side the torrent also forced itself and deepened
that channel, while it left a vast quantity of mud, rocks, and sand, in
the eastern channel, which has been constantly accumulating since that
period. The situation of the present bar is at the meeting of the two
arms of the river, below the island, and does not permit the passage of
vessels over it drawing more than twelve feet water. The consequence of
this alteration in the bed of the river below the island has been to
narrow the mouth of the Eastern Branch, but it had no effect upon the
harbor of Alexandria. This may serve to explain what may be the effect of
opening the old channel in the way proposed: it may operate to widen the
mouth of the Eastern Branch harbor, but it cannot injure Alexandria.

Mr. CLARK.--When this bill was under consideration, some days past, I
endeavored to show (and hope with satisfaction) that Congress had not the
power of legislating on this subject. The ground I then assumed was, that
Virginia had, by contract with the State of Maryland, before the cession
to the United States, acquired the right of highway on the river Potomac,
which she has never granted. It is now unnecessary to inquire into the
reasons of this policy; it is sufficient for our present purpose to say
it is the fact.

In retracing this subject, I find my arguments very much strengthened by
examining the Articles of Agreement between the States of Maryland and
Virginia, and this circumstance is the only inducement for my troubling
the committee again. The sixth article of the Agreement declares that
“the river Potomac shall be considered as a common highway for the
purpose of navigation and commerce to the citizens of Virginia and
Maryland, and of the United States, and all those in amity with them.”
The eighth article declares that “all laws and regulations which may be
necessary for preserving and keeping open the channel and navigation
of the river shall be made with the mutual consent and approbation of
both States.” If a doubt remained, therefore, it appears to me this must
remove it, and time will be spent in vain to illustrate the subject.

Mr. NELSON did not expect that this point would have been brought up
again, but since it had so happened, he felt a propriety, not to say
a duty, in recapitulating also what he had urged before, and adding
some further reasons to show that Congress had the right, and exclusive
right, of jurisdiction over all that part of the river Potomac within the
District of Columbia. The burden of the song appears to be this: that
because the States of Maryland and Virginia entered into compact before
the formation of the present constitution, by which it was agreed that
the river should be considered a common highway, and as both possessed
the right of way, it was a joint right, which, as they did not jointly
convey the right, has never been ceded to the United States. Does the
gentleman (Mr. CLARK) mean to say that the States of Virginia and
Maryland had not the power of granting this joint right? If he does not
assert this, or if he admits they had the power, we shall be able to
demonstrate that they have granted it to Congress. After two States have
made a division of a part of each of their particular property, cannot
they mutually give to another the property they have thus acquired?
Surely common sense cannot deny them the right so to do: if you cannot
grant away a right, it is no right, for a right cannot be complete if it
cannot be conveyed to another; the very idea of right implies the power
of disposal. They say that Maryland had the exclusive right of navigating
the river Potomac, and that she gave by compact a qualified property in
that exclusive right to Virginia. Cannot Virginia convey this qualified
right? If one holds a right to an estate for life or a term of years, is
it not as competent for the party to convey such right, as it would be to
convey an estate in fee simple? Whether the right be a special right, or
a limited right, or of whatever nature it be, every man has a right to
convey it to another, unless there be exceptions or reservations; but in
the compact between Maryland and Virginia there are no reservations or
stipulations that abridge or preclude a conveyance. Then he asked them
to propound this case: Maryland has a common right with Virginia in the
Potomac, and Maryland declares that she gives up all her right to ten
miles square of her territory--the Potomac is a part--Virginia also says
that, so far as she has a right, she gives it up also. Well, then, both
States have given up their respective rights. Does not the relinquishment
of their rights by both States produce the same effect as if it had been
done by a joint instrument? Maryland, he asserted, had given up her
right; no matter whether it was a real right or qualified right, she gave
up all but what she had conveyed to Virginia, and Virginia has given up
all she possessed.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH had hoped that the very perspicuous statement of his
colleague, (Mr. CLARK) when the subject was last under consideration,
had satisfied the most incredulous that Congress were not competent to
pass the bill before them. Indeed, he had hoped that the bill would have
been suffered to sleep through the rest of the session, and the House
no more troubled on the subject. The reasoning of the gentleman last
up was to his mind utterly fallacious and inconclusive. The district
was not necessarily divided into two bodies politic, because of the
intervening jurisdiction of Virginia over the Potomac. Did Massachusetts
constitute two States, because its parts were completely separated by
New Hampshire, through which you must necessarily pass to get into Maine
from old Massachusetts, as it was called? For the purpose of division
the mathematical line which marked the boundary between the two States
of Maryland and Virginia was equivalent to the whole breadth of the
Potomac. On the ground of natural right, Congress could not obstruct the
navigation of the river. They could not do it without admitting the right
of Virginia and Maryland to raise obstructions above and below. Those
States had as good a claim to stop the passage of ships of the United
States as Congress had to interrupt their bateaux. But gentlemen say they
are not stopping the navigation, they are improving it. How? by damming
up the best channel. Did not this justify any species of obstruction? It
was only to term it an improvement, and every objection was silenced.
Whatever might be the decision of the House, he trusted no member from
Virginia would be found to concede her right over the Potomac. He hoped
also that the subject would be suffered to remain at rest until the
question of recession was decided; but, in whatever shape it should
appear, he should always protest against it, as a violation of the rights
of the State which he represented.

Mr. SLOAN would leave the dispute, as to the right of jurisdiction over
the river, to be settled by those who were more competent to investigate
law questions than he was himself. But, from what he had heard, he had
brought his mind to this conclusion, that, whatever right Maryland
possessed to the jurisdiction of the Potomac, Congress was now entitled
to exercise. The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. J. RANDOLPH) has said that
Congress has no right to obstruct the navigation. True; but it does
not follow that Congress has no right to remove obstructions. He says,
also, that we might stop both branches. Not so; it is intended to stop
one only, in order to deepen the other, so as to render the navigation
more useful and safe. The case before us has been occasioned by the act
of God, or a great movement in nature; a great quantity of ice has been
lodged, and tore up from the shore and the island the materials that
form, perhaps, the base of this sand-bar, by which the navigation has
been obstructed. Now, suppose another case, that this ice had pent up the
whole body of the river, and compelled the waters to form themselves a
channel for escape through the lower grounds of the Virginia side, and
thereby have given a new course to the river; and it would not be the
first time that ice had been the cause of changing the bed of a river.

Mr. ALSTON did not intend to consume much of the time of the committee in
delivering his sentiments, as the discussion had already been protracted
to a much greater length than he, at the first view of the subject,
supposed it merited. It has been contended by several gentlemen that
Congress have no power to legislate at all upon the subject of the
navigation of the river Potomac. This really, to him, appeared to be a
very extraordinary doctrine indeed. That because Virginia and Maryland
had not jointly conveyed a common property, their conveyances separate,
although including this very common property, was not obligatory, and did
not convey to Congress exclusive legislation and jurisdiction over such
part of the river as lay within the District of Columbia. He admitted
that the river Potomac was a common highway, and ought ever to remain
so, for the benefit not only of the people of Virginia and Maryland,
but likewise for all the citizens of the United States choosing to
navigate the same; and to do any act whereby the navigation would, in
the slightest degree whatever, be obstructed, was more than we had a
right or ought to do. But would it follow, in consequence, that we had no
right to improve or benefit the navigation of the river? Most indubitably
not. It was, in his mind, clear, from the information he had received,
that, unless something was done for the benefit of the navigation of
the river, an end would soon be put to Georgetown as a commercial spot.
He believed it to be universally the case that the uniting of any two
streams of nearly equal size produced a bar or shallow place just below
their junction. If, then, the bar complained of, just below Mason’s
Island, has been produced in consequence of the uniting of the two arms
of the river, it seemed to him an inevitable consequence that, if one of
them was dammed up, the channel would return to its former depth. Mr. A.
could not see the force of an argument made use of by his colleague, the
honorable Speaker, if he understood him correctly, to say that, if the
dam contemplated should be effected, it would tend to injure the ferries
established on the river. In what manner the erecting the dam from
Mason’s Island to the Virginia shore could affect them, he was not able
to discover, as the land on the Virginia shore, opposite the ferries, and
the island, belong to the same person. He entertained no doubt but that
the same privileges would extend to the island as were now enjoyed at the
landing on the Virginia shore.

Mr. CLAIBORNE asked if the ten miles square, located and surveyed to the
United States, included the river? He rather suspected that they had laid
off ten miles square, exclusive of the river. If this were the case,
Congress had assumed jurisdiction over more territory than they were
constitutionally entitled to.

Mr. J. LEWIS.--My colleague has expressed a hope that no member from
Virginia would be found to sanction a measure so hostile to the rights
of that State. I lament extremely that I should, upon any occasion,
differ in sentiment with that gentleman, and particularly upon this;
but, because I am so unfortunate as not to agree with my colleague upon
this question, I hope I shall not, on that account, be charged with
an abandonment of the interests of Virginia. I am as tenacious of her
rights as my honorable colleague, or any other Representative from that
State, and I must, at the same time, be permitted to express my regret
that any member from Virginia shall be found to oppose a measure so very
interesting to a large portion of the citizens of that State.

Mr. MACON.--Although it may be a good rule, yet it is not a general one,
that people are well satisfied when they do not complain; yet gentlemen,
when they are sent here to legislate, must exercise their own judgment on
the probable consequences. If all the people of the district were to say
that this was a proper measure, he should still exercise his own opinion.
The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. LEWIS) had narrated the history of this
river, and informed us there was no impediment prior to 1784. He did not
doubt the correctness of the statement; but he should have gone further,
and informed us what was the population on the waters of the Potomac at
that time, and what it is at present, and likely hereafter to be; because
if such a mud bank was raised in the river when its banks had little or
no cultivation, what was it likely to be when thickly settled, for every
new farm and every additional cultivation, loosened the earth, which was
swept away by every fresh, and the mud bank at the head of tide water
would proportionally increase in magnitude. Such had been the case with
the Rappahannock, and if it should turn out that these two rivers are in
a similar situation, their trouble would be thrown away.

Mr. HOLLAND admitted that the quantity of mud would increase by
cultivation; but if the channel is deepened by narrowing the river, the
mud would descend lower and deposit itself in that part of the bed of
the river where the channel was deeper. He had no doubt of the right of
Congress to the exclusive legislation over the river, as well as over
every other part of the district. He should therefore vote for the bill,
believing that they had the right, and that the measure would be greatly
beneficial to the commerce of the country.

On the question being about to be put, Mr. EPPES requested the Clerk to
read the eighth article of the compact between Maryland and Virginia,
which being done,

The question on striking out the first section was put and lost--forty
members voting in the affirmative, and seventy-two against it.

The committee then rose and reported, and the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, December 12.

Another member, to wit: BENJAMIN HUGER, from South Carolina, appeared and
took his seat in the House.


THURSDAY, December 13.

_Impressment of John Gregory._

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from John Gregory, a black
man, alleging himself to be a native of Nansemond County, in the State of
Virginia, dated on board of the British ship-of-war, called the Alcmene,
the nineteenth of August in the present year, stating, that having lost
his protection, and being shipwrecked in the British Channel, he has
been impressed on board the said Alcmene, and detained there against his
inclination; and praying that Congress will be pleased to take his case
into consideration, and obtain his discharge from the British service.

The said letter was read, and, together with a certificate of the Consul
and Agent of the United States at London, accompanying the same, ordered
to be referred to the Secretary of State for information.


_Potomac River._

On the third reading of the bill for the erection of a dam or causeway
from Mason’s Island to the western shore of the Potomac, the yeas and
nays were called for by Mr. VARNUM.

Mr. DAWSON said: My absence from this House for some days past,
occasioned by my bad health, has prevented my hearing the arguments which
have been urged in favor of this bill, as well as those in opposition
to it; presuming, however, that they had much affinity to those which
were urged on its introduction, which, in my judgment, were conclusive
in opposition and feeble in support, I must be permitted to express my
astonishment that it has progressed so far, and that this House must now
decide on its passage or rejection.

In this stage of the business, and under existing circumstances, I
should not intrude a single observation, especially as I learn that the
subject has been fully discussed, and various votes taken, did I not feel
impelled by one consideration superior to all others; but, sir, whenever
a proposition is made which goes to affect the interest and wantonly
violates the rights of a State, one of whose Representatives I am, I hold
it to be my bounden duty to rise in the opposition. Such is the bill
in your hands, and under such influence do I now act. In my judgment
that bill usurps a power, and attempts the exercise of a right, which
the States of Maryland and Virginia never have, and I trust never will,
relinquish to any government--a right essential to them as sovereign
States, and the relinquishment of which will render them dependencies
not only on the General Government, but upon any corporation within the
District of Columbia.

In the course of this discussion, reference, no doubt, has been had to
the deeds of cession from those two States to the General Government; I
mean not again to bring them to their view, and mention them only for
one purpose. I presume that in the construction of those articles, the
same rules will be observed, the same principles will be adhered to,
which are observed in the construction of the original compact, the
constitution. I well know that in the construction of that instrument,
two opinions have gone abroad in the United States, and have their
zealous advocates: the one is, that the General Government possesses
all powers which it shall deem necessary, and which are not expressly
reserved to the States; to this doctrine I have never been a friend,
and am surprised to find that it has so many advocates on this day
who support that bill; the other is, “that all rights, powers, and
jurisdictions, are reserved to the States, which are not expressly
delegated to the General Government.” This is the doctrine which I have
always advocated, and which I support on this day by opposing that
bill. Admitting, sir, my first position to be true--that the same rules
of construction must be used in the two cases which I have mentioned,
I call upon gentlemen to show any express surrender of this right of
jurisdiction, either by the State of Maryland or that of Virginia.
None appears, and gentlemen must either adopt the extensive doctrine
of _implication_ as one of their political tenets, or relinquish that
bill. I will go further, sir, and declare it as my opinion, that the
legislatures of those two States never could have intended the surrender
of that jurisdiction. I was a member of the Legislature of Virginia at
that time, and the idea was new to me until the last year, when the
bridge proposition was brought forward. I appeal to the candor of the
gentlemen of this committee, and call upon them to say whether it is
reasonable to suppose that those two States, after taking uncommon pains
to fix, and render secure for ever, to themselves and their friends, the
navigation of this river; after uniting their efforts to open and improve
it to a considerable distance above tide-water, would surrender the
jurisdiction to any earthly power, thereby putting it in their power to
impede it whenever they please? for, be it remembered, that if we have a
right to throw up a dam in one place, we have a right to build a bridge
in another; if to build a bridge, to draw an artificial line at any
place, saying, “Thus far you shall go, and no further.”

For these reasons, I am convinced that the right has never been
surrendered; that it never was intended; and that it never ought to
be relinquished. Considering the objections which I have mentioned as
sufficient to defeat the bill, I have forborne to examine into its
expediency; whether it will prove advantageous to some of the district
and injurious to others, I will not pretend to say. One thing, however,
appears probable to me, that if, by the erection of this dam, the
rapidity of the water opposite to Georgetown is increased, and thereby
the sand and mud carried to a lower point and there deposited, that point
may be at or near the Eastern Branch, which we have established as our
navy yard, to which heavy vessels get with great difficulty, and from
which they may be entirely excluded, should the effect which I apprehend
take place. I submit this to the consideration of the friends of this
establishment, which is not without its enemies already.

One more word and I am done. If we admit the right to erect a dam,
we have the same to build a bridge; and if we grant the one for the
accommodation of one part of the people of the district, I know not how
we can refuse the other to the inhabitants of the other part. Let the
friends of the present bill look to this; the division of this House on
the last year, on that point, was very equal, and the admission of the
right will certainly give it new friends.

On the passage of the bill the yeas and nays were 66 to 39.

_Resolved_, That the title be, “An act authorizing the corporation of
Georgetown to make a dam or causeway from Mason’s Island to the western
shore of the river Potomac.”


THURSDAY, December 27.

_Mrs. Amy Dardin._

A petition of Amy Dardin, of the county of Mecklenburg, in the State
of Virginia, widow and administratrix of David Dardin, deceased, was
presented to the House and read, praying compensation for the value of
a stud horse, called Romulus, the property of the deceased, which was
impressed into the service of the Southern Army, under the command of
Major General Greene, by order of James Gunn, a Captain in a regiment of
Continental cavalry, some time in the month of July, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-one.--Referred to the Committee of the whole House
to whom was committed, on the sixth instant, the bill making farther
provision for extinguishing the debts due from the United States.


_General Hazen._

An engrossed bill for the relief of the legal representatives of the late
General Moses Hazen was read the third time; and, on the question that
the same do pass, it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 60, nays 38.


MONDAY, December 31.

_Post Road to New Orleans._

On a motion made and seconded that the House do come to the following
resolutions:

    1. _Resolved_, That a post road ought to be established from
    the City of Washington, on the most convenient and direct
    route, to pass through or near the Tuckabachee settlement to
    the Tombigbee settlement, in the Mississippi Territory, and
    from thence to the City of New Orleans.

    2. _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to cause to be laid before this House any documents,
    and give such other information as he may think proper,
    relative to opening a post road from the City of Washington to
    the City of New Orleans.

The first resolution being twice read, was, on a motion made, ordered to
be referred to the Committee of the whole House, to whom was committed,
on the seventh instant, a motion respecting “the establishment of a post
road from Knoxville, in the State of Tennessee, to the settlements on the
Tombigbee river, in the Mississippi Territory, and from thence to New
Orleans; also, for the establishment of a post road from Georgia to the
said settlement on the Tombigbee, to intersect the former road at the
most convenient point between Knoxville and the Tombigbee.”

The second resolution being twice read, was, on the question put
thereupon, agreed to by the House.

_Ordered_, That Mr. HOLLAND and Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL be appointed a
committee to present the second resolution to the President of the United
States.


_District of Columbia._

Mr. GREGG called up the resolutions for a recession of the District of
Columbia to the States of Maryland and Virginia.

Mr. HUGER moved to postpone the same till this day week.

Mr. JACKSON moved to postpone them till the 31st December next.

Some desultory remarks were made, not touching the merits of the main
question; at length the question was taken on postponing till 31st
December, and lost, without a division.

On postponing till Monday next, the question was decided in the
affirmative--59 for and 31 against it.

An engrossed bill to incorporate the Washington Building and Fire
Insurance Company was about being read, when

Mr. GREGG expressed a wish that it might be postponed, and a speedy
decision had on the question of recession. He understood this was the day
fixed for that subject.

Mr. LEWIS observed that the motion for recession could have had no effect
upon this bill, as it did not contemplate the recession of the City of
Washington, but only of the other parts of the district.

Mr. STANFORD had intended to have called up the resolutions for
recession, but he had just received a letter from a number of the
inhabitants of the district, wishing a short delay. There were also
absent from the House several members who had taken considerable interest
in the subject. For these reasons, he did not intend to call up the
resolutions for two or three days.

Mr. EARLY was averse to a postponement. He thought an early decision
ought to be made, to quiet the minds and soothe the feelings of the
inhabitants, who felt a deep interest in the decision. Indeed, the
members themselves had had their feelings excited in no inconsiderable
degree. He hoped if the gentleman who brought the resolutions forward
should forbear to bring them up, some other gentleman would do it for him.

Mr. STANFORD was induced to let the subject rest a few days longer, on
account of those very feelings, and interest, which pervaded the whole
body of the people. He would also prefer a decision by a full House,
rather than by such a thin one as now appeared.

Mr. EARLY did not think that a thin attendance by the members was a good
argument for postponement. If it was expected that every member should
attend, he feared the public business would progress very slowly; but
if the subject was entered upon now, and the resolutions adopted, they
would have to take the shape of a bill, and it would be many days before
the subject was finally decided, by which time, no doubt, the absent
gentlemen alluded to would arrive.

Mr. LYON said the bill that was moved to be postponed had nothing to do
with the recession, as it was not proposed to recede the city.

Mr. GREGG knew that the resolutions excepted Washington City, but he
hoped that if a part of the district was to be receded, there would be
found a majority for receding the whole. He was against the recession
altogether, and so he should be till the question was decided against
him. The business had been so long before the House, that he could not
see any reason for further delay.

On the question to postpone the bill for incorporating the Washington
Building and Fire Insurance Company, there were 51 for it and 42 against
it; and the bill was postponed accordingly,

The House then adjourned to Wednesday.


MONDAY, January 7, 1805.

_District of Columbia._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on a motion “to
recede to the States of Virginia and Maryland, the jurisdiction of such
parts of the Territory of Columbia as are without the limits of the city
of Washington.”

Mr. STANFORD said it was his wish to make a few observations on the
resolution now before the Committee, for the retrocession of that part of
the District of Columbia which had been ceded to the United States by the
State of Virginia, in support of the vote he should give--expecting that
what was said on the first, would be generally applicable to the last
resolution also. He begged leave, however, in the first place, to suggest
that, in bringing forward the motion, he had not had any the least
intention to take any step that should go to a removal of the government.
He trusted no gentleman of the committee would entertain such an opinion
of his views. Had such been his intention he would have preferred a
direct motion to that effect.

As then both the resolutions together made but a single object--that
of ceding back again to the respective States of Virginia and Maryland
all the District of Columbia, except the city of Washington--he should,
in the course of the discussion, consider it more incumbent on those
adverse to the measure to show the original wisdom and utility of
the provision in the constitution, than on its friends. It would be
enough for them to show its present evil tendency, and that it was an
encumbrance no way necessary or useful to the General Government.

Upon a former occasion some question had arisen, and might yet lie in
the way of some gentlemen, whether Congress, having once accepted the
cessions of the States, had now the power of recession. On that head he
had not, himself, ever found reason to doubt. By the third section and
fourth article of the constitution, “Congress has power to dispose of,
and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or
other property belonging to the United States;” and besides, the eighth
section of the first article, which assigns to Congress the exclusive
legislation over this district, in all cases whatsoever, does not appear
to come short of such a power. Like authority is also given, in the same
paragraph of the constitution, over all places purchased by the consent
of the State in which the same shall be, “for the erection of forts,
magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other needful buildings.” Congress,
thus possessing the right of disposal, had exercised that right by an act
passed two sessions ago, authorizing the Secretary of the Navy to convey
to the Salem Turnpike and Chelsea Bridge Companies a part of the navy
yard at Boston. With it, will any one contend that jurisdiction did not
also pass to the State of Massachusetts, whence it had been obtained? It
certainly would by every fair and _bona fide_ view of the circumstances.
If, for instance, murder should be committed on that part of the turnpike
which was formerly a part of the navy yard, could it be contended that
such murder was not punishable by the laws of Massachusetts; that the
General Government was the only competent authority to punish? He hoped
otherwise. A like discretionary power of cession was also exercised when
Congress anticipated the ordinance, and transferred the jurisdiction to
the people of the North-western Territory, which now forms the State
of Ohio. It would be remembered that, at the time of the transfer, the
United States held the exclusive jurisdiction of that territory.

But, said Mr. S., over and above the consideration that the District of
Columbia is in no way necessary, and every way expensive, to the General
Government--in fact, a kind of governmental nuisance that ought to be
removed--there was another objection, still more serious with him, the
people of the district were the merest subjects in their condition. If
they held rights, they were not apparent to him in the constitution. He
believed all they held were those of courtesy. In the constitution no
immunity, no privilege, no political right, had been, in so many words,
reserved to them. They had been specifically given away, consigned
to the ideal convenience of the General Government, without a single
specific reservation. This was not the case as to the people of the
States. If he were told the people were content, and did not wish a
change, that with him was a good reason why the motion should at once
prevail. If twenty, or twenty-five thousand people had already become
willing subjects, without wishing any share or control in their own
affairs, such an example ought no longer to remain under our system of
government, and he trusted would not. He concluded by expressing a hope
that the resolutions might be adopted.

Mr. SMILIE rose in reply. He disclaimed any intention hostile to
Washington remaining the seat of Government, and denied that the
recession would have any influence upon it. Having elucidated the
constitutionality of the measure, he exhibited in strong colors the
degraded situation of the people of the district, and the dangers which
might hereafter arise from a continuance of it.

Mr. DENNIS.--Mr. Chairman: As a resolution analogous in all its leading
features to those now under consideration, was submitted to the
consideration of a former Congress, by a gentleman from Massachusetts,
(Mr. BACON,) and as that resolution was put at rest by a very decisive
majority, I had not expected that its ghost would have risen up at
so early a day to haunt the people of Columbia, or to interrupt the
deliberations of this body. That the gentleman who has offered these
resolutions has acted from the best lights of his own understanding, and
has believed the object intended to be thereby effectuated is both within
the pale of our constitutional authority, and politically expedient, it
is not for me to question. To me, however, they appear unconstitutional
and politically inexpedient, and I will moreover add, cruel, unjust, and
tyrannical, in their operation on the people of this district.

In order to ascertain the extent of our power on the subject, we must
resort to the eighth section of the first article of the constitution.
Here we find that, amongst other powers therein enumerated, it is
declared as follows: “That Congress shall have the power to exercise
exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district (not
exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular States, and
the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the General Government,”
&c. This clause contemplates, first, a place to be acquired, lying at
the time within the jurisdiction of some of the States, but which was
to be put out of their control and within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the General Government. This was to be done in order that a permanent
seat might be established, which should not be liable to be changed by
legislative caprice; and in order that the jurisdiction over the place in
which its operations were to be conducted might be, like the Government
itself, the property of the whole people of the Union, and free from the
influence of any one of its component parts.

This appears to be as much a part of the constitution, that you should
always have this federal district, as that there should be a Legislative,
Executive, and Judiciary Department.

2d. It points out the manner in which this district shall be acquired,
and the agents who are to be instrumental in the acquisition. The
convention, on behalf of the people of the United States, who are
the principals, appoint Congress the attorney in fact to receive the
conveyance, and constitute the Legislatures of the States from whom
the cession or conveyance is to be made similar agents to make it. The
several agents have performed their respective offices, the district has
been acquired in conformity with the authority given, the right to the
property vested in the American people, and possession held of it by us,
for their benefit for whose use it was acquired. All the power which
was given as to the acquisition of the territory has been exhausted,
and no other power remains but that of exercising over it exclusive
legislation. To explain and illustrate this subject to the most ordinary
capacity, let me compare the transaction to a case in common life. If I
give a man a power of attorney to purchase for me a tract of land, in a
particular district of country, of a specified quantity of acres, leaving
it to him to make the location, and he accordingly make a purchase, and
I consent to the act, receive the conveyance, and take possession of
it, can my agent afterwards make another choice, divest me of my right,
and reconvey the property without my consent? No man will answer this
question affirmatively; and yet it is clear there is a perfect similitude
between the cases, and that Congress are agents acting in this case under
a limited authority and confined in the exercise thereof to a specific
object. That Congress are special agents, and not vested with a general
power over every possible case, is manifest from the whole tenor of the
constitution; and I will lay down in this instance a rule which has
been generally recognized as the standard, by which to test the extent
of constitutional authority in any given case. It is, that Congress can
exercise no power on any subject but what is expressly delegated and
specifically enumerated in the constitution, or necessary and incidental
to the execution of the specified powers. What is their power in the
present instance? To accept a cession and exercise over it exclusive
legislation. Can you infer from hence a power of retrocession? To do so
is at war with the amendment of the constitution, which declares that all
powers not given to the General Government are retained by the States or
the people respectively. Was not the power confined to the acceptance of
the district directed to be procured for a specific purpose, and when so
acquired, to continue an object over which Congress, as a permanent body,
might always have it in their power to exercise exclusive jurisdiction?
Can you then claim the power of reconveying the district and receiving
one as often as your caprice may dictate, or of divesting your successors
of the same control over this district which we may exercise ourselves?
The power is not expressly delegated, nor is it a necessary power to
carry into effect any power given; for it will not be contended, but we
may exercise all our powers and perform all our duties, and still retain
the jurisdiction over the district.

This district has been completely severed from Maryland and Virginia,
and has been erected into two counties by the name of Washington and
Alexandria, and forms, at this time, no more a part of the territorial
limits of Maryland and Virginia, than of New Hampshire or Georgia; and
you may by the same authority that you propose to reannex them to those
States, unite them to Delaware or Jersey, and put the people, many of
whom never were citizens of Maryland or Virginia, under the jurisdiction
of the Emperor of Hayti.

But, Mr. Chairman, are the people of the territory unworthy of a
moment’s consideration, and will their remonstrances against the
measure be altogether disregarded? Let us take a retrospective view
of the circumstances under which they were seduced from their parent
State, and the manner in which they consented to dissever the civil and
political bonds by which they were formerly connected. What induced them
to alienate their native allegiance, and with a generous confidence to
submit themselves to your authority? First, the constitution held out a
pledge and formed the basis of the contract, involving a promise, that
if the people living in the district of country which should be fixed
upon for the seat of Government, would give up the rights possessed
under the government of the States to which they belonged, they should
for ever remain under the exclusive jurisdiction of Congress. By the act
of Congress accepting the cession, the territory received is declared
to be the place fixed on for the _permanent seat_ of the Government,
and the States ceded for ever the jurisdiction of the persons and soil
within the same to Congress, for the purpose of exercising therein
exclusive legislation. Finally, you assume the government, establish your
own systems, and annul those of the States. Confiding in the premises,
they gave up the control of their persons, and some of them divided
with you their property. They came to you with one consent, and hailed
your arrival here as the most fortunate epoch in the annals of their
country--and now, will you set them adrift without deigning to listen to
their prayers?

This being the seat of Government, where all the representatives of
the nation are collected, and who, from the responsibility which they
owe to their respective constituents and to the whole people of the
United States, are under every moral and political tie to do justice,
and to protect the rights and interests of the people here; here every
citizen of the district has access to every member, and he may personally
communicate his wants, his wishes, and solicit his particular patronage
of his interest; and instead of being confined, like a district of
country in the remote parts of the Union, to a single member, who may
not possess the talents to explain its interests to the legislative
body, the citizen of this place may make a selection out of the whole
of the members to whom he may choose to confide his application. Like
the seat of Government in all other places, without having any actual
representation, this district will have more than its equal share of
influence, and its weight will always be felt more sensibly in the
Legislative Councils of the nation than the remote parts of the Union.
Our theoretical philosophers, however, not only contend that in order
to make these people free and happy, we must force liberty upon them,
whether they will have it or not, but that even with respect to the
conveniency or inconveniency of being governed by this body and the
States of Maryland and Virginia, they are incapable of judging for
themselves.

But is there no conveniency resulting to them from having all their
concerns brought within the narrow limits of ten miles square? Is there
no conveniency in having their own courts of justice at their very doors,
instead of travelling to Richmond and Annapolis? It is an old-fashioned
idea perhaps, but it is one which very generally prevails, even at the
present day, that to bring justice home to every man’s door, is a great
political and civil blessing; and in this respect the people of this
place enjoy an advantage which is unknown to any other people in the
world.

The great advantages contemplated as likely to result from being
represented in the Legislatures of Maryland and Virginia, and the powers
of self-government which it is supposed may result from the measure, are
merely ideal. What weight will the district on the Virginia side of the
Potomac have in the large body of the Legislature of that State, when
they will only form a part of the county of Fairfax, and have a share in
choosing two members to the Assembly? The same question might be asked in
relation to the district of country formerly comprehended in the counties
of Prince George and Montgomery, in Maryland. They would be regarded
with a jealous eye; a sort of aliens, who were forced, contrary to their
remonstrance, to submit to their respective jurisdictions.

Mr. EARLY.--Mr. Chairman, the resolutions which we are now called upon
to decide, possess a high degree of importance, not only from their
object, and the consequences likely to result, but also from certain
principles which have been contended for, as applying themselves to the
subject. In the outset of the discussion we are met with objections
upon constitutional principles against our right. We have been told by
the people of this district, that we cannot recede the territory of
which they are inhabitants without their consent; and the gentleman from
Maryland (Mr. DENNIS) has told us to-day that the proposed recession
cannot be made without the consent of the people of the whole United
States.

It is certainly desirable that all questions of this nature should
receive a solution from the principles and practice of our own
governments, without having a resort to foreign sources. But much I
fear that the condition of the District of Columbia is one of a nature
so peculiar to itself, that no such solution can be found. For it is
impossible to conceive that the principles of a government whose essence
is right, should be found to apply to the situation of a people stripped
of all right.

The proposition that the consent of the people of this district is
necessary to give validity to an act of Congress, having for its
object a recession of the territory, carries with it the resolution of
itself. It proves too much. The same reason by which they maintain this
proposition, would go to prove that their consent was necessary to give
validity to any act of legislation over them. That Congress possess the
power of exclusive legislation over them, cannot be denied. We exercise,
and we are authorized so to do, a power over all their rights of life,
liberty, and property. And there cannot be presented to my mind a greater
absurdity than to say the consent of the people of Columbia is necessary
to any act in relation to them, when they are stripped of all rights of
self-government.

Mr. EPPES, with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. SMILIE,) considered
the question of receding the Territory of Columbia as entirely separate
and distinct from a question to remove the seat of Government. He did
not understand the particular connection between the two questions. He
believed that the seat of Government would be as permanently fixed here
if the jurisdiction of Congress extended only over the soil covered by
its public buildings, as if it embraced any given number of square miles.
All that the National Legislature wants here is accommodation. Assembled
at this place for purposes of general legislation, the exercise of a
local sovereignty over a few square miles is neither beneficial to the
nation nor interesting to Congress. The right of legislating for persons
around us, whose local interests we do not feel or understand, cannot
attach to this spot the Representatives of the nation: the exercise of
this power by Congress cannot attach to this spot the nation itself.
The public convenience and interest fixed our Government within this
territory; the public convenience and interest can alone continue it
here. The permanent seat of our Government depends, not on the extent of
our powers over the country around us, but on the will of the nation.
Whatever might be the feelings of other gentlemen on this subject, he had
no hesitation in declaring, that, although he was in favor of receding
the Territory of Columbia, he should never feel himself authorized,
as a Representative of Virginia, to vote for a removal of the seat of
Government.

The committee now rose, reported progress, and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, January 8.

_The District of Columbia._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on a motion
of the twenty-ninth of November last “to recede to the States of Virginia
and Maryland the jurisdiction of such parts of the Territory of Columbia
as are without the limits of the city of Washington.”

Mr. SOUTHARD.--Mr. Chairman, I should have contented myself with giving a
silent vote on this question, had it not been for the strong impressions
on my mind that more is intended than expressed in the resolutions now
on the table. It is not two years since two resolutions were introduced
to this House similar to those now under consideration, with this
distinction, that _they_ went to include the city of Washington with the
other parts of the district in the transfer to the States of Virginia and
Maryland.

I believe it to be the object of some members not only to recede the
branches of the district contained in these resolutions, but likewise
the city. If the doctrine so strongly contended for, that Congress has a
right to transfer or recede, be once established--take the first step,
and you may as easily take the second. I have no desire to call in
question the sincerity of the mover of these resolutions, nor of many who
support them; yet there are others who wish a recession of the _whole_
territory.

This subject involves two questions: First, whether Congress has a
constitutional power to make a retrocession of this district to the
States of Virginia and Maryland; and secondly, whether it be good policy.
As to the first, Mr. S. said, he had strong doubts on his mind, as to the
rightful power of Congress to recede or transfer.

The members of the convention who framed the Constitution of the United
States looked forward to a day when it would become necessary to fix
a place which should become the permanent seat of the Government. By
reference to the eighth section of the first article of the constitution,
we see it clearly expressed that Congress shall have power “to exercise
exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district, not
exceeding ten miles square, as may by cession of particular States, and
the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the Government of the
United States.”

This article, with all others contained in that instrument, after
publication for the consideration of the people of the United States,
was adopted, and became a part of the constitution. In pursuance of this
object, Congress, on the 16th of July, 1790, passed an act, entitled “the
cession act,” in the words following, to wit:

    “That a district of territory, not exceeding ten miles square,
    to be located as hereafter directed, on the river Potomac,
    at some place between the mouths of the Eastern branch and
    Conococheague, be, and the same is hereby accepted for the
    permanent seat of the Government of the United States.”

Congress accepted a cession of ten miles square for the express purpose,
and on the express condition of exercising exclusive legislation and
jurisdiction, and this, too, agreeably to the spirit and meaning of the
constitution and law, thus forming a compact which Congress has no right
to violate. All the States in their Legislative capacity, and the people
of the United States, including the inhabitants of this territory, are
bound by this compact, which compact is as strong as the constitution
itself.

Mr. FINDLAY observed that, after what his colleague (Mr. SMILIE) and
others had said in favor of the resolutions for a retrocession of the
territory, exclusive of the city, he had not expected to hear any
objection to the resolutions on arguments derived from the constitution;
the resolutions for receding the territory to the States who had made the
original cession might, he thought, have been fairly combated, on the
ground of expediency; on this ground only did the resolutions before the
committee rest. He gave the credit, however, to the gentlemen opposed to
the resolutions, for their ingenuity in taking the most tenable ground,
though not directly involved in the question, but he acknowledged it
was indirectly connected with it. If we had not a right to retrocede,
the Representatives of the United States undoubtedly might decline to
exercise jurisdiction, for whatever the rights of the people were, the
Legislature must be free to act or not to act. If this is not the case,
it could not be a sovereign Legislature; Congress itself, in this case,
would act by compulsion.

He said that, though a member of the ratifying convention of
Pennsylvania, and of the Legislature of that State, and of Congress
since that time, he did not remember ever to have heard it suggested
that Congress was not vested with the same discretion in this case as
in others, expressed in similar terms. He had, indeed, of late, heard
several members say that Congress was obliged to establish a permanent
seat, &c., but, in taking a review of the constitution, he found no
such expressions. The word permanent was not in that instrument, nor
any other expression that made it the duty of Congress to establish a
permanent seat, more than to establish a permanent excise, direct tax,
or bankrupt law. The word permanent, however, he found in an act of
Congress, but certainly not authorized by the constitution; and this
present Congress had equal power to make a retrocession as that Congress
had to accept. He said it was not necessary to prove to the members
of this committee that laws, in their nature, were not permanent, but
changeable with circumstances, and that Congress had by the constitution
equal powers with any other Congress. That, from the express words of
the constitution investing this power in Congress, and from its analogy
to the investiture of other powers, no argument could be drawn against
the resolutions; that every argument of that kind he had heard was not
taken from the words of the constitution, but from constructions given to
it which he conceived the words would not bear, and which would have a
ruinous effect applied to other powers expressed in similar words. That
he did not consider himself bound by what other gentlemen fancied the
constitution meant or intended, but by what it said.

Mr. F. said it had been frequently asked what more difficulty there was
in legislating for ten miles square, than for the city alone. In answer
to this, he asked those members to recollect how many applications had
been made, how many laws have been passed, how many days have been
occupied in legislating for other parts of the district than the city.
He would ask what the people would lose by being receded to the States
to which they formerly belonged, and what they gain by the members of
Congress, who have no common interest with them, nor even acquaintance
with them or their peculiar circumstances, and liable to be imposed on
by every one with whom they converse, legislating for them? He said that
it had not been made to appear that the people would suffer any loss by
agreeing to the resolutions, and that, as it was indubitably evident that
the public would gain advantage, he hoped they would be agreed to. He
had early observed that there were nearly as many interfering interests
in this ten miles square, as in the whole United States; the members of
the committee would recollect that several of the most tedious debates,
accompanied with the greatest irritation, that had taken place this
session, arose from such subjects.

Mr. BOYD said, that, although some gentlemen had left the
constitutionality of the proposed measure out of the question, he was
not satisfied any more on that point than he was of its expediency. The
constitution was to him the polar star by which his course through the
sea of politics would be regulated. The constitution had been formed by
a convention composed of delegates from the several States of the Union,
and was afterwards adopted by State conventions, on behalf of themselves
and the people. He had been a member of his State Legislature, when they
passed a law ceding a part of their territory, well knowing that if
Congress did accept it, by the constitution, they must and would exercise
exclusive legislation over such district. He was well aware at that time
of the consequence of accepting a district of territory not exceeding ten
miles square, as laid down in the section so often alluded to; and he
did believe that that consequence would be, that Congress must exercise
exclusive legislation whenever they accepted the ceded district. The idea
of recession was not taken up at that time. The States of Pennsylvania,
Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, and Virginia, made offers of cession
under the terms of the constitution. A partial cession was accepted by
Congress from Maryland and Virginia. If a new disposition is to be made
of this district, he did not see why Congress might not convey it to any
of those States which had proffered to comply with the constitutional
suggestion, and receive from the same another territory in lieu thereof.
This statement he made merely to show the absurdity of recession, as it
had presented itself to his mind.

Mr. NELSON meant to lay his opinion before the committee, because it
appeared to be the habit of members to assign reasons for voting, without
expecting to make any impression upon others. He considered the present
question of the greatest magnitude to the United States generally; and of
peculiar importance to his immediate constituents. He thought he should
be able to show, to the satisfaction of every member present, that the
removal of the seat of Government, which would be the consequence of
recession, was not only inexpedient, but also unconstitutional. If he
was successful in making out his point, that it was unconstitutional, he
presumed the question of expediency need not be argued; the measure would
be set at rest, and not a member would be found to give it his support.
But, if he should prove unfortunate in this respect, which however
appeared to his mind as true as that two and two make four, he might have
reference to the question of expediency.

Previous to an inquiry into the constitutionality of the proposed
project, he would just observe that constitutions themselves were things
of recent date. Before the American Revolution the word itself was never
fully understood. Lexicographers who attempted to define it never could
agree. There was no practice whereupon to try its meaning. No power
on earth had a constitution before the American States. True, England
has long boasted of possessing a constitution, and so satisfied were
her statesmen and politicians of the reality of this imaginary being,
that they have extolled it to the skies. The glorious Constitution of
England, her pride, and the envy of the world! Fine words truly; but
where is the thing itself to be found? Is it reduced to writing? No.
Who has seen it? No man. Is it known to any man? If it be, no two agree
as to what the boasted Constitution of Britain is. How different, how
honorably different, is the American Constitution! With us it is reduced
to writing. It is in every man’s hand; it is known to the whole world,
and every citizen agrees in its true and legitimate meaning. He would
take this opportunity of expressing his voice, and of holding up his hand
in resisting the doctrine of construction and inference formerly set up,
whereby the tenor and effect of that invaluable instrument was likely to
be changed. He knew that artful and ingenious men might twist and turn,
and make it, like the word republican, to mean any thing or nothing,
as best suited their nefarious designs. But this declaration and these
attacks upon the body of that sacred work, were introduced by insinuating
and artful lawyers, aided by the villany of judges, and accepted by men
employed in the administration of our public and most important national
affairs.

He saw nothing to justify the present motion. Gentlemen had attempted to
show, not only its policy, but also its constitutionality. He, however,
could not discover any words on that paper that warranted the project in
the most remote degree; perhaps it had escaped his search; but he rather
suspected gentlemen relied more upon an inference than on either the
letter or spirit of the instrument itself. But he here would repeat, that
no man was authorized to infer or construe, from the constitution, any
other thing than what the plain sense of plain words would justify.

Mr. ELMER said he agreed with the gentleman from Maryland who had just
now been up, that the question before the committee is an important and
weighty one; but it seems that it is not of itself sufficiently weighty
for that gentleman’s shoulders, for he has loaded it with much extraneous
matter. Had the gentleman proved to my satisfaction either of the
positions which he promised to demonstrate, I would not have troubled the
committee with any remarks on the subject, but would have joined him in
voting against the resolutions on the table. But, unfortunately for me,
I have, by everything that has been said, become more convinced of the
constitutionality and expediency of carrying the resolutions into effect.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD said the object of the present motion was, he supposed,
to make a permanent recession of the two parts of this district, one to
Virginia, and the other to Maryland, retaining the city of Washington.
If this was really the object, there could be no doubt but it went to
operate a change of the seat of Government. This he would endeavor, in as
few words as possible, to demonstrate. The eighth section of the first
article authorizes Congress to assume the exclusive legislation over a
district not exceeding ten miles square, &c. The States of Maryland and
Virginia ceded a district of ten miles square, or any lesser quantity,
and Congress accepted a part from each State, making one district, to
become the seat of Government of the United States. From this statement,
it is apparent that the territory, or district, of Columbia is the seat
of Government, and not the city of Washington. If, then, you recede the
territory, you recede the seat of Government, although you reserve the
city of Washington. He asked, then, whether this did not substantially go
to remove the seat of Government? After you have receded two parts of the
district, can a district be said to remain? If it does not remain, your
seat of Government is gone, and gentlemen are justified in connecting
the idea of removal with that of recession. Indeed, he felt surprised
at the declarations made by gentlemen on this floor, that the recession
had no connection with removal, and if they thought it had, they would
abandon the measure; yet, nevertheless, they give the resolutions their
warmest support.

He was not prepared to say that Congress had no right to exercise
the powers of recession and removal; but he did not think they were
prepared to act upon those questions at the present day. He, however,
acknowledged, that events might arise to make a removal necessary, but
nothing of the kind had yet occurred. There were some inconveniences in
residing here, but the members knew them, and they are lessening every
day. If, however, gentlemen are not satisfied with the accommodation,
and think that a justifiable ground for removal, they will vote for the
motion, if they can get over the constitutional objections, which had
considerable weight on his mind.

It was very clear to him, that the convention which framed the
constitution intended and designed to establish a permanent seat of
Government; that the constitution fully and effectually provides for that
object. The circumstances which gave rise to the measure are too recent,
and must be too fresh in the minds of the members of this committee, to
render it necessary or useful for him to detail them at this time. Now,
whether the convention accomplished the object they had in view, the
constitution would decide; and whether the object had been accomplished
by the cession of particular States and the acceptance of Congress, the
laws will decide. But whether it is wise or expedient to destroy a work
on which so much wisdom, time, and money had been expended, the gentlemen
forming this committee will decide.

There were doubts entertained of the constitutionality of the measure of
retrocession, and if gentlemen doubted, it would be much safer not to act
on the subject than to risk the breach of the solemn obligations they had
entered into at that table. He thought the weight of the argument on the
expediency preponderated on the side he had advocated; and, from the most
candid view of the subject, he was inclined to recommend the rejection of
the resolutions; at all events, he should give them his decided negative.

Mr. CLARK.--The question before the committee is truly of considerable
importance, not only as it respects the constitutionality but the policy
of the measure. He was sorry he had not the talents requisite for a full
and complete investigation of so great a subject. Bred to an occupation
purely professional, he had been led more to the study of detail and
practice, than to abstract theories; hence it was, that, engaged in
that laborious pursuit, he had no time and less opportunity of studying
the diversified objects of political science. Thus circumstanced,
he approached this question with extreme diffidence and cautious
circumspection; the infraction of the constitution was to him a source
of alarm, and however great the object or brilliant the achievement, he
stood appalled at the prostration of that constitution he had always held
in an estimation that approached to reverence.

But, on reflection, he was convinced that Congress were not about to
violate their oaths, as had been insinuated, by the adoption of the
present motion. He considered them in the exercise of a legitimate
authority, and he would endeavor, in a brief manner, to examine whether
they had not complete constitutional power to make a retrocession. If
he was capable of demonstrating this point, he trusted he need not go
further. But, it was necessary he should, in order to ascertain whether
the present was the proper time, and the resolutions the correct mode?
In doing this he had no prejudice to gratify or caprice to indulge; a
stranger to the place, a stranger to the people, he had no motive to
action but the unbiased result of his own opinion.

He should not, however, look into the constitution for sections wherefrom
to draw a constructive power on this head; he was not one of those that
collected power from implication, and if the authority is not expressly
given, he would not assume it. The eighth section of the first article
gives to Congress the power of exercising the sole and exclusive
legislation in all cases whatsoever.

What is the appropriate meaning of the word “exclusive” as here used?
It implies more than the debarring and shutting out all other possible
powers of legislation, and, when taken in connection with the after, and
immediately following words of the paragraph, it vests the absolute and
uncontrollable power in Congress, free from any restriction; there is no
possible case in which it cannot legislate. The constitution declares
Congress shall legislate in all cases whatsoever. But gentlemen say there
is a case in which Congress cannot legislate. Aware of this absurdity, a
distinction is attempted to be drawn between legislating for inhabitants
of the district and for the district itself. But if it be established,
as I think it has been, that Congress is here omnipotent, if you will
allow me the expression, the conclusion in both cases (admitting the
distinction, which can by no means be done) is the same; in one case, the
retrocession will mean nothing more than a cessation from legislation,
accompanied with a desire that it may be resumed by the States; in the
other, it will be a complete transfer of the district. In this sense it
must be considered; the very words go the whole of this length. It is
given to Congress, and not to the people; it is a complete investiture,
boundless and indefeasible; and this is a full answer to the argument of
gentlemen that the power is held in trust and not absolute.

As to the expediency of retrocession, he would add a few words. When
he took a view of this mighty ten miles square, he saw nothing
pleasant--nothing political--to commend. He spoke of the inhabitants,
whenever he had occasion to allude to them, with pity and compassion; and
he most devoutly wished to see them placed, as Americans, in a condition
more congenial to his own feelings, and the feelings of every true lover
of civil and political freedom. The question in this point of view will
be, Is it proper for Congress at this time to recede the parts of the
district contemplated by the resolutions?

He should allude to the expense, in order to give an answer to that
question--an expense enormous, indeed, yet every day increasing, and
one which threatened to defeat every calculation made to ascertain
its amount. The time of Congress is occupied day after day in
trifling Legislative provisions for this or that particular spot, so
inconsiderable in size or commercial importance as scarcely to furnish
a speck in the map of the United States. But laying this circumstance
out of sight, he would ask, Was Congress competent to legislate for
the inhabitants of the district? He had hoped when he first came to
Washington that they were, but experience had convinced him that they
were not equal to the task. One day they received petitions to make
certain provisions for the benefit of the people of the district,
and Congress, with the best intentions and dispositions, went into
the inquiry. After some progress made therein, a counter-petition is
presented, and the House is suspended between two or more jarring
interests. How much better, then, would it be to let these people have
recourse to those Governments which understand their real views, and
can adopt measures to ameliorate their condition! Congress is composed
of materials too heterogeneous ever to do this with any tolerable
satisfaction.

Mr. SLOAN.--My friend from Maryland (Mr. NELSON) has observed that it
is customary for members to express their sentiments on subjects under
discussion in the House--not that he expected to make one proselyte by
his observations. I perfectly agree with him that there is no reason to
believe that he has, for this plain reason: he has not adduced a single
fact in support of his argument; but, after exploding all conclusions
drawn from implication or construction, drew his own from nothing else.

But, Mr. Chairman, under sanction of the aforesaid custom, and also from
a sense of duty, I beg the attention of this committee to some brief
observations on this important subject. I consider it as altogether
improper, unfair, and unjust to blend a subject under discussion with
others not even contemplated, and to endeavor to influence the minds
of members with predictions of certain events, yet in the womb of
futurity, that may or may not come to pass. The end contemplated by the
present resolutions is neither the removal of the seat of Government,
nor to prevent Congress from exercising exclusive jurisdiction over any
territory, but to reduce the present quantum. But, say the opposers of
these resolutions, the proposed retrocession of a part of the territory
is intended as an opening wedge, preparatory to a total retrocession and
removal of the seat of Government.

Mr. Chairman, I do not pretend to a foreknowledge of any member’s
thoughts before they are articulated in words; those who have this
foreknowledge have a great advantage over other members who have it not;
but I am free to declare that my opinion is quite the reverse--believing
that the retrocession of that part of the territory contemplated by the
resolutions now under consideration, would have a tendency to continue
the seat of Government in this place.

But it has been asserted that we have no right to make the proposed
retrocession, and from the dictatorial style of the resolutions of the
town of Alexandria, and the positive assertions that we have heard on
this floor that it was unconstitutional, oppressive, and tyrannical, I
expected from the usual accuracy and correctness of the member who made
those assertions, (Mr. DENNIS,) that he was in possession of documents to
substantiate the fact; but, to my surprise, instead of such documents, he
has adduced and principally relied on the constitution, in which there
is not a single imperative sentence obligatory on Congress, either to
receive a cession, or, when received, to continue exclusive jurisdiction
over one foot of territory--the plain and unequivocal language of the
constitution leaving it perfectly optional whether to receive, and, if
received, whether to retain jurisdiction or not. Hence, I conceive that
no legislative body can be justly charged with tyranny or oppression
for altering or (if from experience it becomes necessary) disannulling
their own acts--a contra-opinion I consider as altogether uncongenial
to improvement, genuine liberty, and the inherent rights of man, and as
such, I hope will ever be exploded in these United States.


WEDNESDAY, January 9.

_District of Columbia._

Mr. THATCHER was opposed to the motion for a recession, and he had heard
only two reasons urged in favor of the measure; that the exercise of
exclusive legislation by Congress over the District of Columbia was
attended with an undue expense of the public money, and occupied so much
of their time, that the business of the Union was interrupted and put to
a stand by the interference of the local concerns of this place. This
statement he did not believe to be perfectly correct; no doubt some of
their time was taken up, but he would leave it to every gentleman to say,
whether, if they had even more business before them than they had, there
was not time enough to transact it. The House usually sat from eleven
o’clock until three; but it must have been frequently observed, that
the adjournment took place much earlier for want of business to employ
them. But he was not an advocate for the present mode of conducting
the business of the district; it would perhaps be a better way to give
them a subordinate government, controllable by Congress; or a committee
of Congress might be appointed for the purpose. He did not see that the
complaint of too much legislation was well founded, in any thing that had
taken place during the present session. If the little labor they had to
perform was too great for them, what must the labor of their predecessors
have been, who had passed all the laws in existence for the government of
the district, and yet he had never heard any complaint made by them on
the ground now taken; they knew that the constitution enjoined upon them
the duty of exercising exclusive legislation over the ten miles square,
and they performed it with patient attention.

His mind revolted at the idea of recession. Gentlemen had contended that
the powers exercised over the people of Columbia were derogatory of, and
inconsistent with the principles of free government. Yet, what does this
motion for recession propose? Why, to transfer them and the territory
away, in the manner practised in Russia, in the transfer of provinces or
manors, transferring the vassals with the soil. This may be truly called
derogatory to the principles of freedom. Nor is this all; for you do not
transfer them merely without their consent, but in the face of their
serious remonstrances against the transfer.

Mr. SMILIE advocated, and Messrs. HUGER and CLAIBORNE opposed the
resolutions; when the question was taken on agreeing to the first
resolution, for receding that part of the district formerly attached to
Virginia, and passed in the negative--yeas 42, nays 62.

The question was then taken on the second resolution, for receding that
part of the district, excepting the city of Washington, formerly attached
to Maryland, and passed in the negative--yeas 42, nays 65.

The question was then taken by yeas and nays on agreeing to that part of
the report which involved a disagreement to the first resolution, and
carried affirmatively--yeas 87, nays 46, as follows:

    YEAS.--Nathaniel Alexander, Simeon Baldwin, William Blackledge,
    Adam Boyd, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, George W. Campbell, John
    Campbell, Levi Casey, William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden,
    Clifton Claggett, Thomas Claiborne, John Clopton, Frederick
    Conrad, Jacob Crowninshield, Manasseh Cutler, Richard Cutts,
    John Davenport, John Dennis, William Dickson, Thomas Dwight,
    John B. Earle, James Elliot, William Eustis, Calvin Goddard,
    Andrew Gregg, Gaylord Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings,
    William Helms, David Holmes, David Hough, Benjamin Huger,
    Samuel Hunt, John G. Jackson, William Kennedy, Joseph Lewis,
    jun., Henry W. Livingston, Thomas Lowndes, John B. C. Lucas,
    Matthew Lyon, William McCreery, Nahum Mitchell, Thomas Moore,
    Roger Nelson, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Thomas Plater,
    Samuel D. Purviance, Thomas Sammons, Thomas Sanford, John
    Smith, Henry Southard, Joseph Stanton, William Stedman, James
    Stephenson, Samuel Taggart, Benjamin Tallmadge, Samuel Tenney,
    David Thomas, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg, Philip Van
    Cortlandt, Isaac Van Horne, Peleg Wadsworth, Matthew Walton,
    Lemuel Williams, Marmaduke Williams, Richard Wynn, Joseph
    Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Willis Alston, jun., Isaac Anderson, John Archer, George
    Michael Bedinger, Phanuel Bishop, John Boyle, William Butler,
    Christopher Clark, Matthew Clay, John Dawson, Peter Early,
    Ebenezer Elmer, John W. Eppes, William Findlay, John Fowler,
    Edwin Gray, John A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Joseph Heister,
    John Hoge, James Holland, Walter Jones, Simon Larned, Michael
    Leib, Andrew McCord, David Meriwether, Nicholas R. Moore,
    Jeremiah Morrow, James Mott, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer, John
    Randolph, John Rea, of Pennsylvania, John Rhea, of Tennessee,
    Jacob Richards, Samuel Riker, Erastus Root, Ebenezer Seaver,
    James Sloan, John Smilie, Richard Stanford, John Stewart,
    Joseph B. Varnum, Daniel C. Verplanck, John Whitehill, and
    Alexander Wilson.

Mr. SMILIE moved to amend the second resolution by striking out the words
“without the limits of the city of Washington,” so that the city as well
as the other parts of the district might be receded.

Only twenty-one members rising in favor of this motion, it was lost.

The question was then taken by yeas and nays on agreeing to the report
of the committee, involving a disagreement to the second resolution, and
carried affirmatively--yeas 69, nays 39.

So the said motion was rejected.

The question was then taken on agreeing to the whole report of the
committee, and carried--yeas 50, nays 28.


SATURDAY, January 12.

_Resolved_, That the Speaker address a letter to the Executive of the
State of North Carolina, communicating information of the death of JAMES
GILLESPIE, late a member of this House, in order that measures may be
taken to supply any vacancy occasioned thereby in the Representation from
that State.


TUESDAY, January 15.

_District of Columbia._

The bill to prohibit the exaction of bail upon certain suits within the
District of Columbia was brought in engrossed, and read the third time.

The final passage of the bill was opposed by Mr. GODDARD, Mr. ROOT, and
Mr. NELSON, and defended by Mr. NEWTON, as a proper measure to prevent
the oppression of malignant creditors.

Mr. EPPES desired Mr. BECKLEY to read that part of the Constitution of
the United States relative to the extent of the Judiciary power, and
that part of the law establishing the Judicial authority of the District
of Columbia, with a view of showing that the bill was not essentially
necessary.

Mr. EARLY moved a recommitment of the bill to a select committee.

Mr. BEDINGER wished that the bill might go to a select committee, because
he considered the principle a valuable one. He imagined, however, that
the details were not altogether perfect. He felt concerned on this
subject, on account of several of his constituents who had been tricked
out of notes and bonds for lands in Kentucky, which had been advertised,
and were no longer available against the drawers in that State; but,
should it so happen that business called them to Washington, they might
be extremely harassed for want of bail.

The reference was opposed by Mr. R. GRISWOLD, as he was against the
principle of the bill altogether.

On the question to recommit it, it passed in the negative--ayes 44, noes
59.

The question was then taken on the passage of the bill, and it was lost,
there being but thirty members who voted in its favor.


WEDNESDAY, January 16.

_Naval Appropriations._

The House again resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole, on the
bill making appropriations for the support of Government for the year one
thousand eight hundred and five.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH moved to fill the blank, in the clause providing for the
expense of intercourse with the Barbary Powers, with $63,500, instead of
the sum of $113,000, stated in the estimate for the current year. The
difference ($50,000) would make a part of additional appropriations, for
which he should move a distinct clause.--Motion carried.

Mr. R. then moved to add the following words: “for the contingent
expenses of intercourse with the Barbary Powers ---- dollars.” He said,
that he should be obliged to ask $150,000, in addition to the sum
reserved out of the preceding appropriation, and of course to fill the
blank with the words $200,000. This was rendered necessary because the
Mediterranean fund, heretofore liable to this charge, had been subjected,
on the motion of a gentleman from Connecticut, to the whole expense
of the support of the Navy. He supposed that no difference of opinion
could exist on the subject of enabling the Executive to make peace with
Tripoli. He had no objection to any restriction which might be thought
necessary to limit the application of the additional sum of $150,000,
which he required, to the object for which it was intended. But as the
words ransom, or tribute, had never been introduced into our statutes
heretofore, he hoped they would not be admitted on this occasion.

Mr. R. GRISWOLD had no objection to making the appropriation required, or
even a larger sum; for he was well convinced that the President ought to
have funds as well as the authority to accomplish any object connected
with the present subject, which he might wish to accomplish.


FRIDAY, January 18.

_Relief of Tax Collectors in New York._

A petition of John York, of Brookefield, in the county of Chenango, and
State of New York, late collector of the taxes on lands, slaves, and
dwelling-houses, for the eighty-third collection district within the
said State, and now confined in the jail of said county, was presented
to the House and read, praying relief in the case of a judgment awarded
against the petitioner and execution issued thereon, for the sum of eight
hundred dollars, including interest and cost of suit, for the payment of
which the petitioner was compelled to apply a certain proportion of the
proceeds of taxes collected by him in the capacity aforesaid.--Referred
to Messrs. ROOT, GREGG, and HASTINGS; to examine and report their opinion
thereupon to the House.


_District of Columbia._

DIVORCES.

Mr. DAWSON, from the committee appointed on the petition of Marcella
Stanton, and others, reported a bill, entitled an act to authorize the
Court of the District of Columbia to decree divorces in certain cases;
which was read twice, and referred to a Committee of the Whole on Tuesday
next.

Mr. DAWSON prefaced his motion, on this subject, when he introduced it in
the manner following:

He observed that, after the decision which had taken place a few days
ago, he had resolved not to meddle any further with the affairs of the
District of Columbia, but to leave the inhabitants in the enjoyment of
the blessings of that government which they seem to have chosen, and the
principles of which were sanctioned by this House.

There was, however, one class of persons who claimed, in all situations,
our particular attention; who had not made a surrender of their political
rights; and, if they had been defrauded out of their natural ones, were
anxious to regain them.

It would be remembered that, at the last session, a gentleman from
Maryland, who had been absent for some time, and whom he rejoiced now to
see in his place, (Mr. NICHOLSON,) presented a petition from a person
in this district, praying for a divorce, and he two others for the same
relief. These were referred to a select committee, and a bill reported,
which remained among the unfinished business; as he learned that the
situations and wishes of these unfortunate persons were still the same,
he thought the subject ought again to be renewed.


_Emancipation in the District of Columbia._

Mr. SLOAN moved the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That, from and after the fourth of July, 1805,
    all blacks and people of color that shall be born within the
    District of Columbia, or whose mother shall be the property of
    any person residing within the said district, shall be free,
    the males at the age of ----, and the females at the age of
    ----.

The House proceeded to consider the said motion, and on the question that
the same be referred to a Committee of the whole House, it passed in the
negative--yeas 47, nays 65.

And then the main question being taken that the House do agree to the
said motion as originally proposed, it passed in the negative--yeas 31,
nays 77, as follows:

    YEAS.--Isaac Anderson, John Archer, David Bard, Phanuel Bishop,
    Robert Brown, Clifton Claggett, Joseph Clay, James Elliot,
    Ebenezer Elmer, William Findlay, Gaylord Griswold, John A.
    Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, David Hough, Nehemiah Knight, Michael
    Leib, Andrew McCord, Nahum Mitchell, Beriah Palmer, John Rea
    of Pennsylvania, Jacob Richards, Erastus Root, Thomas Sammons,
    Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan, John Smilie, Joseph Stanton,
    Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg Wadsworth, and John
    Whitehill.

    NAYS.--Willis Alston, jr., Simeon Baldwin, George Michael
    Bedinger, William Blackledge, Adam Boyd, Joseph Bryan, William
    Butler, George W. Campbell, John Campbell, Levi Casey, Thomas
    Claiborne, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, Jacob
    Crowninshield, Manasseh Cutler, John Davenport, John Dawson,
    John Dennis, William Dickson, John B. Earle, Peter Early, John
    W. Eppes, William Eustis, John Fowler, Calvin Goddard, Peterson
    Goodwyn, Thomas Griffin, Roger Griswold, Joseph Heister,
    William Helms, John Hoge, James Holland, Benjamin Huger, Samuel
    Hunt, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Simon Larned, Joseph
    Lewis, jun., Henry W. Livingston, Thomas Lowndes, John B.
    C. Lucas, Matthew Lyon, William McCreery, David Meriwether,
    Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, James Mott, Roger Nelson,
    Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon
    Olin, John Randolph, John Rhea of Tennessee, Samuel Riker,
    Thomas Sanford, John Smith, Henry Southard, Richard Stanford,
    William Stedman, James Stephenson, John Stewart, Samuel
    Taggart, Samuel Tenney, Philip R. Thompson, George Tibbits,
    Abram Trigg, Philip Van Cortlandt, Killian K. Van Rensselaer,
    Daniel C. Verplanck, Matthew Walton, Marmaduke Williams,
    Alexander Wilson, Richard Wynn, Joseph Winston, and Thomas
    Wynns.

So the said motion was rejected.


MONDAY, January 21.

_Slavery in Territories._

A memorial of the people called Quakers, at their yearly meeting, held in
the city of Philadelphia, in the month of December last, was presented
to the House and read, praying that effectual measures may be adopted
by Congress to prevent the introduction of slavery into any of the
Territories of the United States.--Referred to the committee appointed on
the twelfth of November last, on so much of the Message of the President
of the United States as relates “to an amelioration of the form of
government of the Territory of Louisiana.”


WEDNESDAY, January 23.

_Protection of Seamen._

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Secretary of State,
accompanying statements and abstracts relative “to the number of
American seamen who have been impressed or detained on board of the ships
of war of any foreign nation; with the names of the persons impressed;
the name of the ship or vessel by which they were impressed; the nation
to which she belonged, and the time of the impressment; as also certain
facts and circumstances relating to the same;” prepared in obedience to a
resolution of this House of the thirty-first ultimo.

Mr. CROWNINSHIELD said, that the list of impressed seamen, furnished by
the Secretary of State, exceeded in number any thing he had expected. He
thought these impressments ought to be prevented, and that the subject
demanded investigation. He had drafted a resolution, which he would
submit to the House, having in view to connect this with another very
important subject. Many gentlemen must have observed that some late
proclamations had been issued by the Governors of the several British
West India Islands, interdicting the American trade after May next. The
proclamations bore date in October or November, and were to take effect
in six months. It appeared to him that the British Government were
determined to exclude us from their islands, upon the expectation that
their own vessels would be competent to carry the necessary supplies.
Mr. C. said we had a right to carry the productions of the United States
in American bottoms, and he hoped we should never permit foreign ships
to come to our ports and carry on an exclusive trade with any country
whatever, where our vessels were not allowed the same privilege. His
intention was to prevent the American carrying trade to the West Indies
from falling into the hands of other nations. He would not exclude
foreign vessels from our ports, but it was desirable that our own export
trade should not be monopolized by foreigners. The subject was highly
important to this country. Will the United States tamely submit to see
some of its best citizens torn from their families and friends, without
attempting something for their relief? Shall we see another country
pursuing measures hostile to our commercial rights and make no effort
to correct the mischief? The West India Islands depended on the United
States for their ordinary supplies, and our vessels had usually carried
a large proportion of their cargoes on American account; but it appeared
now that we were to be shut out from this trade, and it was in future
to be carried on in foreign vessels. An effectual remedy would be to
prohibit the exportation of our productions in foreign bottoms to all
ports of islands with which we were not permitted to have intercourse,
and in order that the subject might undergo the examination which its
importance demanded, he offered the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures
    be instructed to inquire if any, and what, further provision
    be necessary for the protection of the commerce and seamen of
    the United States, and to inquire whether any foreign country
    has made any late regulations with a view to monopolize any
    branch of the American carrying trade, to the exclusive benefit
    of such foreign country, or which in their operation may be
    injurious to the agricultural or commercial interest of the
    United States; and also to inquire into the expediency of
    prohibiting the exportation from the United States of all goods
    and merchandise whatever in foreign ships bound to any port
    with which the vessels of the United States are not allowed
    communication, or where a free and unrestricted trade is not
    permitted in the productions of the United States, and that the
    committee be authorized to report by bill or otherwise.

Mr. RANDOLPH wished the resolution to lie for consideration a few days;
he would mention Monday. The gentleman had said it was an important
subject, and if he had no objection it would be as well to allow the
resolution to remain unacted upon for a little time. It might be
printed for the consideration of the House, and he rather supposed some
alteration would be necessary in the form of the resolution.

Mr. CROWNINSHIELD replied that he was perfectly willing the resolution
should lie for consideration, agreeably to the desire of the gentleman
from Virginia, and he would consent to any reasonable delay; but he
would not consent to its remaining unacted upon till a period so late as
to preclude any measures from being adopted this session, because the
proclamation would take effect in the month of May. He was not tenacious
of forms, it was the substance of things he looked to, and he would with
great pleasure agree to modify the resolution to any shape which the
gentleman from Virginia might suggest.

A motion was made to refer the resolution to a Committee of the Whole
for Monday next; which was agreed to, and the resolution ordered to be
printed.


THURSDAY, January 24.

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter from the Secretary of War,
enclosing sundry documents relating to the case of William Scott, and
James and John Pettigrew, stated to have been murdered and plundered by
the Cherokee Indians, in pursuance of a resolution of this House of the
twenty-second instant; which were read and referred to the Committee of
the Whole, to whom is committed the report of the Committee of Claims
on the petition of Alexander Scott, of the State of South Carolina, in
behalf of himself and others.


_Navy Yards, &c._

Mr. EUSTIS moved the following resolution:

    “_Resolved_, That it is expedient to provide by law for
    defraying the expense incident to fitting and preparing one of
    the navy yards belonging to the United States, and lying near
    the margin of the ocean, for the reception and repairing of
    such ships of war as are now at sea on their return to port,
    and such other ships or vessels of war as may hereafter return
    from their cruises or stations.”

Mr. EUSTIS said the resolution now submitted to the consideration of
the House had grown out of an opinion which impressed itself on his
mind, when he first beheld the whole naval force of the United States
moored in the Eastern branch of the Potomac. He had ever considered
the establishment of a navy yard in this city, as the principal naval
arsenal, to be among the errors or misfortunes which had presided over
many other arrangements respecting this city and territory. As the
United States were at that time at peace with all the world, excepting
the Dey of Algiers, as a small part of the force only was necessary to
carry on this warfare, and as the ships had been actually hauled up at
a considerable expense, there appeared to be no immediate necessity for
incurring a further expense in their removal. Our maritime concerns have
now experienced a change. We are at war with another of the Barbary
Powers, and a greater number of ships have been necessarily taken into
the service. We have at this time six frigates, and five or six smaller
vessels on duty in the Mediterranean. After a certain time these ships
must be relieved. Others must be sent out to take their stations. Those
which return will require repairs; and in order to prepare for these
contingencies it was proper that some one of the navy yards nearer to the
ocean should be put in a condition to receive them. This was the object
of the resolution. It was desirable that some place should be selected
easy of access, where the water was deep, and in the neighborhood of some
large maritime town, having large markets and magazines of the variety
of articles required for repairing and fitting ships for sea, with the
artizans employed in that business. It was not his intention to describe
the advantages or disadvantages of one place or of another. The United
States own six navy yards. The whole coast is before the Executive, and
such a place will be selected as will combine the greatest number of
advantages and best promote the public interests. To those who believed
that ships of war could be repaired or fitted out with the same despatch,
at the same expense, and with the same ease and convenience, at a place
three hundred miles distant from the sea, as they could be in one of the
ports lying on its margin, and possessing the advantages which had been
stated, no reasoning could be applied which would change their opinions.
The proposition was offered to the House to be decided by common sense
and understanding. There was one objection which he had anticipated, and
which had some weight in it. The business of the department would in
that case be removed from the eye of the Government, and from the more
immediate inspection and control of the intelligent and capable officer
who directed its operations; this inconvenience would be balanced by the
more ample means and resources which his agents would find in the large
towns, and by which they would be enabled to carry his instructions more
promptly into effect.

The motion was referred to a Committee of the Whole on Monday next.


FRIDAY, January 25.

_Mississippi Territory._

Mr. LATTIMORE presented a memorial from the Legislative Council and the
House of Representatives of the Mississippi Territory, stating sundry
grievances to which they were exposed by the act of Congress for the
government of the same. They complain that a man is not qualified to
vote unless he possess fifty acres of land, whereby those who hold
houses and town lots, as well as respectable citizens of considerable
personal estate, are disfranchised. The inequality of representation in
the several counties to the number of inhabitants in each; the necessity
of extending the powers and authorities of an additional judge lately
furnished the Territory; the inconveniencies arising from the prescribed
mode of the disposal of lands; the necessity of establishing a hospital
at the Natchez; and, lastly, an increase of the salaries of the judges.

On motion, the memorial was referred to a select committee of five
members.


TUESDAY, January 29.

Another member, to wit, OLIVER PHELPS, from New York, appeared, and took
his seat in the House.


_Georgia Claims._

The House again went into Committee of the Whole on the Georgia claims.

After reading over the report of the Committee of Claims, which concludes
with submitting the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That three Commissioners be authorized to receive
    propositions of compromise and settlement, from the several
    companies or persons having claims to public lands within the
    present limits of the Mississippi Territory, and finally to
    adjust and settle the same in such manner as in their opinion
    will conduce to the interest of the United States: _Provided_,
    That in such settlement the Commissioners shall not exceed the
    limits prescribed by the convention with the State of Georgia.

Mr. DANA moved that the committee rise and report the resolution.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH wished, before the committee rose, that the gentleman
from Connecticut (Mr. DANA) would assign some reasons for the adoption of
the resolution. No two things could be more opposite than the prefatory
statement made by the Committee of Claims and the resolution which
terminated the report. As there were no reasons assigned, he suspected
the gentleman had kept them back with a view of surprising the House by
their novelty; but he hoped the committee would not agree to the motion,
unless some better cause was assigned for its adoption than had hitherto
been made known.

Mr. DANA said the Committee of Claims, in the report now before the
Committee of the Whole, had confined themselves to a statement of facts
derived from the documents referred to them. He conceived it to be the
business of the Committee of Claims to investigate the facts, and arrange
them in such a manner as to free the House from the labor of detail; they
had done this, and the report was a summary of all that passed in review
before them. It was left to gentlemen to reason on the case according to
their course of reflection. Whether the committee reasoned on the subject
well or ill, he did not know that gentlemen were bound to follow them in
their conclusion. Indeed, he apprehended that were the reasoning ever
so energetic, it would not go to satisfy every gentleman. On a question
like the present, he despaired of making it satisfactory to the gentleman
who had asked for reasons. He was persuaded that gentleman could not be
convinced by any argument the committee might have used, and it was idle
to call upon them to perform impossibilities.

The question on the committee’s rising and reporting their agreement to
the resolution was put, and carried--yeas 61, nays 50.

The SPEAKER having resumed the chair, Mr. VARNUM reported the foregoing
resolution as agreed to.

Mr. BRYAN called for the reading of that rule of the House which
restrains interested persons from voting.

The Clerk read the same, as follows:

    “No member shall vote on any question in the event of which he
    is immediately and particularly interested; or in any other
    case where he was not present when the question was put.”

A motion was made to consider the report of the Committee of the Whole,
and carried--yeas 64, nays 51.

Mr. CLARK moved a proviso as an amendment, declaring that no part of the
five millions of acres reserved should go to compensate the claimants
under the act of Georgia, passed in 1795.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH called the yeas and nays on the amendment.

Mr. DANA observed that the report on the table had been made on the
application of persons claiming land under the act of 1795. The
amendment, said he, is nothing more nor less than a denial to comply with
the prayer of the petitioners, and whether it was not to all intents and
purposes a substitute for the resolutions agreed to in the Committee of
the Whole, he would leave to the Speaker. If it were decided to be a
substitute, it could not be received, conformably to the rules of the
House.

The SPEAKER said, the resolution reported from the Committee of the Whole
was a general one, including all claims; the amendment went to limit
and confine the resolution to a particular class, and, therefore, he
conceived it to be in order.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--It must be manifest to the House that this discussion
is forced upon those who are opposed to the report of the committee; that
we are not prepared at this time to meet it. I am among those who hoped
that some reasons would be assigned, if indeed reasons can be found,
to warrant the step about to be taken. I did hope that, instead of a
string of facts and statements which were already before the House, the
committee would have given us something new in the shape of argument,
justificatory of the resolution which they have recommended. But I have
been disappointed. Nothing is offered either in the report itself, or in
the debate, which throws a single gleam of light on the subject. I have
particular reasons to deprecate a discussion at this time. I shall not
trouble the House by detailing them, but briefly state that I feel myself
unequal to an immediate investigation of this question, as well from
personal indisposition as from the pressure of other important business,
which has left me but little leisure to attend to this. The few moments
which I have been able to devote to it, have convinced me that much new
and important matter remains to be brought to light. But no apology will
be received: we are driven to a vote by an inflexible majority.

The objection taken by the gentleman from Connecticut, (Mr. DANA,)
and the doubt which he raised on that point of order, respecting the
amendment offered by my worthy colleague, (Mr. CLARK,) discloses his
drift, and that of the Committee of Claims, whilst it proves the
necessity of some such amendment to save citizens of the United States
and their property from spoliation and plunder. The gentleman has stated
truly that his object was to further the claim of the New England
Mississippi Land Company. As I fear I shall have full occasion to exert
my voice, I must beg that the memorial of the agents of that company may
be read by the Clerk.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH then called for the reading of the act of Georgia of
February, 1796, generally called the rescinding act; and he hoped they
would have silence whilst the act was reading, as it was a very important
one, and ought to influence the decision on the present subject.

The act was read in compliance with the request.

After it was finished, Mr. CLARK moved to adjourn.

On the division, there were 52 yeas, and 55 nays. So the motion was lost.

Mr. CLARK requested that the act of 1795, under which they derived their
pretended titles, might be read.

Whilst the SPEAKER was reading the same, Mr. DANA rose and inquired
whether it was necessary to read the whole of the law, or whether
gentlemen would not be satisfied with the reading of such part of it as
bore upon the present question.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH called the gentleman to order for interrupting the
Speaker in his reading.

Mr. SPEAKER.--The objection ought to have been made (if at all) when the
reading of the law was first called for.

The reading was continued to the end of the act--when,

Mr. J. CLAY moved that the House adjourn.

On a division, there were 53 yeas, and 60 nays. Motion lost.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--Perhaps it may be supposed, from the course which this
business has taken, that the adversaries of the present measure indulge
the expectation of being able to come forward, at a future day--not
to this House, for that hope is desperate, but to the public, with a
more matured opposition than it is in their power now to make. But past
experience has shown them that this is one of those subjects which
pollution has sanctified; that the hallowed mysteries of corruption are
not to be profaned by the eye of public curiosity. No, sir, the orgies
of Yazoo speculation are not to be laid open to the vulgar gaze. None
but the initiated are permitted to behold the monstrous sacrifice of
the best interests of the nation on the altars of corruption. When this
abomination is to be practised we go into conclave. Do we apply to the
press--that potent engine, the dread of tyrants and of villains, but the
shield of freedom and of worth? No, sir, the press is gagged. On this
subject we have a virtual sedition law--not with a specious title, but
irresistible in its operation, which, in the language of a gentleman
from Connecticut, (Mr. GRISWOLD,) goes directly to its object. The demon
of speculation, at one sweep, has wrested from the nation their best,
their only defence, and closed every avenue of information. But a day of
retribution may yet come. If their rights are to be bartered away and
their property squandered, the people must not, they shall not be kept in
ignorance by whom, or for whom it is done.

We have often heard of party spirit--of caucuses as they are termed--to
settle legislative questions, but never have I seen that spirit so
visible as at this time. The out-of-door intrigue is too palpable to be
disguised. When it was proposed to abolish a judiciary system reared in
the last moments of an expiring Administration, the detested offspring of
a midnight hour--when the question of repeal was before this House, it
could not be taken up until midnight, in the third or fourth week of the
discussion. When the great and good man who now fills, and who (whatever
may be the wishes of our opponents) I hope and trust will long fill the
Executive chair, not less to his own honor than to the happiness of his
fellow-citizens; when he, sir, recommended the repeal of the internal
taxes, delay succeeded delay, and discussion was followed by discussion,
until patience itself was worn threadbare. But now, when public plunder
is the order of the day, how are we treated? Driven into the Committee of
the Whole, and out again in a breath, by an inflexible majority, exulting
and stubborn in their strength, a decision must be had instanter. The
advocates for the proposed measure feel that it will not bear a scrutiny.
Hence this precipitancy. They wince from the touch of examination, and
are willing to hurry through a painful and disgraceful discussion. But,
it may be asked, why this tenacious adherence of certain gentlemen to
each other on every other point connected with this subject? As if
animated by one spirit, they perform all their evolutions with the most
exact discipline, and march in a firm phalanx directly up to their
object. Is it that men combined to effect some evil purpose, acting on
previous pledge to each other, are ever more in unison than those who,
seeking only to discover truth, obey the impulse of that conscience which
God has placed in their bosoms? Such men do not stand compromitted. They
will not stifle the suggestions of their own minds, and sacrifice their
private opinions to the attainment of some common, perhaps some nefarious
object.

Having given vent to that effusion of indignation which I feel, and which
I trust I shall never fail to feel and to express on this detestable
subject, permit me now to offer some crude and hasty remarks on the
point in dispute. They will be directed chiefly to the claim of the New
England Mississippi Land Company, whom we propose to debar (with all
the other claimants under the act of 1795) from any benefit of the five
millions of acres, reserved by our compact with Georgia, to satisfy such
claims not specially provided for in that compact, as we might find
worthy of recompense. I shall direct my observations more particularly to
this claim, because it has been more insisted upon, and more zealously
defended than any other. It is alleged by the memorialists, who style
themselves the agents of that company, that they, and those whom they
represent, were innocent purchasers; in other words, ignorant of the
corruption and fraud by which the act from which their pretended title
was derived, was passed. I am well aware that this fact is not material
to the question of any legal or equitable title which they may set up;
but as it has been made a pretext for exciting the compassion of the
Legislature, I wish to examine into the ground upon which this allegation
rests. Sir, when that act of stupendous villany was passed in 1795,
attempting under the forms and semblance of law to rob unborn millions of
their birthright and inheritance, and to convey to a band of unprincipled
and flagitious men a territory more extensive, and beyond comparison more
fertile than any State of this Union, it caused a sensation scarcely
less violent than that produced by the passage of the stamp act, or the
shutting up of the port at Boston, with this difference: when the port
bill of Boston passed, her Southern brethren did not take advantage of
the forms of law, by which a corrupt Legislature attempted to defraud
her of the bounty of nature; they did not speculate on the necessities
and wrongs of their abused and insulted countrymen. I repeat that this
infamous act was succeeded by a general burst of indignation throughout
the continent. This is matter of public notoriety, and those--I speak
of men of education and intelligence, purchasers, too, of the very
country in question--those who affect to have been ignorant of any
such circumstance, I shall consider as guilty of gross and wilful
prevarication. They offer indeed to virtue the only homage which she is
ever likely to receive at their hands--the homage of their hypocrisy.
They could not make an assertion within the limits of possibility less
entitled to credit.

The agents of the New England Land Company are unfortunate in two points.
They set out with a formal endeavor to prove that they are entitled to
their proportion of fifty millions of acres of land, under the law of
1795, and this they make their plea to be admitted to a proportional
share of five. If they really believed what they say, would they be
willing to commute a good legal, or equitable claim, for one tenth of
its value? Their memorial contains, moreover, a suggestion of falsehood.
They aver that the reservation of five millions for satisfying claims
not otherwise provided for, in our compact with Georgia, was especially
intended for the benefit of the claimants under the act of 1795, and
that we were pledged to satisfy them out of that reservation. Now, sir,
turn to the sixth volume of your laws, and what is the fact? In the
first place, so much of the reserved five millions as may be necessary,
is appropriated specifically for satisfying claims derived from British
grants not regranted by Spain; and as much of the residue as may be
necessary is appropriated for compensating other claims, not recognized
in our compact with Georgia. An appropriation for certain British grants
specially, and for other claims generally, is falsely suggested to have
been made for the especial benefit of the claimants of 1795; and the
reservation of a power in the United States to quiet such claims as they
should deem worthy of compensation, is perverted into an obligation to
compensate a particular class of claims; into an acknowledgment that
such claims are worthy of compensation. Can this House be inveigled by
such barefaced effrontery? Sir, the act containing this appropriation
clause was not brought to a third reading till the first of March.
Our powers expired on the fourth: it was at the second session of the
seventh Congress. It was in the power of those opposed to the corrupt
claims of 1795 to have defeated the bill by a discussion. But, sir, they
abstained on this ground. If the appropriation of the five millions had
not been made at that session, the year within which, by our agreement
with Georgia, it was to be made, if at all, would have expired before
the meeting of the next Congress; and it was urged, by the friends of
the bill, that there were several descriptions of claims to which no
imputation of fraud could attach; that by making a general appropriation
we secured to ourselves the power of recompensing such claims as, on
examination, might be found worthy of it, whilst we pledged ourselves
to no class of claimants whatever. But that if we should suffer the
term specified, in our compact with Georgia, to elapse without making
any appropriation, we should preclude ourselves from the ability to
compensate any claims, not specially provided for, however just and
reasonable we might find them, on investigation, to be. Under these
circumstances, and I appeal to my excellent friend from Maryland, who
brought it in, for the correctness of my statement, the opponents of the
bill gave it no other opposition than a silent vote. And now, sir, we are
told that we stand pledged, and that an appropriation for British grants
not regranted by Spain, specially, and for such other claims against the
State of Georgia, generally, as Congress should find quite worthy, was
made for the especial benefit of a particular description of claimants,
branded, too, with the deepest odium; who dare to talk to us of public
faith, and appeal to the national honor!

The conclusion of the memorial is amusing enough. After having played
over the farce, which was acted by the Yazoo Squad at the last session,
affecting to believe that an appropriation has been made by the act
of March 1803, for their especial benefit, they pray that Congress
will be pleased to give them--what? that to which they assert they are
entitled?--by no means--an eighth or tenth part of it--which said eighth
or tenth part, if we may credit them, has been already appropriated to
their use by law. From a knowledge of the memorialists, and those whom
they represent, can you believe for a moment that, if they had the least
faith in the volume of argument (I am sorry to profane the word) which
they presented to the House to prove the goodness of their title, can you
believe that under such impression they would accept a paltry compromise
of two shillings in the pound--much less that, to obtain it, they would
descend so low! Sir, when these men talk about public faith and national
honor, they remind me of the appeals of the unprincipled gamester and
veteran usurer to the honor of the thoughtless spendthrift, whilst in
reality they are addressing themselves to his vices and his folly.

The first year that I had the honor of a seat in this House, an act was
passed of a nature not altogether unlike the one now proposed. I allude
to the case of the Connecticut Reserve, by which the nation were swindled
out of some three or four millions of acres of land, which, like other
bad titles, had fallen into the hands of innocent purchasers. When I
advert to the applicants by whom we were then beset, I find that among
them was one of the very persons who style themselves agents of the New
England Mississippi Land Company, who seems to have an unfortunate knack
at buying bad titles. His gigantic grasp embraces with one hand the
shores of Lake Erie, and stretches with the other to the Bay of Mobile.
Millions of acres are easily digested by such stomachs. Goaded by
avarice, they buy only to sell, and sell only to buy. The retail trade of
fraud and imposture yields too small and slow a profit to gratify their
cupidity. They buy and sell corruption in the gross, and a few millions,
more or less, is hardly felt in the account. The deeper the play, the
greater their zest for the game, and the stake which is set upon their
throw is nothing less than the patrimony of the people. Mr. Speaker, when
I see the agency that has been employed on this occasion, I must own that
it fills me with apprehension and alarm. This same agent is at the head
of an executive department of our Government, subordinate indeed in rank
and dignity, and in the ability required for its superintendence, but
inferior to none in the influence attached to it. This officer, possessed
of how many snug appointments and fat contracts, let the voluminous
records on your table of the mere names and dates and sums declare;
having an influence which is confined to no quarter of the country, but
pervading every part of the Union; with offices in his gift amongst the
most lucrative, and at the same time the least laborious, or responsible,
under the Government, so tempting as to draw a member of the other House
from his seat, and place him as a deputy at the feet of your applicant;
this officer presents himself at your bar, at once a party and an
advocate. Sir, when I see this tremendous patronage brought to bear upon
us, I do confess that it strikes me with consternation and dismay. Is it
come to this? Are heads of executive departments of the Government to be
brought into this House, with all the influence and patronage attached
to them, to extort from us now, what was refused at the last session of
Congress? I hope not, sir. But if they are, and if the abominable villany
practised upon, and by the Legislature of Georgia, in 1795, is now to be
glossed over, I for one will ask what security they, by whom it shall
be done, can offer for their reputations, better than can be given for
the character of that Legislature? I will pin myself upon this text, and
preach upon it as long as I have life. If no other reason can be adduced
but a regard for our own fame, if it were only to rescue ourselves from
this foul imputation, this weak and dishonorable compromise ought to
receive a prompt and decisive rejection. Is the voice of patriotism
lulled to rest, that we no longer hear the cry against an overbearing
majority, determined to put down the constitution, and deaf to every
proposition of compromise? Such were the dire forebodings to which we
have been heretofore compelled to listen. But if the enmity of such
men be formidable, their friendship is deadly destruction, their touch
pollution.

Such men, I repeat it, are formidable as enemies, but their friendship
is fraught with irresistible death. I fear indeed the “_Danaos et dona
ferentes_.” But, after the law in question shall have passed, what
security have you that the claimants will accede to your terms of
compromise? that this is not a trap, to obtain from Congress something
like a recognition of their title, to be hereafter used against us? Sir,
with all our wisdom, I seriously doubt our ability to contend with the
arts and designs of these claimants, if they can once entangle us in the
net of our own legislation. Let the act of March, 1801, of which already
they have made so dexterous a use, be remembered. They themselves have
pointed out the course which we ought to pursue. They have told us, that
so long as we refrain from legislating on this subject, their case is
hopeless. Let us then persevere in a “wise and masterly inactivity.”[23]

The committee rose, and had leave to sit again, and the House adjourned.


WEDNESDAY, January 30.

On motion, it was

_Resolved_, That the President of the United States be requested to
inform this House whether SAMUEL HAMMOND, a member of this House, has not
accepted of an Executive appointment, and when?

_Ordered_, That Mr. BRYAN and Mr. EPPES be appointed a committee to
present the foregoing resolution to the President of the United States.


_Georgia Claims._

The House resumed the consideration of the resolution reported yesterday
from the Committee of the Whole on the Georgia Claims.

Mr. ELLIOT.--It cannot but be considered as a very fortunate
circumstance, and one which cannot fail to have a favorable influence
upon the final decision of this important question, that, since the
delivery of the animated observations which yesterday so powerfully
attracted the attention of the House, we have been afforded a few hours
of tranquil retirement from the tempest of the forum, for the purpose,
useful at all times, and peculiarly so at the present time, of calm
reflection. To transfer ourselves in a moment from the flowery fields
of fancy, to the rugged road of argument, to descend instantaneously
from the elevated scenes of eloquence to the humble walks of common
sense, requires an effort transcending ordinary powers. In claiming your
attention, Mr. Speaker, for a greater portion of the day than I commonly
occupy in debate upon this floor, I shall not address you in the style
of compliment or ceremony. It is time to banish from these walls that
idle frippery of ceremonious conversation, which is suited only to a
new year’s compliment, or a birthday salutation, and to catch a little
of the sturdy spirit of antiquity. A bold, a loud, an impressive appeal
is made to the American people. In that appeal I fearlessly and most
cordially unite. I regret, however, the existence of a precedent which
at once justifies and demands these addresses to the people. Much as I
wish to disseminate correct information, particularly on a subject which
I believe is but imperfectly understood without these walls, except by
interested persons, and convinced as I am that the subject is understood,
and an opinion formed upon it, by every member of this House, I shall not
so completely follow the example before us as to speak to the people in
the first instance, but shall, as usual, direct my observations to the
House.

I propose to examine, in a concise, and if it be in my power, in an
argumentative manner, the following questions, which have a direct
application to the amendment proposed by the gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
CLARK) to the resolution under consideration, and which, at the same
time, open to view the whole extent of the subject:

Did the State of Georgia, in the year 1795, possess a title to the
territory in question?

Were the Legislature of Georgia, in 1795, invested with the
constitutional power of making a sale of the territory, and did they make
such sale to those from whom the present claimants derive their title or
pretended title? And if such sale was made, what title or color of title
did it convey?

Were the members of the Legislature of Georgia, in 1796, invested with
the constitutional power of rescinding the acts of their predecessors in
relation to such sale, and did they rescind them?

Were the claims or pretended claims of the present claimants in any
manner recognized by the act of cession of the territory in question from
Georgia to the United States? And,

Do justice and policy, or either justice or policy, require that the
whole or any part of the five millions of acres, reserved by the act of
cession from Georgia to the United States, for the purpose of satisfying
claims of a certain description against Georgia, in reference to the
said territory, should be appropriated for the purpose of satisfying the
claims of the present claimants?

However extensive the outline which I have sketched of the subject, the
survey will be a rapid one.

It is necessary that I should make one or two preliminary observations. I
have uniformly been opposed to the doctrine which has been so powerfully
advocated, that Congress is competent to make a legislative decision
upon the validity or invalidity of the conflicting acts of Georgia. We
possess no such powers. But as individuals we may express our opinions.
Nor am I disposed to do any thing which shall have a tendency to impugn
the title of the United States to this territory. Without deciding the
question of title, my principal object is to show that the claimants are
in possession of so strong a color of title, that it will be good policy
to authorize a negotiation with them for the abandonment of their claim,
especially as we have a prospect of obtaining that abandonment on their
part, without going beyond the reservation in the act of cession, and
of course without the actual expense of a single dollar to the United
States.

Did the State of Georgia, in the year 1795, possess a title to the
territory in question?

To answer this inquiry, it is only necessary to make one or two
quotations from the articles of agreement and cession, entered into on
the 24th of April, 1802, between the Commissioners of the United States
and those of Georgia. In the first article, “the State of Georgia cedes
to the United States all the right, title, and claim, which the said
State has to the jurisdiction and soil of the lands situated within
the boundaries of the United States south of the State of Tennessee,”
&c. By the second article, “The United States accept the cession above
mentioned, and on the condition therein expressed; and they cede to the
State of Georgia whatever claim, right, or title, they may have to the
jurisdiction or soil of any lands lying within the United States, and out
of the proper boundaries of any other State, and situated south of the
southern boundaries of the States of Tennessee, North Carolina, and east
of the boundary line herein above described, at the eastern boundary of
the territory ceded by Georgia to the United States.” Whatever claim or
title the United States might previously have had to the territory, they
thought proper, in 1802, to combine with it, and to fortify it, by that
of Georgia; and surely we shall not do any act, or adopt any principle,
tending to impair the title under which we now exercise jurisdiction over
the territory.

Were the Legislature of Georgia, in 1795, invested with the
constitutional power of making a sale of the territory, and did they make
such sale to those from whom the present claimants derive their title or
pretended title? And if such sale was made, what title or color of title
did it convey?

In this age of political revolution and reformation, for I consider it
an age of reformation as well as revolution, there are still certain
principles and maxims, not merely venerable for their antiquity,
but consecrated by their conformity to the common sense and reason
of mankind, which are considered as universal in their application,
and irresistible in their influence. Among these may be numbered the
principles which attach to the government of every regularly-organized
community; the power of pledging the public faith, and that of alienating
the right of soil of the vacant territory of the nation. In every free
government, there must exist the power of legislation, or of making
laws; a distinct power, charged with the execution of the laws, and a
judicial power. The union of these different powers in the same man or
body of men, is the very essence of despotism. Thus in France, prior to
the Revolution, it was a fundamental maxim of State that the King was
the Legislator of the French Monarchy; and the power exercised in some
instances by certain parliaments, of refusing to register the edicts of
the monarch, however in practice it might operate as an obstruction
to legislation, was in theory only a matter of form, or at most but a
temporary check upon the executive power. In oligarchies the legislative
power is vested in the rich and noble; and in aristocracies, in a few
individuals who are presumed to be the wisest and the best in the
community. In governments of the democratic form, this power resides in
the great body of the people, and is exercised by themselves or their
representatives. The base of the temple of American liberty is democracy,
or the sovereignty of the people; representation and confederation
are the principal pillars which support the great superstructure. As
the State governments are unquestionably representative democracies,
the General Government is a representative federal republic. In every
government of the representative form, the representatives of the people
are vested with power to pledge the public faith, and to alienate the
vacant territory of the nation. Were the members of the Legislature of
Georgia, in 1795, invested with this authority? Certainly it was within
the sphere of those constitutional rights and powers, which had never
been surrendered to the General Government. We have since recognized that
authority by receiving a solemn deed of cession of the territory from a
subsequent Legislature of Georgia, transferring to us not only the soil,
but the right of jurisdiction. Was this authority exercised in 1795? In
the act of the Legislature of that State of the 7th of January in that
year, granting this territory to those from whom the present claimants
derive their claims, certain lands are described, and it is enacted
that those lands shall be sold to such and such persons, as tenants in
common, and not as joint tenants. The land shall be sold, or, in other
words, the right of soil shall be alienated. A proper distinction is
taken between the _dominium utile_ and the _dominium directum_ of the
civilians. No transfer was made of the right of jurisdiction, although
such imaginary transfer forms a prominent article in the reasons assigned
by the Legislature of 1796 for passing the rescinding act. From this view
of the subject, whatever may be the present state of the question of
legal title, who can doubt that the present claimants, honest purchasers
from the original grantees, upon the faith of an independent State, and
innocent of fraud, if fraud existed, possess such a color of title, such
an equitable claim, as to render it prudent and politic to enter into a
compromise with them upon reasonable terms?

Were the members of the Legislature of Georgia, in 1796, invested with
the constitutional power of rescinding the acts of their predecessors in
relation to such sale, and did they rescind them?

Congress is incompetent to the decision of this question. Nor is such
decision necessary. I will, however, make one or two inquiries, and state
one or two principles, which are applicable to the subject, which at the
same time will go to strengthen the ground I have taken as to color of
title in the claimants, and the policy of extinguishing their claims.

Can a legislature rescind a contract made by its predecessors?

Writers on national law make a distinction between laws which operate in
the nature of contracts, and those which have no such operation. Every
enlightened and reasonable man will subscribe to the opinion that a
pledge of the public faith, given by the competent authority, ought to be
irrevocable. Laws which pledge the faith of the community, which create
contracts, which vest rights in individuals or in corporate bodies, it
may safely be assumed as a general principle, are irrepealable. Laws of
merely municipal operation are alterable or repealable at the pleasure of
the existing legislature.

Can the judicial power declare a legislative act void, as having been
passed by means of corruption?

Different opinions have existed in our country as to the right claimed
by the judiciary, of deciding upon the constitutionality of laws. The
better opinion seems to be, that from the nature of our Government, and
the very terms of the constitution itself, by which that instrument is
declared to be the supreme law of the land, the judges not only ought
to exercise that power, but that they cannot avoid its exercise. If I
am not mistaken, some gentlemen, who deny that the judges possess this
right, are prepared to invest them with the more dangerous one of setting
aside a legislative act on the ground of corruption. To admit that the
judiciary may examine into the motives of the Legislature in passing
laws, or that they may receive and decide upon evidence tending to prove
corruption in the legislative body, would certainly be going much further
than those have gone who have claimed for that department the right of
deciding upon the constitutionality of laws. Suppose a trial of title
between a person claiming under the act of Georgia, of 1795, and another
claiming under the United States, and suppose evidence offered to the
Court to prove the corruption of the Legislature of Georgia, in what a
peculiar situation the judges would be placed? And would they listen
for a moment to an application for the admission of such evidence? It
may well be doubted. Do not then the present claimants possess a very
strong color of title? Is it not prudent to extinguish claims of this
description?

Were claims, or the pretended claims of the present claimants, in any
manner recognized by the act of cession of the territory in question from
Georgia to the United States? And,

Do justice and policy, or either justice or policy, require that the
whole or any part of the five millions of acres, reserved by the act of
cession from Georgia to the United States, for the purpose of satisfying
claims of a certain description against Georgia, in reference to the said
territory, should be appropriated for the purpose of satisfying the
claims of the present claimants?

I have anticipated the principal arguments in favor of the equity of
the claims, and the policy of a compromise with the claimants. The
memorialists state that their claims were particularly contemplated
by the Commissioners, both of the United States and of Georgia. They
have offered us no evidence of this fact, and we are not to take it for
granted. Indeed, I am far from thinking it my duty either to advocate or
answer the pamphlet of the memorialists, and I shall make but this single
allusion to it. Whatever may be its merits, it has had no influence upon
my mind in forming my opinion. An examination of the official documents
upon our tables will evince, however, that by a very strong implication,
if not by express provision, these claims have been recognized, both by
the act of cession, and by the law of Congress passed in consequence.

The gentleman from Virginia has expressed his surprise that the Chairman
of the Committee of Claims had contented himself with reporting facts and
principles, and that he has not adopted the novel procedure of reporting
something tantamount to an elaborate speech in favor of the claims. As
the speech of the gentleman from Virginia is unfortunately destitute
of argument against the claims, and as it might be possible to deduce
from it reasons in their favor, it might perhaps be proper for him to
print it and annex it to the report, as a substitute for that which he
thinks the chairman ought to have subjoined for the edification of the
House. My feeble optics have been able to discover but one attempt at
argument, which is in those observations which relate to the Message of
the President, and the proceedings of Congress, on the act of Georgia,
in 1795, and which, it is contended, were notice, to purchasers and
to the world, of fraud. At that time, it was not suspected that fraud
had been committed, and the reason for those proceedings was, that the
United States possessed, or were supposed to possess, certain claims
to the territory. There are certain subtile, sublimated, ethereal,
heaven-descended geniuses, the soft and silken texture of whose minds
would suffer infinite discomposure from the contact of that rude and
knotty thing--an argument. That gentleman is not of this description. Too
often have we witnessed his argumentative powers to entertain this idea.
I regret that he has declaimed instead of reasoning upon this occasion,
as I believe that argument, particularly upon important subjects, is
more useful than mere declamation. From motives which I cannot develope,
for I ascribe improper views to no one, the present is attempted to be
made a party question. The people are told that the Capitol has become
a scene of political and private iniquity, of fraud and federalism;
that the majority, of their Representatives are committing a stupendous
robbery upon the public patrimony, and their indignation is invoked
upon the plunderers. What facts exist to justify these denunciations?
Are we about to barter away the rights and interests of the people? Are
we about to be guilty of a wanton waste of the public property? Are
we guilty of political apostasy? No such thing. We are about to make
arrangements for carrying into effect a solemn stipulation in the treaty
with Georgia, and a solemn act of our predecessors, by devoting a part
of the five millions of acres, specially reserved for that purpose, for
which the United States never paid a cent, and never will pay a cent, to
the extinguishment of the colorable claims of equitable claimants. Yet
we are told that this act of equity, good faith, and good policy, is a
stupendous crime, compared with which the flagitious acts of the former
“unprincipled administration” dwindle into “petty larcenies.” I am a
republican--a democratic republican. I was opposed to the general system
of that administration. But I do not think it magnanimous, or honorable,
malignantly to triumph over fallen foes. Nor do I dread the union of
honest men. It can be dreadful only to the dishonest.

It is said that the circumstance that one of the great officers of
the Government is numbered among the claimants, ought to scatter
consternation through this House. It is unnecessary for me to undertake
a vindication of the character of that gentleman. Does his office divest
him of the common rights of a citizen? Does it deprive him of the right
of petitioning the National Legislature? But his contracts are resorted
to for the purpose of proving that he has extended his official influence
within our walls. Unfortunate, indeed, is the application of this
argument. By the report upon the table, it appears that three members are
contractors, and we all see that two of them are opposed to the present
claims.

Believing, Mr. Speaker, that this act of enormous robbery, this wanton
dissipation of the public treasure, this abominable league between
corruption and federalism, of which we hear so much, is neither more nor
less than an act of just national policy; believing with the Secretary of
State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the late Attorney-General, that
“the interest of the United States, the tranquillity of those who may
hereafter inhabit that territory, and various equitable considerations,
which may be urged in favor of most of the present claimants, render it
expedient to enter into a compromise on reasonable terms;” and believing
that this compromise ought to be delayed no longer, I shall give a
decided vote in opposition to the proposed amendment, and in favor of the
original resolution, as reported by the Committee of Claims.

Mr. LUCAS.--I am, sir, in favor of the amendment proposed to the report
now under consideration. The unparalleled fraud which has been practised
by the divers land companies styled purchasers, under the act, or
pretended act, of Georgia of 1795, and by the Legislature that passed
that act, have been fully noticed and exposed in the course of the
debates which took place on the same subject, during the last session of
Congress, and again during these two last days. This notorious fraud,
odious as it is on the part of the land companies, is still much more
so on the part of the members of the Legislature of Georgia, as their
country had confided in them, and that themselves had pledged their faith
under the obligation of an oath. But there are other instances of fraud
and deception, materially affecting the purchase or claim in question,
which have been solely practised by the land companies, and in which
the Legislature of Georgia had no kind of participation. These charges
cannot be resisted by the ordinary means of denial of facts, for they are
supported upon authentic documents.

It ought to be observed that the four land companies who are original
purchasers under the act of the Legislature of Georgia, passed on the
7th January, 1795, stated in their petition, containing their proposals
to the Legislature to purchase certain lands belonging to the State of
Georgia, that the land contained within the bounds which were described
in their petition, amounted to 21,750,000 acres. It was evidently upon
the faith of this statement, that the Legislature consented to sell that
land for $500,000. However, it is now ascertained that the quantity of
the land thus described amounts to 35,000,000 of acres, and the companies
themselves compute it to be near 40,000,000. From this it appears
evidently that the companies have deceived the Legislature by stating
what was not true, that the contracts are legal and obligatory. The
parties ought not only to have contracted with liberty of choice, but
they ought also to have contracted with a due knowledge of the matter,
which was the object of the contract. This has not been the case here;
the Legislature have sold twice as much land as they intended to sell,
or, which is the same thing, they have sold it one time cheaper than
it was their intention, and all this loss is the result of the false
statement given by the land companies.

It is an incontrovertible maxim of law, that none ought to be benefited
by his own wrongs; this maxim applies with a double force in a contract
between the sovereign authority and private persons. The contract between
the Legislature and the land companies having been entered into by the
means of a statement which proves to be false, and which has been made by
the parties that claim the benefit arising thereof, the contract becomes
vitiated and of no effect.

Should this wrong not be sufficient to invalidate the contract, there is
another wrong that would arise from it; by the act of 1795, a reserve
was made of two millions of acres out of the several tracts sold to the
Georgia land companies, for the use of such citizens of Georgia as chose
to subscribe in the original terms of the purchase. The price paid by
the citizens who did subscribe was two cents and one-third per acre,
it being the price then supposed to have been paid by the companies,
according to the statement originally made of the whole quantity of land
contained in the purchase, which, as I have before said, proves to be
very near double the land companies would receive from the citizens of
Georgia, who clearly had a right to subscribe on the original terms; a
price per acre nearly double to that which they themselves would have to
pay, and thus have a profit on the citizens of Georgia for the difference
in the quantity of acres contained in the purchase arising from the false
statement; which reduces, with respect to the speculators, the actual
price of the land to little more than one cent per acre, while it remains
at two cents and one-third with respect to the citizens of Georgia.
However great may have been the departure of the Legislature of Georgia
from the interest of their constituents on this occasion, it appears
evidently, that by the expression, “original term,” they understand that
their citizens should subscribe, if they chose, to the amount of two
millions, upon terms similar to those of the land companies. It appears
evidently they did believe they were selling the land of the State at the
rate of two cents and one-third per acre, whilst, in fact, they received
but one cent and one-sixth, which, upon the whole, is a consideration
merely nominal.

To the multiplicity of the radical defects with which the title of
the companies claiming under the act of 1795 abound, the advocates of
the claim of the New England Mississippi Land Company answer, that
none of those who compose their company had any participation in the
fraud; they are said to be _bona fide_ purchasers, perfectly ignorant
of the fraud which may have been practised by those of whom they
bought. They are represented in their memorial and vindication as plain
farmers, mechanics, &c., who have made what they possess by the closest
application and industry.

Sir, I stand among those who are the most ready to acknowledge that the
inhabitants of New England are conspicuous for their industry; but I am
likewise of opinion, that they are not less noted for their sagacity,
in their attendance to their interest; and in the art of making good
bargains, I view them as being fully competent to cope in dealings with
the inhabitants of the Southern States. That they should not have heard
of the notorious fraud which has taken place at the passing of the act
of 1795, is a great cause of astonishment to me; that they should have
made a purchase to the amount of eleven millions of acres, without
making inquiries sufficient to discover what almost every body knew
throughout the United States, if possible, increases my astonishment. For
my part, having never thought of purchasing any land from the Georgia
land companies, I made no inquiry about the acts of the Legislature of
Georgia; yet the corruption was so flagrant, the fraud so notorious, that
it reached my ears soon after it was passed. A gentleman from Virginia
(Mr. RANDOLPH) has justly observed, yesterday, that the President of
the United States had, in his address to the two Houses of Congress,
at the beginning of the session of 1795, taken a most direct notice of
the act of Georgia, passed in January of the same year, as tending to
dangerous consequences. Certainly such solemn communications of the
first Magistrate, at the beginning of a session, contain matters that
are an object of national concern, and generally sought for. There is
not a paper in the Union that omits publishing those communications. It
would be possible, however, that this communication would have escaped
the notice of plain industrious farmers, such as are able, perhaps, to
purchase two or three hundred acres of land; but that a company of sober
and discreet speculators, and of New England too, being about purchasing
an immense quantity of land for a great sum of money, should be ignorant
of what every body knows, and of what they ought to know sooner than
any body else, is a circumstance too unaccountable and extraordinary
for me to believe that it really exists. I should rather think that the
speculators of New England, sober and discreet as they style themselves
to be, found the bargain so good and so tempting, the means of pleading
ignorance of fraud committed in the original purchase so easy, the means
on the part of the State of Georgia, or its vendee, to prove the notice
so difficult, that the sober and discreet speculators of New England
thought it advisable to make a gambling bargain, expecting that the two
extremities of the United States being engaged in the same speculation,
they would combine their force and influence to press hard upon the
centre, and save through the conflict their speculation, either in whole
or in part. Other strong circumstances lead still more to believe, that
the New England Company were well aware of the danger which did exist in
making a purchase from the Georgia land companies; and that they were
taking unusual risks upon themselves; this appears clearly from the face
of their deeds; not only the covenant of warranty is special, instead
of being general, but another extraordinary covenant is entered upon by
which the Georgia Mississippi Company “is not liable to the refunding
of any money in consequence of any defect in their title from the State
of Georgia, if any such there should hereafter appear to be.” Was not
such covenant smelling strongly of the fraud which the Georgia grant was
impregnated with? Could the New England Company take more clearly every
risk upon themselves? Could they more expressly preclude themselves from
every remedy in law or equity in case of eviction?

Mr. BOYD.--The question before the House is not whether we are to do a
good or an injury to the class of men who are denounced as a band of
speculators; but it is whether we shall agree to or reject the amendment
to the resolution offered yesterday to the House by a gentleman from
Virginia, (Mr. CLARK.) Yesterday was taken up in reading the laws of
Georgia, and of the United States, and various other papers, which have
been long in the hands of the members, and which no doubt had been so
attentively perused by them as to have rendered the reading at this day
not indispensably requisite. Mr. B. said, that if papers were to be read
for the instruction and edification of the members as to well-known
facts, he thought it would have been of more consequence to have read the
Declaration of Independence, and the Treaty of Peace of 1783, in which
the independence of the United States was acknowledged by the only Power
on earth who contended against it. We were then free, sovereign, and
independent States, to all intents and purposes, and as sovereign States,
each and every State in the Union had full power and authority to dispose
of their lands to whom they pleased, and under what conditions they
pleased. And if the State of Georgia, in the exercise of her sovereignty,
have conveyed to the Mississippi Land Company the right of soil to the
land in question, and that company have transferred the same to the New
England Mississippi Land Company, the right is vested in them; unless we
have arrived at that stage of political depravity that what was yesterday
acknowledged as a right shall to-morrow be declared a wrong.

Mr. CLARK said he was still in favor of the amendment on the table,
and which he yesterday had the honor of submitting. He did not wish it
to be understood that the amendment was intended to give a preference
to any description of claims under the different acts of the State of
Georgia, and provided for by the general resolution, but intended it
should meet directly those which have excited the most public attention,
have been the most ardently pursued, the most zealously advocated, and
attended with the most extraordinary circumstances. If the facts which
have accompanied this monstrous business from its origin to the present
moment were publicly known, or if it could be retraced through all its
cunning and wily mazes, the claims would sink beneath the weight of
honest indignation, and instead of now being urged before the Congress
of the United States, would be gladly withdrawn from public view, and
buried in perpetual silence. He peculiarly wished on this occasion a cool
and temperate discussion, to divest ourselves of all feelings, either of
improper compassion or prejudice, that equally tend to inflame the heart
and mislead the judgment. It should be his humble province to endeavor a
fair investigation of the naked question, disrobing it of those tinsel
habiliments which have been artfully thrown around it for the purpose of
concealing its real deformity.

The claims the amendment goes to reject, are derived by a pretended
law of the State of Georgia, said to have been passed in the month
of January, 1795. He would contend this law was absolutely void, _ab
initio_, not only because the Legislature had no power to make such
a law, but from the circumstances under which it was made. That the
grantees under this law could have no title to the land, either legal
or equitable; and that there have been no circumstances attending the
subsequent sales, that place the sub-purchasers under superior equitable
advantages. It will be particularly necessary, Mr. Speaker, to be
attentive to dates; that of the law under which the claims are made,
and generally known by the name of the “cession law,” has already been
noticed. Let us now see how this law passed. It stands characterized by
circumstances unparalleled in the annals of pollution--of which we have
the most conclusive evidence before us. The whole State of Georgia has
borne testimony to the fact, and it is now deposited in the archives of
the Government, that a majority of the Assembly which passed the law were
corrupted and bribed. Some had money given them; others, shares in the
lands they were effecting the sale of. This is so universally admitted
and detested, that the most enthusiastic friends of the present claimants
cheerfully allow the original grantees had no titles, and he believed
there was not one now before Congress with his claim. But it is contended
the sub-purchasers had no notice of the fraud in the original contract,
but are _bona fide_ purchasers for a good and valuable consideration
actually paid. This he never could agree to. The evidence before him was
the contrary, and he would here take a review of at least a part of that
evidence, a great portion of which, no doubt, has been destroyed by the
lapse of nine years, but a sufficiency remains when brought together,
irresistibly to carry conviction to the mind of the most skeptical. The
law itself is almost enough for this purpose. The simple object was
to sell to four companies the vacant western land; but to delude the
people and lull inquiry, it is called, “An act supplementary to an act,
entitled ‘an act for appropriating a part of the unlocated territory
of this State, and for the payment of the State troops, and for other
purposes, and the protection and support of the frontier;’” and the
same fascination is kept up through the enacting clauses, and it is the
longest act in the statute book. It goes into a lengthy examination of
the State title, of extinguishing the Indian title, and appropriating the
money, directing it to be laid out in bank stock. Where, Mr. Speaker,
will you find such a law as this? If the object of the Legislature had
been correct, would there have been a necessity for clothing the law in
such delusive colors? No, sir! fraud and infamy were to be cancelled, and
the covering must be thick. They were, however, disappointed in their
aim, for honesty and integrity had yet their residence in the State,
and as soon as it was known, the whole country was feelingly alive to
the abuse, and a general effervescence pervaded the public mind; this
was manifested in the only possible way that remained. The Assembly had
adjourned, not to meet again in a twelvemonth. Presentments of the grand
juries, in almost all the counties of the State, were made in terms of
bitter disapprobation of the law. It was also denounced in the public
prints, from one end of the continent to the other. In the month of May,
1795, a convention was held in the State; the grand jury presentments,
petitions, and remonstrances from all parts of the country were sent
up; these were, by the convention, remitted to the next Legislature
as the only competent authority to remedy so enormous an evil. In the
month of February before, as has been so ably stated by my valued friend
and colleague, (Mr. RANDOLPH,) had this subject been the substance of
a communication of the President of the United States to Congress, and
a resolution and a bill passed the House of Representatives on the
subject. Shall I, after this, be told the sub-purchasers had no notice?
Impossible; no historical event so notorious. But the evidence does
not stop here. The Georgia Legislature again assembled in the month of
November, 1795. The subject of this nefarious and wicked speculation,
that covered the country with shame and disgrace, was taken up, and if
a doubt had remained of the corruption, it was then removed by a number
of affidavits proving incontestably the fact; and on the thirteenth day
of February, 1796, a law was passed, not repealing the act of 1795,
but with honest and laudable indignation declaring it null and void,
as being bottomed upon fraud and perjury, and unveiling to the world
the most flagitious conduct that ever disgraced a legislative assembly.
It is there ascertained and declared, that the land had been sold for
three hundred thousand dollars less than what had been offered for it,
and the quantity of land much greater than it had been represented. The
lands contained in the grants to the four companies were estimated at
twenty-one millions of acres, which, at five hundred thousand dollars,
the price given, is twelve and a half cents per acre; the real quantity
is about thirty-five millions of acres; this reduces the price of the
garden of the world to nearly one and one-third cents the acre. Take
notice, Mr. Speaker, that the law of 1796 does not pretend to repeal the
act of 1795, but proclaims, to every body, that to be void which was in
reality so before, and with an honest zeal provides that the money which
had been paid should be repaid to the purchaser. This annulling law was
so precious to the people, it was a monument so honorable to the State,
that when afterwards the citizens of that State arose in the majesty of
their strength, resuming all those rights, and acted in convention, this
very law was ingrafted in their constitution.

Mr. EUSTIS.--If the position taken by the gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
CLARK) could be established, it would not in my opinion justify the
amendment which he has proposed to the resolution under consideration;
because the amendment renders the resolution null and void, and the
resolution neither affirms nor admits the legal title. Still, I should
be willing to rest the whole merits of the case on the single question,
whether the claimants, at the time of making their purchases, had or
had not a knowledge of the fraud? In the autumn of 1795, when the sales
were generally made in New England, there was no knowledge or suspicion
of fraud--the contracts were made in full confidence of the act of a
sovereign and independent State--and I know they could have had no
knowledge of any fraud in the Legislature of Georgia. We are told by
the gentleman that there was “a great uproar throughout the State of
Georgia.” Whatever might have been the nature or extent of this uproar,
I am confident that a knowledge of it had not reached New England at the
time the contracts were made. But the proof that there was no knowledge
of any fraud depends not on the opinions or assertions of individuals--it
is founded on a circumstance which removes all doubt on the subject--it
is founded on the price which the purchasers paid for the land. They
paid, as they have stated in their memorial, as much per acre for these
lands as the State of Massachusetts had received, a few years before,
for lands lying in the State of New York. And is it probable that the
purchasers who have been represented by a gentleman from Pennsylvania as
possessing so much sagacity, and looking so well to their own interests,
would have paid or contracted to pay such a price, with a knowledge that
the original grant had been fraudulently obtained?


THURSDAY, January 31.

_Georgia Claims._

The House resumed the consideration of the resolution reported the
twenty-ninth instant, from the Committee of the Whole, on the Georgia
Claims.

Mr. JACKSON.--Mr. Speaker, I rise with some degree of reluctance to
address you on the present occasion, not because I fear to give publicity
to my sentiments on the question before the House, but from the assurance
that the length of time which this subject has occupied at the last, and
during the present session of Congress, renders it most certain that no
new view can be given; and more especially that the opinions already
formed cannot be changed. I would not now have risen but for the wish
that inasmuch as a most extraordinary course has been pursued, and a
general denunciation of every man who dares to favor the report on your
table has been made, my reasons may accompany my vote, and I am willing
that they together may form the criterion by which my political existence
shall be decided. The reluctance I felt in rising is somewhat removed
by the reflection that the arguments urged on this floor are declared
not intended to influence the judgment of this House, but to control the
public mind, by an avowed appeal to the people of the United States.
Let the appeal be fairly made, and I fearlessly await their decision.
For that purpose, I deem it proper to offer my sentiments, in order that
they may accompany those of my two colleagues who have preceded me.
Sir, I am decidedly in favor of the report of the Committee of Claims,
and of course opposed to the amendment under consideration. I do not on
this occasion regret the absence of party spirit from these walls, which
has been invoked by my colleague, (Mr. RANDOLPH.) That party spirit
which has been the bane of all government; that party spirit which,
disregarding all the forms of justice, tramples its most sacred laws
under foot, and presides without check or control over questions relating
solely to private property; or which was displayed in the conduct of
Jeffries, who servilely prostrating his sacred functions to the purposes
of ministerial vengeance, has justly excited the reproach and execration
of posterity: and which, if cherished upon occasions like the present,
will tend to demolish the fair fabric of our Republican Government. I
will not admit that because a majority of this House are in favor of the
claims, and desire a prompt decision without debate, it is evidence that
“unprincipled men have acquired the ascendency, and knowing themselves
to be in the commission of wrong they are silent.” Is my colleague aware
of the extent of this doctrine? When unprincipled men, said he, acquire
the ascendency, they act in concert and are silent--silence and concert,
then, are to him proofs of corrupt motive. Is this always a correct
position? Does the gentleman recollect that measures were adopted a few
years past without discussion, by my political friends, in conjunction
with him, who were _silent, and united_? I am unwilling to believe that
such an inference can result from a union of sentiment. In some instances
we are unanimous in our decision of questions, on which no debate takes
place; but I have never thought this was proof of the prostration of
principle; nor can I suppose that the gentleman himself thinks so; even
now we adopt measures advocated by him, and are nevertheless told that
to act in concert is proof of corruption. Having premised that the
inferences made by the gentleman were not correct, I will proceed to the
investigation of the question before the House, viz: Are the claims under
the act of 1795, entitled to reference to commissioners for compromise
and settlement, or are they not? My colleague (Mr. RANDOLPH) says the
persons who obtained the land from the Legislature of Georgia were guilty
of a most detestable fraud; and the present claimants, pretending to be
innocent purchasers without notice of fraud, are a set of hypocrites,
undeserving the attention of Congress, or the commiseration of mankind.
In support of this assertion he has quoted the Message of the President
of the United States, in 1795, to Congress, describing in terms of
approbation the high character of its author--WASHINGTON--whose memory I
revere, and whose name I will teach my children to lisp, and venerate
as the father of American freedom, and who with Liberty were the two
best gifts bestowed by Heaven upon our favored country! WASHINGTON,
my colleague says, gave notice to the nation, and published the rape
of unhallowed hands upon the property of the State of Georgia. But,
sir, if we examine the Message, and the proceedings of Congress upon
the occasion, it will be discovered that no knowledge of fraud in the
transactions of the Legislature of 1795, was even known, or suspected;
because, if any such information had been received, the known integrity
of that virtuous man assures me, he would have communicated it; he would
have opposed it with his best exertions, and give me leave to say,
deprecated it as much as any man can.

Mr. FINDLAY said that he claimed the attention of the House for a short
time; but from viewing the unusual turn some of the arguments had taken,
and the nature of the subject, he found it a matter of some delicacy to
know how to proceed. He was opposed to the amendment under debate, and in
favor of the resolution, but he observed some members, with whom he had
generally voted, and for whose talents he had a high esteem, and in whose
integrity he had the utmost confidence, take the other side with such
ardent zeal, and in a mode of argument so unusual in public bodies, that
on observing this, he had hesitated and had voted in the last session for
the postponement which took place. He had done this in hopes that the
House would in this session meet the case in a temper more becoming their
own dignity and the importance and delicacy of the subject.

He said he would begin with the Message of the President near the close
of the session in February, in the year 1795, informing Congress of the
two laws made in Georgia, one in December and the other in the month of
February, 1795, (the same Message mentioned by the member from Virginia,
Mr. RANDOLPH.) The Message was referred to a select committee, of which
he had the honor of being a member, with other very intelligent members
from both South and East, (Mr. NICHOLAS, Mr. AMES, &c.) It had long been
the opinion of men well informed, that the title of Georgia to the extent
of territory she claimed was doubtful, and that it was too great for
any one State to possess in connection with the Federal Union. The old
Congress frequently called on Georgia to make a cession of her unsettled
territory, agreeably to the stipulations on which the Confederation was
agreed to, but when Georgia did propose a cession, the terms on which it
was made were rejected. Other States made cessions of lands to which they
had no title, or else had appropriated the lands to individuals before
the cession was made; so that, on the whole, but a small quantity of land
unencumbered came to the benefit of the United States. But to return: the
committee in February, 1795, examined the title of Georgia as far as they
had information, the bounds not being certainly known; the unsettled
territory of Georgia was believed to be larger than France or Germany,
or any other European nation, except Russia, whose Asiatic dominions
extend to the Pacific Ocean; hence they concluded that such an extent of
territory possessed by one State, at the extremity of the United States,
and bordering its whole length on the Spanish dominions, with which we
were then in danger of a serious contest, it was the opinion of the
committee that every proper means should be used to induce Georgia to
cede, in a peaceable manner, a proportion of that territory; and, as a
first step towards obtaining this object, the committee reported that the
Attorney-General should examine the titles of the State of Georgia and of
the lands claimed by the company from the law of 1795; and they further
reported that the President should be authorized to obtain a cession from
the State of Georgia of the whole or part of the territory.

It was not certainly known that there was a defect in the title of
Georgia, but from the circumstances of the small extent of that
colony at the beginning, and in various extensions by different royal
proclamations, &c., the title of Georgia was held in doubt. It is well
known that the State of Georgia at first was pitched into the State of
South Carolina, which for a considerable time granted titles for land
south of the State of Georgia, and one degree of latitude which the
United States claimed from the definitive treaty with Britain, was yet
in the possession of Spain; but this the members of Georgia considered
also as within the jurisdiction of that State. This being the case,
the committee thought it prudent to make no mention of the supposed
defect of the title of Georgia. The committee, and particularly himself,
suspected that different laws enacted by that State for the sale of land,
and particularly the recent sale of 1795, were encouraged by their own
suspicion of a defective title, but they knew nothing of the bribery and
corruption assigned as a reason in the year following, for annulling
the contract; therefore it was, that no notice to the contractors that
Congress doubted the title of Georgia was given. There was no precedent
in the United States of a contract authorized by a constitutional
legislative act being declared null and void by a succeeding legislature.
The power of decisions on frauds and corruptions, or the validity of
titles being vested in the courts of justice in all civilized countries,
such a decision could only be looked for from that department; but
neither a judge who is stated to have been corrupted was impeached, nor
any of the members indicted.

Mr. F. said, while the case was so situated, the New England purchasers,
or long-legged speculators, did not, as his colleague (Mr. LUCAS) had
said, go to Georgia, but the long-legged contractors or speculators
of Georgia, went above a thousand miles to Massachusetts, an old,
thick-settled country, the citizens of which needed land for their
families, (a country which annually sent forth numerous emigrants, who
generally purchased in large quantities and settled in large bodies
together,) and sold the land at seven or eight times the original price,
by which they gained near $1,000,000 advance. They went with the patents
from the State of Georgia, and the law, and probably the constitution
of that State, in their hands. This, alone, was sufficient to encourage
purchasers among a people who needed land; but this was not all. The
respectability of the characters of the settlers was such as would
reasonably induce an opinion, that they could not themselves be deceived,
and would not deceive others. Among these were a very respectable _judge
of the Supreme Court of the United States_, who had been a member of the
old Congress from almost its commencement till its dissolution, for as
long a period as the State constitution would permit, and had been an
efficient member of the Convention which prepared the Constitution of
the United States, and several State conventions, and a gentleman who
was then, and both before and after that time, a SENATOR of the United
States, and many other very respectable characters--who, however, he
acknowledged, had by that act forfeited the character they had formerly
enjoyed, and yet, strange to tell, neither before nor after the annulling
act, he could not call it a law, as no such law could be made under
the Constitution of the United States. The sale was annulled; but the
judge said to have been corrupted, nor the federal judge, was impeached,
nor any of the members of whom it was testified that they had received
bribes, or were sharers in the spoil, were indicted, but still enjoy the
confidence, as much as they otherwise would have done, of that State. Not
one of them was removed from office, or in any official manner consigned
to infamy, by the courts of that respectable State, or by impeachment.

The lands sold at Boston were yet in possession of the Indian tribes,
and the Indian war but lately extinguished, while, at the same time,
the lands in Pennsylvania were sold, the first rate at one shilling and
sixpence; the reputed second rate--but in fact equal if not superior in
quality and situation--at one shilling the acre; and what remained unsold
to the old settlements, at sixpence; and, in New York, still cheaper the
acre; when the Georgia purchase, with all its disadvantages, is stated
and admitted to have been sold, rough and smooth, good and bad, and of
which a large proportion is allowed to be bad, at something above fifteen
pence an acre on the amount reserved. Certainly such a speculation, if it
was one, was such as he would not have had any share in, and therefore
no proof of the superior cunning ascribed to them by his colleague and
others.

Mr. F. said that, so far, the bargain and sale were fair and legal;
whether it was a good bargain or a bad one, was the look-out of the
purchasers; if it was a bad one Government would have given them no
relief. Had nothing extraordinary, or out of the common road, taken
place, he believed the attention of Congress would never have been
called to the subject. Soon, however, after this contract was made,
the Legislature of Georgia declared the contract, and the law under
which it was made, to be void or annulled; and in a short time after, a
convention of that respectable State disapproved of the constitutional
act of the Legislature; but as long as we pay respect to constitutional
obligations and the distribution of the powers of government, and as long
as we respect the Federal Constitution, which expressly asserts that
no _ex post facto_ law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts,
shall be made, we must agree that one session of a legislature cannot
annul the contracts made by the preceding session. If that could be
done, the patent for his own plantation might also be set aside, for
he acknowledged it is worth more now than the price that he paid for
it. This doctrine had never been entertained even in the Revolutionary
period. At that solemn period, all contracts were protected.

Mr. F. said that he cheerfully acknowledged that the amount of land
sold under the law of Georgia of 1795, was so enormous as that, if
that State had been a separate and wholly independent government,
would have justified, in some degree, an agrarian law; and if the
fraud and corruption attested by _ex parte_ testimony was true, would
have justified the most exemplary punishment of those who suffered
themselves to be corrupted, or who defrauded the commonwealth, and this
would have proved a defect in the contract itself; but no such thing
appears to have taken place. The judge, who is said to have received
$13,000 for his vote, was not impeached, nor the members who are said
to have given, or received bribes, indicted. It appears to have been
so contrived that the State or citizens of Georgia, should suffer no
loss--that the loss and reproach should be transferred to people at the
greatest possible distance. He gave credit, however, to the Legislature
of Georgia, which met in the year 1796, for making an extraordinary
exertion to free themselves from an extraordinary evil. It was a laudable
testimony against corruption and fraud, but no court of justice had yet,
by deciding on it, acknowledged it to be law, and it was too slow for
warning others at a distance against titles originating under the law of
1795.

The annulling law of 1796 had all the effect that any citizen, at that
period, could have wished. Congress took possession of the government of
the western parts of Georgia, the parts in which the lands in question
lay, and erected a territorial government, without the consent of that
State, and passed a law authorizing the President to enter into a
negotiation with Georgia on the principles of compromise, for the right
of soil. The compromise eventually succeeded, and an act of cession
took place between the United States and the State of Georgia. In this
act of cession, or convention, it was provided that the claims in the
counties of Bourbon and Washington, bordering on the Mississippi river,
&c., should be protected, and that five millions of acres, or part
thereof, should, by the United States, be applied to satisfy, quiet, or
compensate, the claims now before the House, and that if they were not so
applied, they should revert to the State of Georgia.

On these conditions, Mr. F. said, did Georgia surrender her right of
soil. Agreeably to these conditions were the Commissioners of the United
States authorized to make and receive proposals, but the commissioners
were not authorized to conclude the agreement, they did report to
Congress, and in that report, they state that the claimants cannot, in
their opinion, recover by law. This is well founded, because no action
can be brought against the United States, nor, since the amendment
made to the constitution respecting the suability of States, against a
State. Therefore this fund, viz: the five millions of acres, set apart
by the Convention of Georgia, to quiet, satisfy, or compensate these
claims, must be either applied to that purpose, or revert to the State of
Georgia, or the faith of the United States must be sacrificed.

Mr. F. said, that from this view of the subject, he had made up his
mind to vote in favor of the report of the Committee of Claims. That
he had not made up his mind lightly, that he had been prepossessed
against it, but it becoming his duty to decide, he had thrown aside
these prepossessions, and examined the case with all the coolness and
deliberation of which he was capable, and would give his vote, as he
had made up his mind, without consulting or relying on the opinions of
others, for he was responsible only for his own opinion.

Mr. GREGG.--I rise, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the House, on the
question being at length brought within such narrow limits. The validity
of the title appears to be nearly abandoned, and the advocates of the
resolution seem now disposed to rest its defence almost entirely on the
ground of expediency. For my own part I have always felt satisfied with
the report of the commissioners, so far as it respects the question
of title. They have investigated the subject with more diligence and
attention than can well be bestowed on it by members of this House,
and being men distinguished for their abilities and of high official
standing, their opinion, certainly, should have great weight. That
opinion, as recorded in their report, is, that the title of the claimants
cannot be supported. In this opinion I most heartily concur, for I
can never be induced to believe that an act so marked with fraud and
corruption as the act of Georgia, under which the claimants pretend to
derive their title, has been fully proved to be, can vest a title either
in law or in equity.

The question of title being given up, any remarks respecting the weight
that ought to attach to the rescinding act passed by the Legislature of
Georgia, in 1796, will be unnecessary. On that part of the subject I will
only just observe, in reply to one of my colleagues, (Mr. FINDLAY,) who
has stated that act to be without precedent, and that one Legislature
cannot repeal an act of a preceding Legislature where it involves a
contract, that there is one instance at least of such an act, and that
instance is in the State in which he and I live. The case to which
I allude, is an act passed by the Legislature of Pennsylvania, for
repealing the charter of the Bank of North America. This act, if I am not
mistaken, was passed when my colleague was a member of the Legislature,
and I believe received his support.

But, leaving the question of title, good policy, say gentlemen, requires
us to pass the resolution. In this sentiment, they and the commissioners
appear to unite. The commissioners acknowledge that the title of
the claimants cannot be supported, and yet undertake to recommend a
compromise, by stating “that the interest of the United States, the
tranquillity of those who may hereafter inhabit that territory, and
certain equitable considerations which may be urged in favor of most of
the present claimants, render it expedient to enter into a compromise on
reasonable terms.” Now, I would ask, how is the interest of the United
States to be promoted by giving five millions of acres of land to persons
acknowledged not to have a good title in law, and none in equity? If our
interest is to be promoted in this way, we may soon get rid of all our
land. Claimants will not be wanting, if it is to be got for asking.

With respect to the equitable considerations which have been urged
so strenuously in favor of the present claimants, I must acknowledge
they have not appeared to me so very forcible. The innocence of the
claimants has been painted in strong and glowing colors. They have been
represented, not only as innocent, but innocent through ignorance. One
of my colleagues, in particular, has dilated largely on this idea, and
applied it especially to the New England purchasers. In evidence of
this, he has referred to the case of the Connecticut intruders in the
State of Pennsylvania. But in this allusion he was certainly extremely
unfortunate. The case might be cited to prove a position exactly the
reverse. The fact is, that these intruders have for many years, by their
superior skill and address, held their lands in defiance of the State;
and, from appearance, I believe will continue to hold them, without
making any compensation to the State; and this instance may serve to show
the impropriety and inefficiency of governments pretending to compromise
with individuals. The measures pursued by the State of Pennsylvania
relative to these claimants have generally been of this description. They
have produced no advantage to the State, and have always been converted
by the intruders into arguments in favor of their claims. I do know
of one case that goes far to prove that there are some persons in the
Eastern States extremely uninformed in matters relating to land. The
case to which I allude is recent, having occurred but a few days ago. A
petition was presented by a gentleman from Vermont, signed by a number
of persons, praying to be permitted to form a settlement on the public
lands lying north-west of the river Ohio. On a motion for referring
it to a committee, a member from the same State rose and opposed the
reference, assigning as a reason, that if the petition should so far
receive the countenance of the House as to be referred, the petitioners
would instantly commence the sale of rights. Now, if there are people
so extremely ignorant as to purchase rights of this description, they
certainly ought to be pitied. But will any person say that the present
claimants belong to this class? No, sir; they are men experienced in
business, by all accounts well versed in transactions relating to land,
and as little liable to be imposed on as perhaps any equal number of
persons that could be selected.

But it is said they could not have knowledge of the circumstances under
which the act of Georgia of 1795 was passed; that they became purchasers
before such information could possibly reach them. This certainly cannot
be seriously insisted on. Will gentlemen look at the deeds conveying the
titles, and then say the purchasers had no notice? Evidence, if not of
the fraud, at least that there was something wrong in the business, is
stamped on the very face of all the conveyances.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH said, that, as well as his extreme indisposition and
excessive hoarseness would permit, he would lay before the House some
observations on the various objections which had been urged against the
amendment of his worthy and respectable colleague, (Mr. CLARK,) for such
he was in every point of view.

The venerable gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr. FINDLAY,) when he gave
in his recantation of his last year’s opinions on this subject, told you
that General Washington’s Message had no reference to the fraudulency
of the act of 1795. He considered it as a _caveat_ on behalf of the
United States, who claimed a great part of the territory in question.
Be it so. Was that notice to subsequent purchasers, or not? How will
gentlemen reconcile this inconsistency? Within the disputed limits
between the Federal Government and Georgia, five-sixths of this very New
England Company’s purchase were comprised, besides that valuable part
of the Georgia Company’s grant contained in the fork of the Alabama and
Tombigbee. The United States contended, that the country west of the
Chatahoochee, and south of a parallel of latitude which should intersect
the mouth of the Yazoo River, never constituted a part of Georgia--that
it was within the limits of the province of West Florida, from which
being severed by the peace of 1783, it became vested in the Confederacy,
and not in the State to which it happened to be contiguous. The far
greater part of the grant to the Georgia Mississippi Company is embraced
within these limits: the purchase of the New England Company is stated,
by themselves, to have been made from that company, twelve months after
the President’s Message. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, himself,
considers this Message as a formal annunciation of the adverse claim of
the United States to the land in question, and, in the same breath, avers
that the New England Company, subsequent purchasers of that very land,
were ignorant of any defect of title in the State of Georgia, or the
grantees under her. How will he reconcile this?

The same gentleman has introduced into this debate the names of two
persons; one of them, at that time, _a judge of the Supreme Court of the
United States, the other a Senator from the State of Georgia_; who, he
tells us, were deeply concerned in the transaction of 1795. Both these
gentlemen are no more. Private character, always dear, always to be
respected, seems almost canonized by the grave. When men go hence, their
evil deeds should follow them, and, for me, might sleep oblivious in
their tomb. But if the mouldering ashes of the dead are to be raked up,
let it not be for the furtherance of injustice. In every stage of this
discussion, whilst I have kept my eye steadily fixed on the enormity of
the act of 1795, I have lost sight of the agents. Since, however, some
of them have been mentioned, it may not be immaterial to notice the
interest which they took in this business. It is too true, sir, that
the Senator in question was one of the fathers of the act of 1795. By
the Assembly which passed it he was, at the same session, re-elected to
the Senate of the United States for six years thereafter. It is equally
true, Mr. Speaker, that the notorious British Treaty was ratified by
that Senator’s casting vote. And as the Yazoo speculation then carried
through the British Treaty, now, it seems, the adherents of that treaty
are to drag the Yazoo speculation out of the mire. The connection of
the two questions at that day is too notorious to be denied. That very
Senator, were he now here, would disdain to deny it. With all his faults,
he was a man of some noble qualities. Hypocrisy, at least, was not in
the catalogue of his vices. The coupling together of the British Treaty
and the Yazoo business, cannot surely be unknown to the gentleman from
Pennsylvania. He was a member of the House of Representatives which voted
the appropriation for carrying that treaty into effect, and is understood
to have acted a conspicuous part on the occasion. Can it be matter of
surprise that the same Senate that ratified the British Treaty by the
casting vote of one of the principal grantees of the act of Georgia of
1795, should refuse to co-operate with the House of Representatives,
in measures for obviating the mischiefs of that act? When you see this
corruption extending itself to two great departments of Government, can
you wonder at the bitterness of its fruit? With their leaders in the
Legislature and on the judgment seat, well might the host of corruption
feel confident in their strength; even yet they have scarcely laid aside
their audacity.

A gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. EUSTIS) has said, that the claimants
from his State had no notice of the fraud; “that he knows they had not;”
I cannot have mistaken him, for I took down the words. Sir, I would ask
that gentleman whence arises the proverbial difficulty of providing a
negative, but from the difficulty of knowing one?

[Mr. EUSTIS rose to explain. If he had said that he knew the claimants
had not a knowledge of the fraud, he had said too much. It was impossible
that any one should know all that was known or passing in the mind of
another. Without recollecting the precise words used, he had intended
to state his own belief that they had no such knowledge or information.
He was resident and conversant with those concerned in the transaction,
it was the subject of general conversation, and if there had been any
knowledge or report of the kind, he thought it must have come to his
knowledge; but he also recollected to have stated at the time that
this circumstance did not depend on the knowledge or opinion of any
individual--as the price paid for the land precluded any idea or belief,
that the purchasers could have had any knowledge of the fraud.]

Mr. RANDOLPH resumed. The facts which I am about to mention are derived
from such a source that I could almost pledge myself for their truth:
When the agent of the Georgia Mississippi Company (under whom the New
England Land Company claim) arrived in the Eastern States, he had great
difficulty in disposing of his booty. The rumor of the fraud by which
it was acquired had gone before him. People did not like to vest their
money in this new Mississippi scheme. He accordingly applied to some
leading men of wealth and intelligence, offering to some as high as
200,000 acres, to others less, for which they were neither to pay money,
nor pass their paper, but were to stand on his books as purchasers at
so much per acre. These were the decoy-birds to bring the ducks and
geese into the net of speculation. On the faith of these persons, under
the idea that men of their information would not risk such vast sums
without some prospect of return, others resolved to venture, and gambled
in this new land fund, laid out their money in the Yazoo lottery and
have drawn blanks. And these, sir, are the innocent purchasers by whom
we are beset; purchasers without price, who never paid a shilling, and
never can be called upon for one; the vile panders of speculation. And
in what do their dupes differ from the losers in any other gambling
or usurious transaction? The premium was proportioned to the risk. As
well may your buyers and sellers of stock, your bulls and your bears
of the alley, require indemnification for their losses at the hands of
the nation. There is another fact, too little known, but unquestionably
true, in relation to this business. This scheme of buying up the
Western Territory of Georgia did not originate there. It was hatched in
Philadelphia and New York, (and I believe Boston; of this, however, I am
not positive,) and the funds with which it was effected were principally
furnished by moneyed capitalists in those towns. The direction of these
resources devolved chiefly on the Senator who has been mentioned. Too
wary to commit himself to writing, he and his associates agreed upon
a countersign. His re-election to the Senate was to be considered as
evidence that the temper of the Legislature of Georgia was suited
to their purpose, and his Northern confederates were to take their
measures accordingly. In proof of this fact, no sooner was the news of
his reappointment announced at New York, than it was publicly said in
a coffee house there, “then the Western Territory of Georgia is sold.”
Does this require a comment? Do you not see the strong probability that
many of those, who now appear in the character of purchasers from the
original grantees named in the act of 1795, are in fact partners, perhaps
instigators and prime movers of a transaction in which their names do not
appear? Amidst such a complication of guilt, how are you to discriminate;
how fix the Proteus? The Chairman of the Committee of Claims, who brought
in this report, under the lash of whose criticism we have all so often
smarted, that he is generally known as the pedagogue of the House, will
give me leave on this subject to refer him to an authority. It is one
with which he is no doubt familiar, and, however humble, well disposed to
respect. The authority which I am about to cite is Dillworth’s Spelling
Book, and if it will be more grateful to the gentleman, not our common
American edition, but the Royal English Spelling Book. In one of the
chapters of that useful elementary work it is related, that two persons
going into a shop on pretence of purchase, one of them stole a piece
of goods and handed it to the other to conceal under his cloak. When
challenged with the theft, he who stole it said he had it not, and he who
had it said he did not take it. Gentlemen, replied the honest tradesman,
what you say may all be very true, but, at the same time, I know that
between you I am robbed. And such precisely is our case. But I hope,
sir, we shall not permit the parties, whether original grantees who took
it, or subsequent purchasers who have it, to make off with the public
property.

The rigor of the Committee of Claims has passed into a proverb. It has
more than once caused the justice of this House to be questioned. What,
then, was our surprise, on reading their report, to find that they
have discovered “Equity” in the pretensions of these petitioners. Sir,
when the war-worn soldier of the Revolution, or the desolate widow and
famished offspring of him who sealed your independence with his blood,
ask at the door of that Committee for _bread_, they receive the statute
of limitation. On such occasions you hear of no equity in the case.
Their claims have not the stamp and seal of iniquity upon them. _Summum
jus_ is the measure dealt out to them. The equity of the committee is
reserved for those claims which are branded with iniquity and stamped
with infamy. This reminds me of the story of a poor, distressed female
in London applying for admittance into the Magdalen Charity. Being asked
who she was, her wretched tale was told in a few words--“I am poor,
innocent, and friendless.” “Unhappy girl,” replied the director, “your
case does not come within the purview of this institution. Innocence has
no admission here; this is a place of reception for prostitutes; you
must go and qualify yourself before you can partake of our relief.” With
equal discretion the directors of the Committee of Claims suffer nothing
to find support in their asylum but what is tainted with corruption,
and stamped with fraud. Give it these properties and they will give it
“equity.”

I have said, and I repeat it, that the aspect in which this thing
presents itself, would, alone, determine me to resist it. In one of the
petitioners I behold an executive officer, who receives and distributes
a yearly revenue of $300,000, yielding scarcely any net profit to
Government. Offices in his disposal to the annual amount of $94,000, and
contracts more lucrative making up the residue of the sum. A patronage
limited only by the extent of our country. Is this right? Is it even
decent? Shall political power be made the engine of private interest?
Shall such a suspicion tarnish your proceedings? How would you receive
a petition from the President of the United States, if such a thing can
be supposed possible? Sir, I wish to see the same purity pervading every
subordinate branch of the Administration, which, I am persuaded, exists
in its great departments. Shall persons holding appointments under the
great and good man who presides over our councils, draw on the rich
fund of his well-earned reputation, to eke out their flimsy and scanty
pretensions? Is the relation in which they stand to him, to be made the
cloak and cover of their dark designs? To the gentleman from New York,
(Mr. ROOT,) who takes fire at every insinuation against his friend, I
have only to observe, on this subject, that what I dare to say, I dare to
justify. To the House I will relate an incident, from which it may judge
how far I have lightly conceived or expressed an opinion to the prejudice
of any man. I owe an apology to my informant for making public what he
certainly did not authorize me to reveal. There is no reparation which
can be offered by one gentleman and accepted by another, that I shall
not be ready to make him; but I feel myself already justified to him,
since he sees the circumstances under which I act. A few evenings since,
a profitable contract for carrying the mail was offered to a friend of
mine who is a member of this House. You must know, sir, that the person
so often alluded to maintains a jackal, fed, not (as you would suppose)
upon the offal of contract, but with the fairest pieces in the shambles;
and, at night, when honest men are in bed, does this obscene animal prowl
through the streets of this vast and desolate city, seeking whom he may
tamper with. Well, sir, when this worthy plenipotentiary had made his
proposal, in due form, the independent man to whom it was addressed, saw
at once its drift. “Tell your principal,” said he, “that I will take his
contract, but I shall vote against the Yazoo claim, notwithstanding.”
Next day, he was told that there had been some misunderstanding of the
business, that he could not have the contract, as it was previously
bespoken by another!

Sir, I well recollect, when first I had the honor of a seat in this
House, we were members then of a small minority; a poor, forlorn hope;
that this very petitioner appeared in Philadelphia, on behalf of another
great land company on Lake Erie. He then told us as an inducement to
vote for the Connecticut reserve (as it was called) that if that measure
failed, it would ruin the republicans and the cause in that State. You,
sir, cannot have forgotten the reply he received: “That we did not
understand the republicanism that was to be paid for; that we feared it
was not of the right sort, but spurious.” And, having maintained our
principles through the ordeal of that day, shall we now abandon them,
to act with the men and upon the maxims which we then abjured? Shall we
now condescend to means which we disdained to use in the most desperate
crisis of our political fortune? This is, indeed, the age of monstrous
coalitions; and this corruption has the quality of cementing the most
inveterate enmities, personal as well as political. It has united in
close concert those, of whom it has been said, not in the figurative
language of prophecy, but in the sober narrative of history: “I have
bruised thy head, and thou hast bruised my heel.” Such is the description
of persons who would present to the President of the United States an act
to which, when he puts his hand, he signs a libel on his whole political
life. But he will never tarnish the unsullied lustre of his fame; he
will never sanction the monstrous position, (for such it is, dress it up
as you will,) “that a legislator may sell his vote, and a right, which
cannot be divested, will pass under such sale.” Establish this doctrine,
and there is an end of representative government; from that moment
republicanism receives its death-blow.


FRIDAY, February 1.

_Postmaster-General._

The SPEAKER laid before the House the following letter from Gideon
Granger, Postmaster-General of the United States:--

                                                  FEBRUARY 1, 1805.

    Hon. NATHANIEL MACON, _Speaker of the House of Representatives
    of the Congress of the United States_.

    SIR,--I have received information, from various sources, that
    both my public and private character and conduct have been
    arraigned on the floor of the House of Congress by a member
    of that House, in a debate of the 29th, and in another of the
    31st ultime, in a case where no examination of my official
    conduct was proposed. As there is not, within my knowledge,
    any instance of a similar abuse offered to an officer of
    Government, I know not of any precedent whereby to regulate
    my conduct. I wish at all times, and more especially on an
    occasion so extraordinary and unprecedented, to approach the
    representatives of the nation with all that respect and regard
    to which they are entitled. My feelings do not allow me, at
    present, to exercise that coolness and judgment which I might
    call to my aid in a case less interesting.

    Conscious of the purity of my conduct, and that no charge
    can be made or supported against me consistent with truth
    and justice, it is a duty which I owe to my country--to
    the government which has confided in me--to myself and my
    family--to declare (and I do now most solemnly declare) that
    every charge or insinuation which has been made against my
    private or public character, or against my fairness and
    impartiality, or of my attempting, by bribery, or in any
    improper manner, to influence any member of Congress upon any
    question pending before that honorable body, is absolutely and
    altogether untrue, and founded at least in error only.

    The high respect due to your body and every member of it during
    your sessions, will not allow me to hazard a conjecture as to
    the motives of the gentleman who has proclaimed these charges.

    I court and solicit of Congress an investigation into my
    official (and if they please my private) conduct, from the
    first moment the Post-Office Department was committed to my
    charge to the present period. Nor have I any favor to ask, save
    only this, that an investigation may be had the present session.

    I pray you to communicate this to the House of Representatives;
    and I tender to that honorable body, and to you, their Speaker,
    the assurance of my high esteem and respect.

    GIDEON GRANGER.[24]

Mr. VARNUM moved that the letter of the Postmaster-General be referred
to a select committee to inquire into the subject.

Mr. NELSON hoped the motion would not prevail, as no good purpose could
be answered by the inquiry. It appeared to him to be an affair of honor
between two gentlemen, and Congress had nothing to do with it. If, upon
investigation, the charges were found to be true, Congress had no power
to remove the Postmaster-General from office. For what purpose, then,
were they to waste the time of the House in such an inquiry? That was not
the proper place to make the application; it should have been made to
the President, if made at all, as he had the power of removing officers.
The session was far advanced and limited in its duration. A variety of
important business still remained unfinished, and he feared some of it
would remain so; yet, notwithstanding, the House was called upon to
take up private quarrels between gentlemen. He hoped the motion would
not prevail, and that the gentlemen would be left to settle the dispute
themselves.

Mr. BRYAN called for the yeas and nays.

Mr. ELLIOT.--This House was informed by a member, (Mr. RANDOLPH,) in
language too strong to be misunderstood, that corruption had found its
way within these walls, and that indirect advantages had been taken to
influence the decision of the House upon a question pending before them.
An officer of the Government, who considered his conduct much implicated,
has informed the House, by letter, that he has been informed that his
public conduct has been arraigned, and prays an investigation into it. In
my opinion, nothing can be more just and reasonable than to grant it.

Mr. NICHOLSON.--I recollect but a single instance in which the conduct
of an officer of the Government has been inquired into, at his request;
that was the case of Mr. Wolcott, the late Secretary of the Treasury,
who, upon his resignation, addressed a letter to the House, requesting
an investigation into his conduct. That letter was couched in decent
terms, and the language was such that no member could take umbrage at.
Had the letter of the Postmaster-General been written in the same style,
I should have had no objection to the investigation, although I can see
no good likely to result from it. But it is couched in such language as
this House ought not to listen to. We are told in it, that charges made
by a member of this House are untrue. Are we to sit here, and suffer
such language to be used? I trust not, sir; had I known the language of
the letter, I should have opposed its being read. If gentlemen wish an
investigation into their conduct, they ought to ask it in decent terms;
and I should not oppose it, although, as I before observed, I can see no
good likely to result, for I trust that the Postmaster-General will never
be dignified with an impeachment. If the charges against him are true,
the President ought to remove him, and it is to him that he ought to
justify himself. If, however, gentlemen are anxious that an investigation
should take place, let them lay a resolution to that effect on the table,
and I will give it no opposition; but I will never agree that such a
letter as the one now on the table be referred to a committee, and, by
that means, give a sanction to the language contained in it.

Mr. GREGG regretted that such business had been brought before the House,
especially at so late a period of the session. He did not know for what
purpose an inquiry was to be made; for, supposing the charges to be true,
the House had no power to remove him. The Postmaster-General was not one
of those officers who could be impeached; and the President was the only
one that could remove him. He was opposed to the motion, conceiving that
too much important business remains unfinished, to take up new matters,
which would answer no good purpose whatever.

Mr. CLARK was opposed to the reference of the letter, on account of the
language which it contained. It charged a member of the House with having
uttered falsehood. In his opinion, such language ought not to receive any
sanction from the House.

Mr. LYON.--I feel, Mr. Speaker, a sympathy for the Postmaster-General,
who, as well as myself, was so egregiously belied yesterday by the member
from Virginia, (Mr RANDOLPH.)

[Here Mr. NICHOLSON called Mr. LYON to order, whereupon the latter sat
down, when the SPEAKER decided that the words were out of order.]

After this decision was made, Mr. LYON again rose to proceed, and was
again called to order, but the SPEAKER determining that he was in order,

Mr. BRYAN appealed to the House, and

Mr. NICHOLSON called for the yeas and nays.

The question was then taken, “Is the decision of the Chair correct?” And
it was determined in the affirmative--yeas 81, nays 34.

Mr. LYON, upon this, immediately said, I give up my right; and would not
proceed.

Mr. ELLIOT.--However surprising it may appear to some gentlemen, it is
not so to me, that the language of innocence should be warm and pointed.
We have been told that the letter is couched in disrespectful terms.
For my part, I cannot perceive any thing of the kind in it; and I am
surprised that, as it respects the gentleman who made the charges against
him, that he is so moderate. Gentlemen have said that an inquiry would
be of no service; because, if the charges are true, the officer cannot
be impeached. If gentlemen will advert to the constitution they will
find that “all civil officers are liable to impeachment,” and removal
from office. Surely it will not be contended that the Postmaster-General
is not a civil officer. The gentleman from Maryland (Mr. NICHOLSON)
differs very widely from his friend from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH) as to
the Postmaster-General. The former considers him as holding an office
too insignificant to be dignified with an impeachment, while the latter
deems his patronage and influence sufficient to influence or to bribe the
majority of this House. However insignificant the gentleman from Maryland
may think the Postmaster-General, still he is a civil officer, and as
such is liable to be impeached, and removed from office. We have been
told that a combination has taken place between some of those who have
avowed themselves republicans and the federalists, and that the liberties
of the country will be endangered. Sir, we have no danger to apprehend
from monarchists, aristocrats, or federalists.

Our liberty can only be endangered by those description of persons
against whom the gentleman from New York (Mr. ROOT) so emphatically
exclaimed--I mean political demagogues and popular leaders! They have
been the curse and destruction of every Republic, and I fear will be our
destruction. We are cursed with them in this country, and even in this
House. But I trust that the majority of this House are opposed to them.
The great objection which gentlemen make to the inquiry is, that the
letter is couched in too disrespectful terms. Will they please to bear
in mind the charges made against the officer, and, viewing them, is it
not a matter of astonishment that he is so mild? As the letter respects
this House, it is remarkably respectful. Upon what ground, then, can
the investigation be refused? If the charges made are true, the officer
ought to be removed; if untrue, this House ought in justice to him
whose character has been so assailed to declare that they are so. The
gentleman from Virginia (Mr. RANDOLPH) informed us yesterday that the
Postmaster-General kept in his pay a jackall, who went prowling about
this desolate city at midnight, when honest men ought to be asleep,
offering bribes to the members. Sir, the gentleman must have keen optics
to discover this jackall, when he is asleep; for he informs us that
he only goes about when honest men ought to be asleep; and surely the
gentleman is one of that description. Upon every view which I can take of
this subject, I can see no objection to the inquiry, but the strongest
reason in its favor; and justice demands that it should be made.

Mr. NELSON would offer a few remarks to the House, why he was opposed to
the motion. He would not undertake to give an opinion as to the character
of the Postmaster-General, or whether the charges made against him could
be substantiated. His objection was, that the House had nothing to do
with charges made by a member against any individual. If the charges were
true, the President (and not the House) was the proper person to apply
to, to remove the officer. But it had been said that the House had the
power to impeach all civil officers, and, therefore, could impeach the
Postmaster-General. But because the House was invested with that power,
he asked whether they were bound to exercise it? Surely not. And he
hoped they would not, when they could get rid of the officer by a more
summary mode. Late experience had taught them the trouble and expense
attendant on impeachments, and he trusted that no officer would ever be
impeached that could be removed by the President. It would be better to
let them remain in office, although guilty of misbehavior, than to spend
so much time as they would be obliged to do in cases of impeachment.
Suppose the motion should be agreed to, and the committee appointed, he
asked what power they would possess? Were they to declare whether the
charges were true or false? A determination either way would have no
effect upon the House, because they could not, he trusted, impeach the
officer. He was not disposed to do any thing to hurt the character of
the Postmaster-General, but he would not give his sanction to a measure
which would spend so much of the time of the House in deciding what he
considered an affair of private honor and private feelings between two
gentlemen. He also considered that the adoption of the resolution would
pass a censure upon the gentleman who made the charges, and he asked
whether the House were disposed to censure one of its members for any
warm and unguarded expressions about an officer of the Government? He
trusted not. How many times had charges been made in the House against
the President of the United States; but that officer had never thought it
proper to apply to the House for an inquiry into his conduct; nor did the
House ever pass a vote of censure on the members who made them. He looked
upon this as a question of dispute between two gentlemen, and no tribunal
could be erected in the House to decide on it. He should, therefore, vote
against the motion of the gentleman from Massachusetts, (Mr. VARNUM,) and
hoped it would not prevail.

Mr. HUGER knew not what was the opinion of any gentleman as to the
merits of the question, but he was satisfied that a calm decision of
it could not take place at that time. They were about to establish a
precedent, which might be of importance, and it ought to be done after
the utmost deliberation. He called upon gentlemen to say, whether it
was possible that a calm and impartial decision could be given after so
much irritation had been displayed in the debate? In order to afford an
opportunity to gentlemen to give the subject a cool and dispassionate
investigation, he moved to postpone the further consideration thereof
until Monday.

The question was taken thereon, and determined in the affirmative--yeas
93.

The resolution (Mr. Varnum’s motion to refer Mr. Granger’s letter to a
select committee) was never after called up.


_Georgia Claims._

The unfinished business of yesterday on the Yazoo claims was resumed--the
amendment offered by Mr. CLARK, under consideration.

Mr. HOLMES observed that as he was a member of the Committee of Claims,
from whom the report under consideration emanated, he thought it his duty
to state to the House the part he acted on that occasion. I was, said
Mr. H., in all our deliberations upon this subject, decidedly opposed
to the adoption of the report, and in every stage of its progression
used all fair means in my power to produce a different result; in this,
however, I was unsuccessful. My conduct was governed by a firm conviction
that the present claimants had no right in law or equity to the lands in
question, and that policy did not demand the interference of the National
Legislature. Most of the arguments that operated upon my mind then, and
will influence my vote now, have been adduced by gentlemen who preceded
me. It is not my intention to detain the House with a repetition of them;
one or two, however, have occurred to me as worthy of consideration, that
have not been urged. This must be my apology for addressing you after
the able and lengthy discussion the subject has received. I am of the
opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the Legislature of Georgia, of 1795, were not
authorized to dispose of the lands in question, even if they had been
honestly inclined to do so.

Mr. MATTHEW LYON.--From the drift of the speeches delivered by the
member from Virginia, from his call for the Postmaster-General’s report
of a list of his contracts, and from the invitation he has given to an
examination of that report, I am led to consider it a duty I owe to
myself, in this House, and in the face of the world, to take up that
report, and explain the nature of the contracts which there appear
in my name. I find my name seven times mentioned in that report: the
first is in the 12th page, for a contract for carrying the mail from
Cincinnati to Detroit; the second in the same page, and is from Marietta
to Cincinnati; these two contracts I never solicited or bid for, but the
Postmaster-General having advertised for proposals, and having received
none that he thought reasonable, they being new routes and to be let for
one year only, he wrote to me offering the price they stand there at,
and I undertook to get the business done. For the performance of the
latter contract I gave every cent I received, and without saving one
penny for a great deal of trouble, risk, and perplexity, I had taken upon
myself to get it effected. From the other I saved a few dollars toward
paying me for the care, trouble, and responsibility I had sustained
on the occasion. Long before these contracts were out, I informed the
Postmaster-General that I should take neither of them again, and the
contract from Cincinnati to Detroit was let to another person at $105 60
more than was given to me; this may be seen in the 22d line of page 20 of
the same report.

The third time my name is mentioned is in the same 12th page, and is from
Hartford to Fort Massac, a distance of about 180 or 190 miles, for which
$654 75 is paid; out of this $65 is to be paid for ferriage. For some
parts of this route I am obliged to give much more than a proportionate
share of what I receive; some other parts I give a trifle less; sometimes
my own horses carry the mail. I cannot with precision tell what is lost
or gained in it, but it cannot be $50 either way. The fourth contract is
also in the same page, it is from Russelsville to Eddygrove, or, rather,
Eddyville; it is 80 miles, for which $240 is paid; this is as low if
not lower than the price given any where south or west of this place,
and I give to the person who performs it the whole amount of what I
receive. The fifth and sixth time my name is mentioned in that report is
in the 28th page--those are merely a renewal of the two last-mentioned
contracts, which had expired in 1803; all of those contracts were made
before I was elected to my present seat in this House, before I had the
pleasure of a personal acquaintance with the present Postmaster-General,
and before I ever spoke with him.

The seventh contract is noticed in the last page of the
Postmaster-General’s report, which is from Massac to New Madrid, from
Kaskaskias to Girardeau, from Cahoka to St. Louis, a distance of more
than 200 miles, for $515, out of which more than $150 must be paid for
ferriage, at the rate ferriages stood at the time of the contract.

This is the true history of the contracts by which it is insinuated
that the Postmaster-General has bribed me. I never was bribed, sir;
it is not all the lands and negroes my accuser owns that could tempt
me to do a thing which honor or conscience dictated to me to avoid. I
could, sir, if it was pertinent, show how the over-vigilance of the
present Postmaster-General has deprived me of the benefit of the only
profitable contract I ever made with the Government--a contract made
with his predecessor which he very improperly, in my opinion, considered
void on account of some words in it not being exactly consonant with
the intention of the contracting parties; believing, however, that the
Postmaster-General designed to do what he thought right, he has not lost
my esteem, nor do I think his character can be injured by the braying of
a jackall or the fulminations of a madman.[25]

Mr. J. CLAY.--It was not my intention to have troubled the House with any
observations on the subject, but I think a view may be taken different
from any exhibited by the gentlemen who have preceded me. Some of the
gentlemen who have advocated the appropriation of the land to satisfy
the New England Mississippi Land Company, have been content to rest the
claim upon the ground of policy. They have said that if some mode should
not be taken to satisfy the Yazoo speculators, they would be incessantly
troubling Congress. If these men have any title, it must be by right
of pre-emption; and yet that title it was not practicable for them to
acquire, as the State of Georgia could not extinguish the Indian title.
Notwithstanding, however, their imbecility, the Legislature of Georgia,
of 1796, undertook to grant an estate in fee simple. It will require more
time to examine this question, and perhaps more abilities than I possess;
but I cannot conceive how Georgia had a pre-emption title to the land,
while the Indian title still existed. The Congress of the United States
possessed the sole power of extinguishing the Indian title to lands
within their territories; no individual State has either the right or the
power of extinguishing the Indian title to any lands they may claim. Of
course, Georgia had no right to grant a title in fee simple.

We are told of the policy of compromising with these speculators, and
that they are innocent purchasers. How are they so? Are they not the
very men who purchased a fraudulent claim, and does not their deed carry
on the face of it a proof that they knew it to be fraudulent? There is
also a strange coincidence: These people’s deeds are dated February
13th, 1796, the very day that the rescinding act was passed, but these
instruments were not all executed until May following. [Here Mr. J.
Clay read several passages from the pamphlet published by the agents of
the New England Yazoo Company, and compared them with the resolution of
Congress passed on that subject, from which he inferred an acknowledgment
of the present claimants, that they purchased a disputed title.] He went
on to state that Governor Strong, who was at that time a Senator of
the United States, was made acquainted with the whole transaction; and
it could not but be presumed that he and the Massachusetts delegation
communicated to their constituents the circumstance.

The general notoriety of the fraud, said Mr. CLAY, is such as to convince
any man that the present claimants are not innocent purchasers. The very
conditions under which they purchased, demonstrate this. They undertake
to stand in the shoes of men who had defrauded the State of Georgia
through a corrupt Legislature, and when they paid their money, they
conditioned that it should not be repaid them, by reason of any defect in
the title. The petitioners take it for granted, that, whatever was the
fate of the original compact, though bottomed in fraud and consequently
null, they have no other resource than in the mercy of this House. Why
did they make that stipulation in their deed? Why not take a general
warrantee? If the deeds had been executed in the usual manner, they
could have recovered their money from the party who had practised upon
them. But, notwithstanding that article, I still think they should have
recourse to the original grantees; let them go to them, and a court of
equity will do them justice.

I have no idea of supporting questions of property upon grounds of mere
policy; I shall never be inclined to squander millions of the public
money, because a gang of swindling speculators may enter this House
and prove troublesome to its members. The agents of these men have
accidentally acknowledged that they cannot extinguish the Indian title,
and, therefore, they cannot get possession of the land. What is a man
to get by a contract, when it is impossible to comply with the terms?
I was in hopes, that the representation from the State of Pennsylvania
would have been unanimous on this question: they ought to know, from the
salutary experience of their own State respecting land speculations,
whether it relates to the Connecticut, Susquehanna, or Delaware
Companies, who have kept a part of our State in a continual broil for
fifty years, while another set of men, under the garb of the Population
and Holland companies, have thrown their warrants over the north-western
corner of the State, and are likely to defeat the great objects which
the Legislature had in view, when they disposed of the lands to actual
settlers alone. I trust, however, that they will be defeated, and that
the courts of justice will determine the case in the manner in which it
was recently decided. I regret that the oldest member of Congress from
our State, should, at this late hour, abandon those republican principles
which he has so long and so ably maintained, to support a band of Yazoo
speculators. For my part, I must be an altered man indeed, if I ever
consent to a compromise with a gang of speculators holding a title
founded in fraud and speculation.

The yeas and nays were then taken on the resolution of the Committee of
Claims, and decided in the affirmative--yeas 63, nays 58, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jun., Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton,
    Phanuel Bishop, Adam Boyd, John Boyle, John Campbell,
    William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett,
    Jacob Crowninshield, Manasseh Cutler, Richard Cutts, Samuel
    W. Dana, John Davenport, John Dawson, John Dennis, William
    Dickson, Thomas Dwight, James Elliot, Ebenezer Elmer, William
    Eustis, William Findlay, John Fowler, Calvin Goddard, Gaylord
    Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings, William Helms, John
    Hoge, James Holland, David Hough, Benjamin Huger, Samuel Hunt,
    John G. Jackson, Nehemiah Knight, Simon Larned, Joseph Lewis,
    jr., Henry W. Livingston, Thomas Lowndes, Matthew Lyon, Nahum
    Mitchell, Jeremiah Morrow, James Mott, Thomas Plater, Samuel
    D. Purviance, Erastus Root, Henry Southard, Joseph Stanton,
    William Stedman, James Stephenson, Samuel Taggart, Benjamin
    Tallmadge, Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, David Thomas, George
    Tibbits, Killian K. Van Rensselaer, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg
    Wadsworth, Matthew Walton, Lemuel Williams, and Marmaduke
    Williams.

    NAYS.--Isaac Anderson, David Bard, George Michael Bedinger,
    William Blackledge, Walter Bowie, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan,
    William Butler, Levi Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Christopher
    Clark, Joseph Clay, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Frederick
    Conrad, John B. Earle, John W. Eppes, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew
    Gregg, Thomas Griffin, John A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Joseph
    Heister, David Holmes, Walter Jones, William Kennedy, Michael
    Leib, John B. C. Lucas, Andrew McCord, David Meriwether,
    Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Roger Nelson, Anthony New,
    Thomas Newton, jr., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah
    Palmer, John Randolph, Thomas M. Randolph, John Rea of
    Pennsylvania, Jacob Richards, Samuel Riker, Thomas Sammons,
    Thomas Sanford, Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan, John Smilie, John
    Smith, Richard Stanford, John Stewart, Philip R. Thompson,
    Abram Trigg, Isaac Van Horne, John Whitehill, Alexander Wilson,
    Joseph Winston, and Thomas Wynns.

The resolution was of consequence agreed to.

Mr. J. RANDOLPH.--On this question I have nothing more to say than to
congratulate my friends on the vote just taken. We are strong in the
cause of truth, and gentlemen will find that truth will ultimately
prevail. When I compare the votes of this session with some of the votes
of the last, my objections to refer this subject are almost done away. In
whatever shape the subject may be again brought before the House, it will
be my duty, and that of my friends, to manifest the same firm spirit of
resistance, and to suffer no opportunity to pass of defeating a measure
so fraught with mischief.

[On a subsequent day, a bill was introduced for compromising the claims;
but it was not acted upon by the House during the remainder of the
session.][26]


WEDNESDAY, February 6.

_Post Roads._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on a motion of
the seventh of December last, respecting “the establishment of a post
road from Knoxville, in the State of Tennessee, to the settlement on the
Tombigbee River, in the Mississippi Territory, and from thence to New
Orleans; also, for the establishment of a post road from Georgia to the
settlements on the Tombigbee, to intersect the former road at the most
convenient point between Knoxville and the Tombigbee;” to which Committee
of the whole House were also referred on the tenth of the said month of
December, and on the first instant, the report of a select committee, and
a Message from the President of the United States, on the same subject.

Mr. G. W. CAMPBELL observed, that having introduced this resolution,
he would very briefly state some of the reasons that induced him to do
so, and the grounds upon which he expected the committee to adopt it.
He stated the object of the measure to be two-fold: 1st. To obtain a
direct route for the transportation of the mail from Knoxville, and
also from Georgia, to the Tombigbee settlements, and thence to New
Orleans, in order to facilitate the communication with those places by
means of the mail. And 2d. To open a communication from East Tennessee
to the same places for commercial purposes. This measure, he said, was
important to the citizens of East Tennessee, in both those points of
view. The mail was conveyed at present, he observed, by a circuitous
route, from Knoxville to Nashville, two hundred miles, thence to Natchez,
at least five hundred miles, and thence to New Orleans, nearly three
hundred miles; making in the whole, from Knoxville to New Orleans, one
thousand miles. Whereas the distance from Knoxville to New Orleans by
the route proposed to be opened, would not much, if any, exceed five
hundred. A gentleman of undoubted veracity, who resided some years in
the country through which this road will pass, in the service of the
Government, estimates this route in the following manner: From Knoxville
to Tellico, thirty-three miles. This part of the route passes through
a settled country, and is at present a good road. From Tellico, to a
place called the Hickory Ground, in the Creek Nation, near the junction
of the Coosa River with the Tallapoosa, where they form the Alabama and
about twenty miles from the Tuckabatchee settlements, two hundred and
twenty miles. From thence to Fort St. Stephen’s on the Tombigbee River,
about one hundred miles; and thence to New Orleans, a direct course,
about one hundred and fifty miles, making in all five hundred and three
miles; and the largest calculations, as I had been informed, made by
the Postmaster-General, of this road from Knoxville to New Orleans, was
five hundred and fifty miles; making very little more than half the
present route. Add to this the distance from Washington to Knoxville,
according to the estimated post route, five hundred and forty-seven
miles, and the whole distance from Washington to New Orleans, passing by
Knoxville--and from thence the proposed route will be about one thousand
and fifty miles. This saving of between four and five hundred miles,
in transporting the mail from Knoxville to New Orleans, is certainly a
very important object to all those who may communicate with the latter
place, by means of this route. This road is still more necessary, for
the purpose of affording a communication from East Tennessee to the
settlement on the Tombigbee, or the eastern parts of the Mississippi
Territory. The only mode of communication at present with that country,
is by the post road already stated, by Nashville to Natchez, seven
hundred--and thence to the Tombigbee, about two hundred; making nine
hundred miles. Whereas the real distance along the proposed route, as has
been stated, will not exceed three hundred and fifty, or at most between
that and four hundred.

The effect of this circuitous route is, at present, to cut off the
communication almost entirely with that country.

But the second object for which we wish this road opened, viz: for
commercial purposes, is still more important to our citizens; and is
essential for the prosperity of our country.

The only mode by which the people of that country can, at this time,
convey their produce to market, is by boating it down the river Tennessee
into the Ohio, then along that to the Mississippi, and down that river
to New Orleans. Our boatmen employed in this trade are obliged to return
by land, as the same boats that carry produce down those rivers, cannot
ascend them, and there is but little navigation yet, in boats of any
kind, up those waters into the State of Tennessee; and no boats of any
considerable burden can pass up the river Tennessee, through the Muscle
Shoals, to the eastern part of the State. The only route by which those
boatmen can now return from New Orleans, is that already stated, on
which the mail is conveyed, being between four and five hundred miles
more than they would have to travel by the proposed route. The present
road also passes over the Cumberland mountain, a part of which is very
bad, and a wilderness at this part of the route, subject to the Indian
claim, of between seventy and one hundred miles, without inhabitants. It
also passes through another wilderness between Nashville and Natchez,
subject to the Indian claim, of about four hundred miles, a considerable
part of which is stated to be very bad road in winter, and that there
are many large water courses to be passed. The difficulties are so great
that few of our citizens are willing to embark in this trade, and our
farmers, having no convenient vent for their surplus produce, have little
or no inducement to industry beyond what may be necessary to produce the
ordinary supplies of subsistence. This in a very great degree retards
the progress of agriculture, and consequently the prosperity of our
country. It is therefore hoped that this House will feel disposed to
encourage the farming interests of our infant country by removing those
obstacles to its progress that the State authority is incompetent to
effect, and that prove so materially injurious to the interests of our
citizens. Here it may be proper to remark that this proposed road, so
far as it is desired to be established by this measure, passes through
a country belonging entirely to the United States, except about sixty
miles, and most of it subject to the claim of Indian tribes, being the
Mississippi Territory until it enters West Florida, or Orleans Territory.
This distance of about sixty miles alluded to, is from Tellico, on the
frontiers of the settlements in East Tennessee, to a point beyond the
south boundary of that State in the State of Georgia, and near the limits
of the Mississippi Territory, being also subject to the Indian claim.
A road has already been authorized to be opened in this direction; has
been viewed and designated by commissioners appointed for that purpose
from our State, at the expense of the State, and it is expected, by this
time, has been opened, being designed to afford us a communication with
the State of Georgia. This road will answer the proposed route--at least
as far as the limits of our State--being, as before stated, about sixty
or seventy miles from Tellico, and about one hundred from Knoxville.
There will therefore remain only about one hundred miles (or very little
more, if any) to be opened, to the point at which the road proposed from
Georgia will intersect this route. From this view of the subject, it
will appear we do not require the United States to be at any expense in
opening a road within the limits of the State of Tennessee, but only to
open it through a country belonging exclusively, except the Indian claim,
to the United States. With regard to the roads proposed to be opened from
Georgia to the Tombigbee settlements, so as to intersect the former road
at the most convenient point between Tellico and the said settlements,
what has been advanced to show the necessity of the former road will
apply with equal force to this. The only route by which the people of
Georgia can at present communicate with New Orleans, by means of the
mail, or travel to that place along any authorized road, is that already
stated, from Knoxville; thence by Natchez to New Orleans; and the people,
even on the frontiers of that State, have to travel nearly three hundred
miles to Knoxville to take this route, and are not then much, if any,
nearer New Orleans than when they set out. This in a great degree cuts
off this communication with that country. The road proposed to be opened
from Georgia, according to the best information, will intersect the road
from Knoxville, near the junction of Coosa and Tallapoosa Rivers, and
about two hundred miles, or somewhat more, from the latter place--of
which, as already stated, one hundred miles at least are opened, and only
about one hundred remain to be opened. The country through which the road
from Knoxville will pass, is represented, by those who are acquainted
with it, and who have resided many years among the Indian nations that
inhabit it, to be a fine, open country, generally dry without being
broken by any mountains, and very few streams of any considerable size
to be crossed, and no large rivers until you arrive at the Tombigbee. It
will pass along the high lands that lie between the waters falling into
the Tennessee River, and those that are discharged into the Coosa and
Alabama Rivers, and will require but little expense to be made a good
road. We hope, therefore, upon viewing all those circumstances, Congress
will agree to afford us the aid we require, and which is essentially
necessary to enable us to resort to the only market that will compensate
our farmers for their industry, encourage agriculture and commerce, and
promote the prosperity of our country.

When Mr. W. had concluded, the committee rose, and had leave to sit again.


TUESDAY, February 12.

_Counting Electoral Votes._

On motion it was

_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed on the part of this House, to
join such committee as may be appointed on the part of the Senate, to
ascertain and report a mode of examining the votes for President and Vice
President, and of notifying the persons who shall be elected, of their
election; and to regulate the time, place, and manner of administering
the oath of office to the President.

_Ordered_, That Mr. JOSEPH CLAY, Mr. VARNUM, Mr. DENNIS, Mr. THOMAS
MOORE, and Mr. DICKSON, be appointed a committee, pursuant to said
resolution; and that the Clerk of this House do carry the resolution to
the Senate, and desire their concurrence.

A message from the Senate notified the House that the Senate will be
ready to receive the House of Representatives in the Senate Chamber, on
Wednesday, the thirteenth of February, at noon, for the purpose of being
present at the opening and counting the votes for President and Vice
President of the United States: That one person be appointed a teller on
the part of the Senate to make a list of votes for President and Vice
President of the United States, as they shall be declared, and that the
result shall be delivered to the President of the Senate, who shall
announce the state of the vote, which shall be entered on the Journals,
and if it shall appear that a choice had been made agreeably to the
constitution, such entry on the Journals shall be deemed a sufficient
declaration thereof.


_Amy Dardin._

Mr. CLAIBORNE, from the committee appointed yesterday, presented a bill
for the relief of Amy Dardin, and the legal representatives of David
Dardin, deceased; which was read twice, and committed to a Committee of
the whole House to-morrow.


WEDNESDAY, February 13.

_Counting Electoral Votes._

A message was received from the Senate informing the House that Mr.
SMITH of Maryland has been appointed a teller of the votes of President
and Vice President of the United States, on the part of the Senate,
conformably with their vote of the twelfth instant, and are now ready,
in the Senate Chamber, to proceed therein: Whereupon, Mr. SPEAKER,
attended by the House, proceeded to the Senate Chamber, and took seats
therein; when, both Houses being assembled, the PRESIDENT of the Senate,
in the presence of both Houses, proceeded to open the certificates of
the Electors of the several States, beginning with the State of New
Hampshire; and as the votes were read, the tellers on the part of each
House counted and took lists of the same; which, being compared, were
delivered to the President of the Senate, and are as follows:

    [Given in the Senate proceedings of the same day.]

The PRESIDENT of the Senate, in pursuance of the duty enjoined upon him,
announced the state of the votes to both Houses, and declared that THOMAS
JEFFERSON, of Virginia, having the greatest number, and a majority of the
votes of the Electors appointed, was duly elected President of the United
States, for the term commencing on the fourth day of March next; and
that GEORGE CLINTON, of New York, having also the greatest number, and
a majority of the votes of all the Electors appointed, was duly elected
Vice President of the United States, for the term commencing on the
fourth day of March next.

The two Houses then separated, and the House of Representatives being
returned to their Chamber, Mr. SPEAKER resumed the Chair.

The list of the votes of the Electors for President and Vice President of
the United States, as declared by the PRESIDENT of the Senate, and herein
before recited, was read at the Clerk’s table.


THURSDAY, February 14.

A new member, to wit, GEORGE CLINTON, jr., returned to serve as a member
of this House, for the State of New York, in the place of Samuel L.
Mitchill, appointed a Senator of the United States, appeared, produced
his credentials, was qualified, and took his seat in the House.


MONDAY, February 18.

_Ordered_, That Mr. ROGER GRISWOLD, Mr. J. CLAY, Mr. BLACKLEDGE, Mr.
HUGER, and Mr. NICHOLAS R. MOORE, be appointed of the said committee, on
the part of this House; and that the Clerk of this House do carry the
said resolution to the Senate, and desire their concurrence.

The House proceeded to the further consideration of the bill authorizing
the Secretary of War to issue military land warrants, and for other
purposes, to which the Committee of the whole House, to whom it had been
committed, reported no amendment, on the thirteenth instant; and the said
bill being twice read and amended at the Clerk’s table, was, together
with the amendments, ordered to be engrossed, and read the third time
to-morrow.

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill for
the relief of Philip Nicklin and Robert Eaglesfield Griffith; and, after
some time spent therein, the committee rose, reported progress, and were
discharged from the further consideration thereof, and the bill was
recommitted to the Committee of Commerce and Manufactures.


TUESDAY, February 19.

_Richard Taylor._

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the report of
the Committee of Claims, of the thirteenth instant, to whom was referred
the memorial of Richard Taylor, of the State of Kentucky; and, after
some time spent therein, the committee rose and reported a resolution
thereupon; which was twice read, and agreed to by the House, as follows:

    _Resolved_, That the prayer of the memorial of Richard Taylor
    is reasonable, and ought to be granted.

_Ordered_, That a bill, or bills, be brought in, pursuant to the said
resolution; and that the Committee of Claims do prepare and bring in the
same.


FRIDAY, March 1.

_Presidential Oath of Office._

The SPEAKER laid before the House a letter addressed to him signed,
“Th. Jefferson,” notifying, that “he shall take the oath which the
constitution prescribes to the President of the United States, before he
enters on the execution of his office, on Monday, the fourth instant, at
twelve o’clock, in the Senate Chamber.”

Ordered to lie on the table.


_Eodem Die, 4 o’clock, P. M._

_Removal of Federal Judges._

On a motion made by Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, that the House do come to the
following resolution:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds
    of both Houses concurring_, That the following article
    be submitted to the Legislatures of the several States,
    which, when ratified and confirmed by the Legislatures of
    three-fourths of the said States, shall be valid and binding,
    as a part of the Constitution of the United States:

    The judges of the Supreme and all other Courts of the United
    States, shall be removed by the President, on the joint address
    of both Houses of Congress, requesting the same, any thing
    in the Constitution of the United States to the contrary
    notwithstanding:

A motion was made and seconded that the said proposed resolution be
referred to the consideration of a Committee of the whole House; and the
question being taken thereupon, it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas
68, nays 33, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, jr., Isaac Anderson, David Bard, William
    Blackledge, Walter Bowie, Adam Boyd, Robert Brown, Joseph
    Bryan, William Butler, Levi Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph
    Clay, George Clinton, jun., John Clopton, Frederick Conrad,
    Jacob Crowninshield, Richard Cutts, John Dawson, John B.
    Earle, Peter Early, John W. Eppes, William Findlay, John
    Fowler, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew Gregg, John A. Hanna, Josiah
    Hasbrouck, Jas. Holland, David Holmes, John G. Jackson, Walter
    Jones, Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, J. B. C. Lucas, Andrew
    McCord, William McCreery, Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore,
    Jeremiah Morrow, Roger Nelson, Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph H.
    Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer, Oliver Phelps, John
    Randolph, John Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee,
    Jacob Richards, Samuel Riker, Cæsar A. Rodney, Thomas Sammons,
    Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan, John Smilie, Henry Southard,
    Richard Stanford, Joseph Stanton, John Stewart, David Thomas,
    Philip R. Thompson, Isaac Van Horne, Joseph B. Varnum, Matthew
    Walton, John Whitehill, Alexander Wilson, Richard Wynn, and
    Thomas Wynns.

    NAYS.--Nathaniel Alexander, Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton,
    William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton Claggett,
    Manasseh Cutler, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport, Thomas Dwight,
    James Elliot, Ebenezer Elmer, Calvin Goddard, Gaylord Griswold,
    Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings, William Helms, John Hoge, Benj.
    Huger, Simon Larned, Thomas Lowndes, Nahum Mitchell, Erastus
    Root, William Stedman, Samuel Taggart, Benjamin Tallmadge,
    Samuel Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, George Tibbits, Killian K. Van
    Rensselaer, Peleg Wadsworth, Lemuel Williams, and Marmaduke
    Williams.

Another motion was made, and the question being put, that the said
resolution be the order of the day for the first Monday in December next,
it was resolved in the affirmative.


_Recall of Senators._

On a motion made by Mr. NICHOLSON,

    _Resolved_, That the following article, when adopted by
    two-thirds of both Houses of Congress, and by the Legislatures
    of three-fourths of the respective States, shall become a part
    of the Constitution of the United States, viz:

    That the Legislature of any State may, whenever the said
    Legislature shall think proper, recall, at any period whatever,
    any Senator of the United States, who may have been elected
    by them; and whenever a vote of the Legislature of any State,
    vacating the seat of any Senator of the United States, who may
    have been elected by the said State, shall be made known to the
    Senate of the United States, the seat of such Senator shall
    thenceforth be vacated:

A motion was made and seconded, that the said proposed resolution be
referred to the consideration of a Committee of the whole House; and the
question being taken thereupon, it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas,
53, nays 46, as follows:

    YEAS.--Willis Alston, junior, Isaac Anderson, David Bard,
    Walter Bowie, Robert Brown, Joseph Bryan, William Butler, Levi
    Casey, Thomas Claiborne, Joseph Clay, George Clinton, jun.,
    John Clopton, Frederick Conrad, John Dawson, John B. Earle,
    Peter Early, J. W. Eppes, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew Gregg, John
    A. Hanna, Josiah Hasbrouck, Joseph Heister, James Holland,
    David Holmes, Nehemiah Knight, Michael Leib, Andrew McCord,
    William McCreery, Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah
    Morrow, Roger Nelson, Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jun., Joseph
    H. Nicholson, Gideon Olin, Beriah Palmer, John Randolph, John
    Rea of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee, Jacob Richards,
    Thomas Sammons, Ebenezer Seaver, James Sloan, Richard Stanford,
    Joseph Stanton, John Stewart, Philip R. Thompson, Abram Trigg,
    John Whitehill, Alexander Wilson, Richard Wynn, and Thomas
    Wynns.

    NAYS.--Nathaniel Alexander, Simeon Baldwin, Silas Betton,
    William Blackledge, Adam Boyd, William Chamberlin, Martin
    Chittenden, Clifton Claggett, Jacob Crowninshield, Manasseh
    Cutler, Richard Cutts, John Davenport, Thomas Dwight, James
    Elliot, Ebenezer Elmer, William Findlay, John Fowler, Gaylord
    Griswold, Roger Griswold, Seth Hastings, William Helms, David
    Hough, Benjamin Huger, John G. Jackson, William Kennedy, Simon
    Larned, Thomas Lowndes, John B. C. Lucas, Nahum Mitchell,
    Oliver Phelps, Erastus Root, John Smilie, Henry Southard,
    William Stedman, Samuel Taggart, Benjamin Tallmadge, Samuel
    Tenney, Samuel Thatcher, David Thomas, George Tibbits, Killian
    K. Van Rensselaer, Joseph B. Varnum, Peleg Wadsworth, Lemuel
    Williams, and Marmaduke Williams.

Another motion was then made, and the question being put, that the said
resolution be the order of the day for the first Monday in December next,
it was resolved in the affirmative--yeas 70, nays 28.


SATURDAY, March 2.

The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the bill, sent
from the Senate, entitled “An act to amend an act, entitled ‘An act for
imposing more specific duties on the importation of certain articles;
and, also, for levying and collecting light money on foreign ships or
vessels,’” to which the Committee of Ways and Means, to whom it had been
referred, reported no amendment, on the eighteenth of January last; and,
after some time spent therein, the Committee reported the same to the
House without amendment.

The House then proceeded to consider the said bill: Whereupon a motion
was made and seconded that the further consideration thereof be postponed
until the first Monday in December next, and the question being put
thereon, it passed in the negative--yeas 43, nays 46, as follows:

    YEAS.--David Bard, Silas Betton, Adam Boyd, William Butler,
    John Campbell, William Chamberlin, Martin Chittenden, Clifton
    Claggett, Frederick Conrad, Samuel W. Dana, John Davenport,
    Thomas Dwight, James Elliot, Ebenezer Elmer, John W. Eppes,
    Calvin Goddard, Peterson Goodwyn, Andrew Gregg, Gaylord
    Griswold, Roger Griswold, John Hoge, David Hough, Benjamin
    Huger, Samuel Hunt, John G. Jackson, Thomas Lowndes, John B. C.
    Lucas, Nahum Mitchell, Beriah Palmer, Thomas Plater, John Rea
    of Pennsylvania, John Rhea of Tennessee, Thomas Sammons, Thomas
    Sanford, Henry Southard, Richard Stanford, William Stedman,
    John Stewart, Samuel Taggart, Benj. Tallmadge, Samuel Tenney,
    Samuel Thatcher, and George Tibbits.

    NAYS.--Willis Alston, jun., Nathaniel Alexander, Isaac
    Anderson, William Blackledge, Walter Bowie, Robert Brown,
    Joseph Clay, Matthew Clay, John Clopton, Jacob Crowninshield,
    John Dawson, John Fowler, Josiah Hasbrouck, James Holland,
    David Holmes, William Kennedy, Nehemiah Knight, Simon Larned,
    Michael Leib, Matthew Lyon, Andrew McCord, William McCreery,
    Nicholas R. Moore, Thomas Moore, Jeremiah Morrow, Roger Nelson,
    Anthony New, Thomas Newton, jr., Joseph H. Nicholson, Gideon
    Olin, John Randolph, Thomas Mann Randolph, Jacob Richards,
    James Sloan, John Smilie, Joseph Stanton, Philip R. Thompson,
    Abram Trigg, Joseph B. Varnum, John Whitehill, Lemuel Williams,
    Alexander Wilson, Richard Wynn, Joseph Winston, and Thomas
    Wynns.

And then the main question being taken, that the said bill do pass, it
was resolved in the affirmative.

An engrossed bill further to provide for the accommodation of the
President of the United States, was read the third time, and passed.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have passed
a bill, entitled “An act supplementary to an act, entitled ‘An act
making an appropriation for carrying into effect the Convention between
the United States of America and His Britannic Majesty;’” to which they
desire the concurrence of this House.


_Eodem Die, 5 o’clock, P. M._

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate have passed
the bill, entitled “An act supplementary to the act, entitled ‘An act
making provision for the disposal of the public lands in the Indiana
Territory, and for other purposes,’” with an amendment; to which they
desire the concurrence of this House; also, the bill, entitled “An
act further to alter and establish certain post roads, and for other
purposes,” with several amendments; to which they desire the concurrence
of this House.

The House proceeded to consider the amendment proposed by the Senate to
the bill, entitled “An act supplementary to the act, entitled ‘An act
making provision for the disposal of the public lands in the Indiana
Territory and for other purposes:’” Whereupon,

_Resolved_, That this House doth agree to the said amendment.


SUNDAY, March 3.

_Importation of Slaves._

Mr. VARNUM, one of the members for the State of Massachusetts, presented
to the House a letter from the Governor of the said State, enclosing an
attested copy of two concurrent resolutions of the Senate and House of
Representatives of the State of Massachusetts, passed the fifteenth of
February in the present year, “instructing the Senators and requesting
the Representatives in Congress, from the said State, to take all legal
and necessary steps, to use their utmost exertions, as soon as the same
is practicable, to obtain an amendment to the Federal Constitution, so as
to authorize and empower the Congress of the United States to pass a law,
whenever they may deem it expedient, to prevent the further importation
of slaves from any of the West India islands, from the coast of Africa,
or elsewhere, into the United States, or any part thereof:” Whereupon,
a motion was made and seconded, that the House do come to the following
resolution:

    _Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
    United States of America in Congress assembled, two-thirds of
    both Houses concurring_, That the following article be proposed
    to the Legislatures of the several States, as an amendment to
    the Constitution of the United States, which, when ratified by
    three-fourths of the said Legislatures, shall be valid to all
    intents and purposes, as a part of the said constitution, to
    wit:

    “That the Congress of the United States shall have power to
    prevent the further importation of slaves into the United
    States and the Territories thereof.”

The said proposed resolution was read, and ordered to lie on the table.


_Commodore Preble._

The resolutions sent from the Senate, “expressive of the sense of
Congress of the gallant conduct of Commodore Edward Preble, the officers,
seamen, and marines, of his squadron,” together with the amendments
agreed to this day, were read the third time; and on the question that
the same do pass, it was unanimously resolved in the affirmative.


_Eodem Die, 5 o’clock, P. M._

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate insist on
their amendments disagreed to by this House to the bill, entitled “An act
making an appropriation for the payment of witnesses summoned on the part
of the United States, in support of the impeachment of Samuel Chase,” and
desire a conference with this House on the subject-matter of the said
amendments; to which conference the Senate have appointed managers, on
their part.

The Senate have agreed to the amendments proposed by this House to the
resolutions “expressive of the sense of Congress of the gallant conduct
of Commodore Edward Preble, the officers, seamen, and marines, of his
squadron,” with amendments; to which they desire the concurrence of this
House.


_Divorces._

The order of the day for the House to resolve itself into a Committee of
the Whole on the bill to authorize the Circuit Court of the District of
Columbia to decree divorces in certain cases, being called for, a motion
was made, and the question being put, that the said order of the day be
postponed until the first Monday in December next, it was resolved in the
affirmative.

A motion was then made and seconded, that the House do come to the
following resolutions:

    _Resolved_, That the Clerk of this House be, and he is
    hereby, directed to pay out of the contingent fund of this
    House, to every witness summoned on behalf of the House of
    Representatives, to attend the Senate in support of the
    impeachment of Samuel Chase, for every day’s attendance, the
    sum of three dollars, and the further sum of twenty cents for
    each mile in coming from and returning to his place of abode.

    _Resolved_, That the Clerk be likewise directed to pay, out
    of the said fund, any other expense incurred by order of the
    managers of the said impeachment, and certified by their
    chairman.

On which motion, various efforts were made to obtain a decision of
the House on the previous question, “that the House do now proceed to
consider the said motion;” but no result could, in any instance, be
obtained for the want of a quorum.


_Adjournment._

After which, a quorum being present,

A message from the Senate informed the House, that the Senate have
appointed a committee, on their part, jointly with such committee as may
be appointed on the part of this House, to wait on the President of the
United States, and notify him of the proposed recess of Congress.

The House proceeded to consider the foregoing message of the Senate, and

_Resolved_, That this House do agree to the same, and that Mr. JOHN
RANDOLPH, Mr. HUGER, and Mr. NELSON, be appointed of the said committee,
on the part of this House.

Mr. JOHN RANDOLPH, from the committee appointed on the part of this
House, jointly with the committee appointed on the part of the Senate,
to wait on the President of the United States, and notify him of the
proposed recess of Congress, reported that the committee had performed
that service; and that the President signified to them that he had no
further communication to make during the present session.

A message from the Senate informed the House that the Senate, having
finished the legislative business before them, are now ready to adjourn.

_Ordered_, That a message be sent to the Senate to inform them that
this House, having completed the business before them, are now about to
adjourn, without day; and that the Clerk of this House do go with the
said message.

The Clerk, accordingly, went with the said message; and, being returned,

The SPEAKER adjourned the House, _sine die_.[27]




NINTH CONGRESS.--FIRST SESSION.

BEGUN AT THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, DECEMBER 2, 1805.

PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE.


LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE SENATE.

_New Hampshire._--William Plumer, Nathaniel Gilman.

_Vermont._--Stephen R. Bradley, Israel Smith.

_Massachusetts._--John Quincy Adams, Timothy Pickering.

_Rhode Island_.--James Fenner, Benjamin Howland.

_Connecticut._--James Hillhouse, Uriah Tracy.

_New York._--Samuel L. Mitchill, John Smith.

_New Jersey._--John Condit, Aaron Kitchel.

_Pennsylvania._--George Logan, Samuel Maclay.

_Delaware._--Samuel White, James A. Bayard.

_Maryland._--Samuel Smith, Robert Wright.

_Virginia._--Andrew Moore.

_North Carolina._--David Stone, James Turner.

_South Carolina._--Thomas Sumter, John Gaillard.

_Georgia._--Abraham Baldwin, James Jackson.

_Tennessee._--Daniel Smith, Joseph Anderson.

_Kentucky._--Buckner Thruston, John Adair.

_Ohio._--Thomas Worthington, John Smith.


MONDAY, December 2, 1805.

The first session of the Ninth Congress conformably to the Constitution
of the United States, commenced this day, at the city of Washington, and
the Senate assembled.


PRESENT:

WILLIAM PLUMER and NICHOLAS GILMAN, from New Hampshire.

JOHN QUINCY ADAMS and TIMOTHY PICKERING, from Massachusetts.

JAMES HILLHOUSE and URIAH TRACY, from Connecticut.

JAMES FENNER, from Rhode Island.

STEPHEN R. BRADLEY and ISRAEL SMITH, from Vermont.

SAMUEL L. MITCHILL, from New York.

JOHN CONDIT and AARON KITCHEL, from New Jersey.

GEORGE LOGAN and SAMUEL MACLAY, from Pennsylvania.

SAMUEL WHITE, from Delaware.

SAMUEL SMITH, from Maryland.

DAVID STONE, from North Carolina.

THOMAS SUMTER and JOHN GAILLARD, from South Carolina.

ABRAHAM BALDWIN, from Georgia.

DAVID SMITH, from Tennessee.

THOMAS WORTHINGTON, from Ohio.

The VICE PRESIDENT being absent, the Senate proceeded to the election of
a President _pro tem._, as the constitution provides, and the Honorable
SAMUEL SMITH was appointed.

The credentials of the following Senators were read, viz:

Of ABRAHAM BALDWIN, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State
of Georgia, for the term of six years, from the 3d day of March last;
of JAMES A. BAYARD, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the
State of Delaware, for the term of six years, from the 3d day of March
last; of JAMES FENNER, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the
State of Rhode Island, for the term of six years, from the 3d day of
March last; of NICHOLAS GILMAN, appointed a Senator by the Legislature
of the State of New Hampshire, for the term of six years, from the
3d day of March last; of AARON KITCHEL, appointed a Senator by the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey, to serve during the term limited
by the constitution; of TIMOTHY PICKERING, appointed a Senator by the
Legislature of the State of Massachusetts, for the term of six years,
to commence on the 4th day of March last; of DANIEL SMITH, appointed a
Senator by the Legislature of the State of Tennessee, for the term of six
years, from the 3d of March last; and of BUCKNER THRUSTON, appointed a
Senator by the Legislature of the State of Kentucky.

The oath was administered by the President to the following Senators, as
the law prescribes: Mr. BALDWIN, Mr. FENNER, Mr. GILMAN, Mr. KITCHEL, Mr.
PICKERING, and Mr. SMITH of Tennessee; also, to Mr. SUMTER, appointed a
Senator by the Legislature of the State of South Carolina, for the term
of six years, commencing on the 4th day of March last.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary wait on the President of the United States,
and acquaint him that a quorum of the Senate is assembled, and that, in
the absence of the Vice President, they have elected the Honorable SAMUEL
SMITH President of the Senate _pro tempore_.

_Ordered_, That the Secretary make a like communication to the House of
Representatives.

_Ordered_, That Messrs. SUMTER and MITCHILL be a committee, on the part
of the Senate, with such committee as the House of Representatives may
appoint on their part, to wait on the President of the United States and
notify him that a quorum of the two Houses is assembled, and ready to
receive any communication that he may be pleased to make to them.


TUESDAY, December 3.

JOSEPH ANDERSON, from the State of Tennessee; BUCKNER THRUSTON, from
the State of Kentucky; and ROBERT WRIGHT, from the State of Maryland,
attended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that a
quorum of the House of Representatives is assembled, and have appointed
NATHANIEL MACON, Esq., one of the Representatives for North Carolina,
their Speaker, and are ready to proceed to business. The House of
Representatives have appointed a committee on their part, jointly with
the committee appointed on the part of the Senate, to wait on the
President of the United States, and notify him that a quorum of the two
Houses is assembled, and ready to receive any communications that he may
be pleased to make to them. The House of Representatives agree to the
resolution of the Senate for the appointment of two Chaplains.

Mr. SUMTER reported, from the committee appointed yesterday to wait on
the President of the United States, that they had performed the service,
and that the President of the United States informed the committee that
he would make his communications to the two Houses at twelve o’clock this
day.

The oath prescribed by law was administered to Mr. THRUSTON.

The following message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States of America_:

    At a moment when the nations of Europe are in commotion, and
    arming against each other, and when those with whom we have
    principal intercourse are engaged in the general contest, and
    when the countenance of some of them towards our peaceable
    country threatens that even that may not be unaffected by
    what is passing on the general theatre, a meeting of the
    Representatives of the nation in both Houses of Congress has
    become more than usually desirable. Coming from every section
    of our country they bring with them the sentiments and the
    information of the whole, and will be enabled to give a
    direction to the public affairs, which the will and the wisdom
    of the whole will approve and support.

    Since our last meeting the aspect of our foreign relations
    has considerably changed. Our coasts have been infested, and
    our harbors watched, by private armed vessels, some of them
    without commissions, some with illegal commissions, others with
    those of legal form, but committing piratical acts beyond the
    authority of their commissions. They have captured in the very
    entrance of our harbors, as well as on the high seas, not only
    the vessels of our friends coming to trade with us, but our
    own also. They have carried them off under pretence of legal
    adjudication; but, not daring to approach a court of justice,
    they have plundered and sunk them by the way, or in obscure
    places, where no evidence could arise against them; maltreated
    the crews, and abandoned them in boats in the open sea, or
    on desert shores, without food or covering. These enormities
    appearing to be unreached by any control of their sovereigns,
    I found it necessary to equip a force to cruise within our
    own seas, to arrest all vessels of these descriptions found
    hovering on our coasts, within the limits of the Gulf Stream,
    and to bring the offenders in for trial as pirates.

    The same system of hovering on our coasts and harbors, under
    color of seeking enemies, has been also carried on by public
    armed ships, to the great annoyance and oppression of our
    commerce. New principles, too, have been interpolated into the
    law of nations, founded neither in justice nor the usage or
    acknowledgment of nations. According to these, a belligerent
    takes to itself a commerce with its own enemy which it denies
    to a neutral, on the ground of its aiding that enemy in the
    war. But reason revolts at such an inconsistency, and the
    neutral, having equal right with the belligerent to decide the
    question, the interests of our constituents, and the duty of
    maintaining the authority of reason, the only umpire between
    just nations, impose on us the obligation of providing an
    effectual and determined opposition to a doctrine so injurious
    to the rights of peaceable nations. Indeed, the confidence
    we ought to have in the justice of others still countenances
    the hope that a sounder view of those rights will, of itself,
    induce from every belligerent a more correct observance of them.

    With Spain, our negotiations for a settlement of differences
    have not had a satisfactory issue. Spoliations during a
    former war, for which she had formally acknowledged herself
    responsible, have been refused to be compensated but on
    conditions affecting other claims in nowise connected with
    them. Yet the same practices are renewed in the present war,
    and are already of great amount. On the Mobile, our commerce
    passing through that river continues to be obstructed by
    arbitrary duties and vexatious searches. Propositions for
    adjusting amicably the boundaries of Louisiana have not been
    acceded to. While, however, the right is unsettled, we have
    avoided changing the state of things by taking new posts or
    strengthening ourselves in the disputed territories, in the
    hope that the other power would not, by a contrary conduct,
    oblige us to meet their example, and endanger conflicts of
    authority the issue of which may not be easily controlled.
    But in this hope we have now reason to lessen our confidence.
    Inroads have been recently made into the territories of Orleans
    and Mississippi, our citizens have been seized and their
    property plundered in the very parts of the former which had
    been actually delivered up by Spain, and this by the regular
    officers and soldiers of that Government. I have, therefore,
    found it necessary, at length, to give orders to our troops
    on that frontier to be in readiness to protect our citizens,
    and to repel by arms any similar aggressions in future. Other
    details, necessary for your full information of the state of
    things between this country and that, shall be the subject of
    another communication. In reviewing these injuries from some of
    the belligerent powers, the moderation, the firmness, and the
    wisdom, of the Legislature will all be called into action. We
    ought still to hope that time and a more correct estimate of
    interest, as well as of character, will produce the justice we
    are bound to expect. But should any nation deceive itself by
    false calculations, and disappoint that expectation, we must
    join in the unprofitable contest of trying which party can do
    the other the most harm.

    Considerable provision has been made, under former authorities
    from Congress, of materials for the construction of ships of
    war of seventy-four guns. These materials are on hand, subject
    to the further will of the Legislature.

    An immediate prohibition of the exportation of ammunition is
    also submitted to your determination.

    Turning from these unpleasant views of violence and wrong, I
    congratulate you on the liberation of our fellow-citizens who
    were stranded on the coast of Tripoli and made prisoners of
    war. In a Government bottomed on the will of all, the life
    and liberty of every individual citizen become interesting to
    all. In the treaty, therefore, which has concluded our warfare
    with that State, an article for the ransom of our citizens has
    been agreed to. An operation by land, by a small band of our
    countrymen, and others engaged for the occasion, in conjunction
    with the troops of the ex-bashaw of that country, gallantly
    conducted by our late Consul Eaton, and their successful
    enterprise on the city of Derne, contributed, doubtless, to the
    impression which produced peace; and the conclusion of this,
    prevented opportunities of which the officers and men of our
    squadron, destined for Tripoli, would have availed themselves
    to emulate the acts of valor exhibited by their brethren in
    the attack of the last year. Reflecting with high satisfaction
    on the distinguished bravery displayed, whenever occasions
    permitted, in the late Mediterranean service, I think it would
    be a useful encouragement, as well as a just reward, to make
    an opening for some present promotion, by enlarging our peace
    establishment of captains and lieutenants.

    With Tunis some misunderstandings have arisen, not yet
    sufficiently explained, but friendly discussions with their
    Ambassador, recently arrived, and a mutual disposition to do
    whatever is just and reasonable, cannot fail of dissipating
    these. So that we may consider our peace on that coast,
    generally, to be on as sound a footing as it has been at any
    preceding time. Still, it will not be expedient to withdraw,
    immediately, the whole of our force from that sea.

    The law providing for a Naval Peace Establishment fixes the
    number of frigates which shall be kept in constant service in
    time of peace, and prescribes that they shall be manned by not
    more than two-thirds of their complement of seamen and ordinary
    seamen. Whether a frigate may be trusted to two-thirds only of
    her proper complement of men, must depend on the nature of the
    service on which she is ordered. That may sometimes for her
    safety, as well as to ensure her object, require her fullest
    complement. In adverting to this subject, Congress will,
    perhaps, consider whether the best limitation on the Executive
    discretion in this case, would not be by the number of seamen
    which may be employed in the whole service, rather than by the
    number of vessels. Occasions oftener arise for the employment
    of small than of large vessels, and it would lessen risk as
    well as expense, to be authorized to employ them of preference.
    The limitation suggested by the number of seamen would admit a
    selection of vessels best adapted to the service.

    Our Indian neighbors are advancing, many of them, with spirit,
    and others beginning to engage in the pursuits of agriculture
    and household manufacture. They are becoming sensible that the
    earth yields subsistence with less labor and more certainty
    than the forest, and find it their interest, from time to
    time, to dispose of parts of their surplus and waste lands for
    the means of improving those they occupy, and of subsisting
    their families while they are preparing their farms. Since
    your last session, the northern tribes have sold to us the
    lands between the Connecticut Reserve and the former Indian
    boundary, and those on the Ohio, from the same boundary to the
    Rapids, and for a considerable depth inland. The Chickasaws
    and Cherokees have sold us the country between and adjacent to
    the two districts of Tennessee, and the Creeks the residue of
    their lands in the fork of Ocmulgee, up to the Ulcofauhatche.
    The three former purchases are important, inasmuch as they
    consolidate disjoined parts of our settled country, and render
    their intercourse secure; and the second particularly so, as,
    with the small point on the river, which we expect is by this
    time ceded by the Piankeshaws, it completes our possession of
    the whole of both banks of the Ohio, from its source to near
    its mouth, and the navigation of that river is thereby rendered
    for ever safe to our citizens settled and settling on its
    extensive waters. The purchase from the Creeks too has been for
    some time particularly interesting to the State of Georgia.

    The several treaties which have been mentioned will be
    submitted to both Houses of Congress for the exercise of their
    respective functions.

    Deputations, now on their way to the seat of Government, from
    various nations of Indians inhabiting the Missouri and other
    parts beyond the Mississippi, come charged with assurances of
    their satisfaction with the new relations in which they are
    placed with us, of their dispositions to cultivate our peace
    and friendship, and their desire to enter into commercial
    intercourse with us. A state of our progress in exploring
    the principal rivers of that country, and of the information
    respecting them hitherto obtained, will be communicated so soon
    as we shall receive some further relations which we have reason
    shortly to expect.

    The receipts at the Treasury during the year ending on the
    30th day of September last, have exceeded the sum of thirteen
    millions of dollars, which, with not quite five millions in the
    Treasury at the beginning of the year, have enabled us, after
    meeting other demands, to pay nearly two millions of the debt
    contracted under the British treaty and convention, upwards
    of four millions of principal of the public debt, and four
    millions of interest. These payments, with those which had been
    made in three years and a half preceding, have extinguished of
    the funded debt nearly eighteen millions of principal.

    Congress, by their act of November 10, 1803, authorized us to
    borrow $1,750,000, towards meeting the claims of our citizens,
    assumed by the convention with France. We have not, however,
    made use of this authority; because, the sum of four millions
    and a half, which remained in the Treasury on the same 30th day
    of September last, with the receipts which we may calculate on
    for the ensuing year, besides paying the annual sum of eight
    millions of dollars, appropriated to the funded debt, and
    meeting all the current demands which may be expected, will
    enable us to pay the whole sum of three millions seven hundred
    and fifty thousand dollars, assumed by the French convention,
    and still leave us a surplus of nearly a million of dollars at
    our free disposal. Should you concur in the provisions of arms
    and armed vessels, recommended by the circumstances of the
    times, this surplus will furnish the means of doing so.

    On the first occasion of addressing Congress, since, by the
    choice of my constituents, I have entered on a second term
    of administration, I embrace the opportunity to give this
    public assurance, that I will exert my best endeavors to
    administer faithfully the Executive Department, and will
    zealously co-operate with you in every measure which may tend
    to secure the liberty, property, and personal safety, of our
    fellow-citizens, and to consolidate the republican forms and
    principles of our Government.

    In the course of your session, you shall receive all the aid
    which I can give, for the despatch of public business, and all
    the information necessary for your deliberations, of which the
    interests of our own country, and the confidence reposed in us
    by others, will admit a communication.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    DECEMBER 3, 1805.

The Message was read and three hundred copies thereof ordered to be
printed for the use of the Senate.


WEDNESDAY, December 4.

_Chaplain._

The Senate proceeded to the election of a Chaplain, on their part, in
pursuance of the resolution of the two Houses, and the ballots being
collected, were, for Doctor GANTT, 15; Bishop CLAGGETT, 5; Mr. MCCORMICK,
2. So the Reverend Doctor GANTT was elected a Chaplain to Congress, on
the part of the Senate, during the present session.


MONDAY, December 9.

JAMES JACKSON, from the State of Georgia, attended.

JOHN ADAIR, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
Kentucky, in place of John Breckenridge, Esq., resigned, produced his
credentials, which were read; and the oath prescribed by law having been
administered, he took his seat in the Senate.

A confidential Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES, as follows:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    The depredations which have been committed on the commerce of
    the United States during a preceding war, by persons under the
    authority of Spain, are sufficiently known to all. These made
    it a duty to require from that Government indemnifications for
    our injured citizens; a convention was accordingly entered into
    between the Minister of the United States at Madrid, and the
    Minister of that Government for Foreign Affairs, by which it
    was agreed that spoliations committed by Spanish subjects, and
    carried into ports of Spain, should be paid for by that nation;
    and that those committed by French subjects, and carried into
    Spanish ports, should remain for further discussion. Before
    this convention was returned to Spain with our ratification,
    the transfer of Louisiana by France to the United States took
    place; an event as unexpected as disagreeable to Spain. From
    that moment she seemed to change her conduct and dispositions
    toward us. It was first manifested by her protest against the
    right of France to alienate Louisiana to us; which, however,
    was soon retracted, and the right confirmed: then high offence
    was manifested at the act of Congress establishing a collection
    district on the Mobile, although, by an authentic declaration,
    immediately made, it was expressly confined to our acknowledged
    limits; and she now refused to ratify the convention signed by
    her own Minister, under the eye of his sovereign, unless we
    would consent to alterations of its terms, which would have
    affected our claims against her for the spoliations by French
    subjects carried into Spanish ports.

    To obtain justice, as well as to restore friendship, I thought
    a special mission advisable; and accordingly appointed James
    Monroe, Minister Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, to repair
    to Madrid, and, in conjunction with our Minister resident
    there, to endeavor to procure a ratification of the former
    convention, and to come to an understanding with Spain as to
    the boundaries of Louisiana. It appeared at once that her
    policy was to reserve herself for events, and, in the mean
    time, to keep our differences in an undetermined state. This
    will be evident from the papers now communicated to you. After
    nearly five months of fruitless endeavor to bring them to some
    definite and satisfactory result, our ministers ended the
    conferences, without having been able to obtain indemnity for
    spoliations of any description, or any satisfaction as to the
    boundaries of Louisiana, other than a declaration that we had
    no rights eastward of the Iberville, and that our line to the
    west was one which would have left us but a string of land
    on that bank of the river Mississippi. Our injured citizens
    were thus left without any prospect of retribution from the
    wrong-doer; and, as to boundary, each party was to take its own
    course. That which they have chosen to pursue, will appear from
    the documents now communicated. They authorize the inference
    that it is their intention to advance on our possessions, until
    they shall be repressed by an opposing force. Considering that
    Congress alone is constitutionally invested with the power of
    changing our condition from peace to war, I have thought it my
    duty to await their authority for using force in any degree
    which could be avoided. I have barely instructed the officers
    stationed in the neighborhood of the aggressions, to protect
    our citizens from violence, to patrol within the borders
    actually delivered to us, and not to go out of them, but, when
    necessary to repel an inroad, or to rescue a citizen or his
    property; and the Spanish officers remaining at New Orleans are
    required to depart without further delay. It ought to be noted
    here, that since the late change in the state of affairs in
    Europe, Spain has ordered her cruisers and courts to respect
    our treaty with her.

    The conduct of France, and the part she may take in the
    misunderstandings between the United States and Spain, are
    too important to be unconsidered. She was prompt and decided
    in her declarations, that our demands on Spain for French
    spoliations carried into Spanish ports were included in the
    settlement between the United States and France: she took at
    once the ground that she had acquired no right from Spain,
    and had meant to deliver us none, eastward of the Iberville;
    her silence as to the western boundary, leaving us to infer
    her opinion might be against Spain in that quarter. Whatever
    direction she might mean to give to these differences, it does
    not appear that she has contemplated their proceeding to actual
    rupture, or that, at the date of our last advices from Paris,
    her Government had any suspicion of the hostile attitude Spain
    had taken here; on the contrary, we have reason to believe that
    she was disposed to effect a settlement on a plan analogous to
    what our ministers had proposed, and so comprehensive as to
    remove, as far as possible, the grounds of future collision
    and controversy on the eastern as well as western side of the
    Mississippi.

    The present crisis in Europe is favorable for pressing such
    a settlement, and not a moment should be lost in availing
    ourselves of it. Should it pass unimproved, our situation would
    become much more difficult. Formal war is not necessary--it
    is not probable it will follow; but the protection of our
    citizens, the spirit and honor of our country, require that
    force should be interposed to a certain degree. It will
    probably contribute to advance the object of peace.

    But the course to be pursued will require the command of
    means which it belongs to Congress exclusively to yield or
    to deny. To them I communicate every fact material for their
    information, and the documents necessary to enable them to
    judge for themselves. To their wisdom, then, I look for the
    course I am to pursue; and will pursue, with sincere zeal, that
    which they shall approve.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    DECEMBER 6, 1805.

The Message was read, and ordered to lie for consideration.


TUESDAY, December 10.

ANDREW MOORE, from the State of Virginia, attended.


MONDAY, December 16.

GEORGE CLINTON, Vice President of the United States and President of the
Senate, attended.

JOHN SMITH, from the State of Ohio, also attended.


FRIDAY, December 20.

JOHN SMITH, from the State of New York, attended.


_Trade with St. Domingo._

Agreeably to notice given on the 18th instant, Mr. LOGAN asked leave to
bring in a bill to suspend the commercial intercourse between the United
States of America and the French island of St. Domingo.

Mr. L. observed that the attention of Congress had been called to this
subject by the President of the United States, at the commencement of the
last session of Congress, in the following words:

    “While noticing the irregularities committed on the ocean by
    others, those on our own part should not be omitted, nor left
    unprovided for. Complaints have been received, that persons
    residing within the United States have taken on themselves to
    arm merchant vessels, and to force a commerce into certain
    ports and countries in defiance of the laws of those countries.
    That individuals should undertake to wage private war,
    independently of the authority of their country, cannot be
    permitted in a well-ordered society. Its tendency to produce
    aggressions on the laws and rights of other nations, and to
    endanger the peace of our own, is so obvious, that I doubt
    not you will adopt measures for restraining it effectually in
    future.”

Mr. L. observed that the commerce as carried on by the citizens of the
United States is not only a violation of the law of nations, which the
United States as an independent nation is bound to obey, but is in
direct violation of a treaty made in 1800, between the United States
and France--a treaty on the most liberal principles as to the rights of
neutrals, and highly advantageous and honorable to both nations.

To remedy the evils complained of, a law was enacted during the last
session of Congress to regulate the clearance of armed merchant vessels;
this act has operated as a deception, as, since the publication of the
law, the trade with St. Domingo has been carried on to as great if not
greater extent than formerly. The only merit of the arming law is, that
in a national view it removes the responsibility from the individual who
may be engaged in the trade, to the Government by which it is authorized.

Mr. ADAMS.--Mr. President: Had the gentleman who asks leave to introduce
this bill, assigned any new reasons as the foundation of his motion,
whatever my opinion might have been upon their merits, I should not
think it proper to combat them at this time; but the object of the bill
is so simple, that its details are immaterial. Its purpose is totally
to prohibit a branch of our commerce, which at the last session of the
Legislature was proved to be of great importance to the country. Unless,
therefore, a majority of the Senate should be of opinion that the bill
ought to pass, it appears to me that the present is the stage at which
it ought to be arrested: since the mere discussion of the question, and
pendency of the measure before Congress, may have an unfavorable effect
upon the commercial interest, or at least injuriously affect individual
merchants, in the course of their affairs.

Mr. JACKSON seconded Mr. LOGAN’s motion, and in reply to Mr. ADAMS said,
that he wished Mr. LOGAN to make it an annual motion, as Mr. Sawbridge
had, in the Parliament of England, to reduce septennial Parliaments, but
with more effect, until the trade so highly dishonorable to national
character was annihilated. As to Mr. ADAMS’s observations that the bill
was not allowed to be brought in last session, and that he had heard no
new arguments, he would answer the gentleman by asking what new arguments
had been advanced on the bill to prohibit the importation of slaves,
when leave was given two days since to bring in the bill, and the same
arguments had been rung in our ears by Quakers and others, ever since the
constitution had been in operation, and not a new one had been produced.
He said that the day would come when this dishonorable traffic would
be rued by the United States; that day must arrive when a general peace
would take place, when the present hostilities must cease; that it must
and would then become the interest of every nation of Europe, having
colonies in the West Indies, to extirpate this horde or ship them off
to some other place. That the United States, by affording them succor,
arms, ammunition, and provisions, must be considered by them as their
allies--their supporters and their protectors. That he believed the
United States would be viewed in this light by the French Government and
by themselves, and that they would demand and expect us to grant them
an asylum as allies and protectors, and send them to our coast. This
was no novelty; and he had received information from a late celebrated
French General, given in a public company at the city of Washington where
he boarded, and the General was one who dined there, that arrangements
had been made, if General Le Clerc had been victorious, to send those
brigands to the Southern States. This was a melancholy subject for South
Carolina and Georgia, and one of those brigands introduced into the
Southern States was worse than a hundred importations of blacks from
Africa, and more dangerous to the United States.

Mr. S. SMITH.--We are told that a celebrated French General, since here,
has said, that had General Le Clerc succeeded, he meant to have landed
all the blacks of St. Domingo on our southern shores. This may be--but,
sir, it is not probable. If such, however, had been his intention, it
could not have arisen from resentment on account of our commerce, for
we had been of the greatest utility to him and his army, and had then
carried on no commerce that was not fully sanctioned by France. Nay, I
might say, that owing to the supplies from the United States, the colony
of St. Domingo had been preserved to the mother country until the arrival
of General Le Clerc. Unless, Mr. President, the honorable mover shall
produce some new information, I shall be under the necessity of voting
against leave to bring in this bill.

Mr. MITCHILL, in a speech of considerable length and detail, stated his
objections to giving leave.

During the last session of Congress, the whole of the intercourse with
St. Domingo had undergone a full investigation. While the bill regulating
the clearance of armed merchant vessels was under discussion, that
part of our foreign commerce had been minutely examined. It would be
remembered that the bill had been committed, recommitted, amended, and
modified, with the utmost labor and skill. Besides the talents which
the Senate afforded, all the sources of Executive information had been
drained, to aid their researches. And the letters of the British and
French Ministers, complaining of the conduct of our merchants in forcing
this trade, were opened to our view. The crude material of the bill had
been hammered at and worked upon so elaborately, as to have at last
received the complete burnish of a law. With all the knowledge that could
be derived from so many quarters, the bill was at length passed to check
the violence of our navigators, and to restrain the adventurous zeal of
our merchants. The provisions of this law were such as it was deemed just
and proper that a neutral nation should take. And this was a liberal
condescension to the wishes of the two great maritime and belligerent
powers, without forgetting the respect that we owed to our own. With both
these he wished to cultivate peace and good understanding; but to neither
of them would he consent to yield any portion of our neutral and national
rights.

The difficulties exhibited in the ministerial correspondence, Mr. M.
said, were thus removed. With a promptitude that deserved to be admired,
Congress interposed its authority, for the purpose at once of doing
justice to our neighbors, regulating our commerce, and tranquillizing
the Mexican seas. With these salutary provisions, he believed the two
complaining nations had been satisfied. At least we had done so much
that they ought in all reason to be content. Congress had already
manifested a due regard to all that France and Great Britain had offered
upon the branch of West Indian commerce, and in the true spirit of good
neighborhood, and correct principle, had modified and restricted the
intercourse with Hayti. And so fully did the Europeans seem to acquiesce
in our conduct, that he had not heard any further remonstrances made by
either of them about it. He thought the observations of the gentleman
from Massachusetts (Mr. ADAMS) very much in point. Under a conviction
that we had done as much as public faith and national honor required, he
had given his vote against the introduction of a similar bill during the
last session. Nothing had occurred from that time to this day, to alter
the circumstances of the case, or to make it necessary for him to change
his conduct.

For my own part, said Mr. M., I think the St. Domingo commerce is no
great thing in itself. We might do exceedingly well without it; and I am
very far from approving the means by which it has been carried on; but
I dislike the idea of forbidding it, at the mandate of a foreign power.
Like our Revolutionary patriots, let us put our foot here, and hence
refuse to budge. It is not for us to legislate at the nod or bidding of
any nation. I hope we understand our business better than to register
edicts for them; while we pay due respect to others, it becomes us also
to respect ourselves. The precedent is a dangerous one. If we agree to
interdict this intercourse, we may, at the next session, be informed
that we ought to withdraw from some other important port or region. When
we are found to be so complying to one nation, we shall be subjected to
a like request or menace from another, until, sir, our flag shall be
furled in one foreign port after another, and nothing be left us but the
coasting trade at home. The sad consequences have been ably portrayed by
the gentleman from Maryland, (Mr. SAMUEL SMITH.)

Mr. HILLHOUSE said, he hoped the question would be taken by yeas and
nays, because he confidently expected there would be a great majority
of the Senate opposed to giving leave to bring in the bill, for he
considered the measure not only as improper, but as ill-timed.

The gentleman from Georgia has told us that the conflict in St. Domingo
is that of masters attempting to reclaim their slaves, and that if the
United States suffer the trade to be carried on, we shall be considered
as aiding and upholding those slaves, and give offence to France. And
that when peace shall take place in Europe, the French will transport
those negroes by thousands to the shores of South Carolina and Georgia,
to the endangering the lives of the citizens of those States. This Mr. H.
considered as a bugbear, with which we ought not to be frightened, for,
as to the warfare in St. Domingo being a mere conflict between master
and slave, it will be well remembered that the French Republic long ago
liberated all the slaves in that island, and declared them free. As to
the citizens of the United States carrying arms and military stores to
the enemies of France, the law of nations has declared the penalty,
which is a forfeiture of the property, and the United States can in no
way be implicated thereby. And as to France landing those negroes on our
shores, he said there was power, and he believed there would be found a
disposition in the people of the United States to repel such an insult;
for if we cannot prevent France or any other power from invading our
territory and insulting our national honor, by landing their outcasts
upon our shores, we shall no longer deserve the name of an independent
nation.

Mr. JACKSON, in reply to Mr. SMITH and Mr. MITCHILL, confessed he had
seen no official document, other than what the honorable mover had
read, but he had seen at Newcastle, in Delaware, a whole fleet bound
to St. Domingo, to force a trade which even captains of vessels, true
Americans, cried shame on. That the honorable gentleman had called out,
why had not the mover brought forward a resolution against Britain or
some other power who had committed depredations on our commerce! Mr. J.
said he wished to begin here, by preventing our own merchants from doing
injury to other nations, and then to strike at those who insulted us. He
for himself was prepared and willing to attack the first power who had
insulted us with far more superior weapons than arming our ships. He was
an agricultural man, and would suffer with the flour-makers; but he would
call on the honorable gentleman either from Maryland, from New York, from
Massachusetts, or Connecticut, to strike at Great Britain or any other
nation who had injured us, by a resolution of prohibition of trade or
intercourse, and he was the man who would second it and keep it on till
the injuring nation should cry _peccavi_--keep it on one twelvemonth,
and you would see them all at your feet. Look at the Legislature of
Jamaica petitioning their Governor from time to time for American
intercourse. Look at Trinidad, the same, in a state of famine. Sir, we
have no favors to ask the nations of the earth; they must ask them of us,
or their West India colonies must starve.

That, however, with respect to documents, he would inform the gentleman
from Maryland, that he had seen, though not official, a letter from
General Ferrand, Governor of St. Domingo, and which was published in all
the principal newspapers of the United States, complaining to the French
Government on this subject, and laying all the blame to the American
Government, if not in direct, in the most severe indirect terms. That as
to the total separation of the self-created Emperor and nation of Hayti,
and its independence of the parent country, and under which gentlemen
declared our rights of trade founded on the laws of nations--the late
attack on that General by the Emperor proved it did not exist; he was
defeated, his army scattered and driven to the mountains; that Ferrand
held the island as French Governor for the French nation, and the
separation was not such as to warrant the arguments used for a right
to trade. It would be a fatal argument used against us as respected
our Southern States by other powers. On the same grounds, a parcel of
runaways and outcasts from South Carolina and Georgia, to the amount
of some hundreds, now collected on or near the Okefonokee[28] swamp in
Georgia, might be termed an independent society; or if an insurrection
took place in those States, the rebellious horde, on creating an emperor,
be supplied with arms and ammunition, as a separate and independent
nation. This, as the honorable gentleman from Connecticut had been
pleased to term his fears bugbears, might be no bugbear to him, safe and
remote from the scene of action, near New Haven; but it was a serious
bugbear to him, and would be to the whole southern country, where the
horrid scenes of that island would be reacted, their property destroyed,
and their families massacred.

After a few replicatory remarks from Mr. LOGAN, the consideration of the
subject was postponed to Monday.


TUESDAY, January 7, 1806.

JAMES TURNER, appointed a Senator by the Legislature of the State of
North Carolina, for the term of six years, from the third of March, 1805,
produced his credentials, which were read, and the oath prescribed by law
having been administered, he took his seat in the Senate.


MONDAY, January 13.

_Hamet Caramalli, ex-Bashaw of Tripoli._

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States:_

    I lay before Congress the application of Hamet Caramalli, elder
    brother of the reigning Bashaw of Tripoli, soliciting from the
    United States attention to his services and sufferings in the
    late war against that State. And, in order to possess them of
    the ground on which that application stands, the facts shall be
    stated according to the views and information of the Executive.

    During the war with Tripoli, it was suggested that Hamet
    Caramalli, elder brother of the reigning Bashaw, and driven by
    him from his throne, meditated the recovery of his inheritance,
    and that a concert of action with us was desirable to him.
    We considered that concerted operations by those who have a
    common enemy were entirely justifiable, and might produce
    effects favorable to both without binding either to guarantee
    the objects of the other. But the distance of the scene, the
    difficulties of communication, and the uncertainty of our
    information, inducing the less confidence in the measure, it
    was committed to our agents as one which might be resorted to,
    if it promised to promote our success.

    Mr. Eaton, however, (our late Consul,) on his return from the
    Mediterranean, possessing personal knowledge of the scene,
    and having confidence in the effect of a joint operation, we
    authorized Commodore Barron, then proceeding with his squadron,
    to enter into an understanding with Hamet, if he should deem it
    useful; and as it was represented that he would need some aids
    of arms and ammunition, and even of money, he was authorized to
    furnish them to a moderate extent, according to the prospect
    of utility to be expected from it. In order to avail him of
    the advantages of Mr. Eaton’s knowledge of circumstances,
    an occasional employment was provided for the latter as an
    agent for the Navy in that sea. Our expectation was, that
    an intercourse should be kept up between the ex-Bashaw and
    the Commodore, that while the former moved on by land, our
    squadron should proceed with equal pace, so as to arrive at
    their destination together, and to attack the common enemy by
    land and sea at the same time. The instructions of June 6th to
    Commodore Barron show that a co-operation only was intended,
    and by no means a union of our object with the fortune of
    the ex-Bashaw; and the Commodore’s letters of March 22d and
    May 19th, prove that he had the most correct idea of our
    intentions. His verbal instructions, indeed, to Mr. Eaton and
    Captain Hull, if the expressions are accurately committed to
    writing by those gentlemen, do not limit the extent of his
    co-operation as rigorously as he probably intended; but it is
    certain, from the ex-Bashaw’s letter of January 3d, written
    when he was proceeding to join Mr. Eaton, and in which he says,
    “your operations should be carried on by sea, mine by land,”
    that he left the position in which he was, with a proper idea
    of the nature of the co-operation. If Mr. Eaton’s subsequent
    convention should appear to bring forward other objects, his
    letter of April 29th and May 1st, views this convention but
    as provisional; the second article, as he expressly states,
    guarding it against any ill effect, and his letter of June
    30th confirms this construction.

    In the event it was found, that, after placing the ex-Bashaw
    in possession of Derne, one of the most important cities and
    provinces of the country, where he had resided himself as
    governor, he was totally unable to command any resources, or
    to bear any part in co-operation with us. This hope was then
    at an end, and we certainly had never contemplated, nor were
    we prepared to land an army of our own, or to raise, pay, or
    subsist, an army of Arabs to march from Derne to Tripoli, and
    to carry on a land war at such a distance from our resources.
    Our means and our authority were merely naval, and that such
    were the expectations of Hamet, his letter of June 29th is an
    unequivocal acknowledgment. While, therefore, an impression
    from the capture of Derne might still operate at Tripoli, and
    an attack on that place from our squadron was daily expected,
    Colonel Lear thought it the best moment to listen to overtures
    of peace, then made by the Bashaw. He did so, and while urging
    provisions for the United States, he paid attention also to the
    interests of Hamet, but was able to effect nothing more than to
    engage the restitution of his family, and even the persevering
    in this demand, suspended for some time the conclusion of the
    treaty.

    In operations at such distance, it becomes necessary to leave
    much to the discretion of the agents employed, but events may
    still turn up beyond the limits of that discretion. Unable in
    such a case to consult his government, a zealous citizen will
    act as he believes that would direct him, were it apprised of
    the circumstances, and will take on himself the responsibility.
    In all these cases the purity and patriotism of the motives
    should shield the agent from blame, and even secure a sanction
    where the error is not too injurious. Should it be thought by
    any, that the verbal instructions said to have been given by
    Commodore Barron to Mr. Eaton amount to a stipulation that
    the United States should place Hamet Caramalli on the throne
    of Tripoli, a stipulation so entirely unauthorized, so far
    beyond our views, and so onerous, could not be sanctioned by
    our Government, or should Hamet Caramalli, contrary to the
    evidence of his letters of January 3d and June 29th, be thought
    to have left the position which he now seems to regret, under
    a mistaken expectation that we were at all events to place him
    on his throne, on an appeal to the liberality of the nation,
    something equivalent to the replacing him in his former
    situation might be worthy its consideration.

    A nation, by establishing a character of liberality and
    magnanimity, gains in the friendship and respect of others more
    than the worth of mere money. This appeal is now made by Hamet
    Caramalli to the United States. The ground he has taken being
    different, not only from our views, but from those expressed
    by himself on former occasions, Mr. Eaton was desired to state
    whether any verbal communications passed from him to Hamet,
    which had varied what he saw in writing. His answer of December
    5th, is herewith transmitted, and has rendered it still
    more necessary, that, in presenting to the Legislature the
    application of Hamet, I should present them at the same time an
    exact statement of the views and proceedings of the Executive,
    through this whole business, that they may clearly understand
    the ground on which we are placed. It is accompanied by all
    the papers which bear any relation to the principles of the
    co-operation, and which can inform their judgment in deciding
    on the application of Hamet Caramalli.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    JANUARY 13, 1806.

The Message and documents therein referred to were read, and ordered to
lie for consideration,

And on motion, the House adjourned.


TUESDAY, January 14.

_Inhabitants of Galliopolis._

Mr. WORTHINGTON presented the petition of a number of French settlers
of Galliopolis, grantees, on the 3d of March, 1795, of 20,000 acres of
land, situated on the Ohio River, and nearly opposite the mouth of Little
Sandusky, on condition that they settle the same within five years from
the date of the letters patent, and stating that they, being ignorant
of this condition, are liable to lose their lands, although for the
space of four years they have paid the taxes thereon, and praying the
interposition of Congress in their behalf; and the petition was read
and referred to Messrs. WORTHINGTON, SMITH of Tennessee, and ADAIR, to
consider and report thereon.


FRIDAY, January 17.

_Aggressions on Commerce._

On motion, the galleries were cleared, and the doors of the Senate
Chamber were closed; and, after the considerations of the confidential
business,

The following Message was received from the PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:

    _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
    States_:

    In my Message to both Houses of Congress at the opening of
    their present session, I submitted to their attention, among
    other subjects, the oppression of our commerce and navigation
    by the irregular practices of armed vessels, public and
    private; and by the introduction of new principles, derogatory
    of the rights of neutrals, and unacknowledged by the usages of
    nations.

    The memorials of several bodies of merchants of the United
    States are now communicated, and will develop these principles
    and practices, which are producing the most ruinous effects on
    our lawful commerce and navigation.

    The right of a neutral to carry on commercial intercourse with
    every part of the dominions of a belligerent, permitted by the
    laws of the country, (with the exception of blockaded ports and
    contraband of war,) was believed to have been decided between
    Great Britain and the United States, by the sentence of their
    commissioners mutually appointed to decide on that and other
    questions of difference between the two nations, and by the
    actual payment of the damages awarded by them against Great
    Britain for the infractions of that right. When, therefore, it
    was perceived that the same principle was revived, with others
    more novel, and extending the injury, instructions were given
    to the Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States at the
    Court of London, and remonstrances duly made by him on the
    subject, as will appear by documents transmitted herewith.
    These were followed by a partial and temporary suspension only,
    without any disavowal of the principle. He has, therefore,
    been instructed to urge this subject anew, to bring it more
    fully to the bar of reason, and to insist on rights too evident
    and too important to be surrendered. In the mean time the evil
    is proceeding, under adjudications founded on the principle
    which is denied. Under these circumstances the subject presents
    itself for the consideration of Congress.

    On the impressment of our seamen, our remonstrances have
    never been intermitted. A hope existed at one moment of an
    arrangement which might have been submitted to, but it soon
    passed away, and the practice, though relaxed at times in
    the distant seas, had been constantly pursued in those in
    our neighborhood. The grounds on which the reclamations on
    this subject have been urged, will appear in an extract from
    instructions to our minister at London now communicated.

                                                     TH. JEFFERSON.

    JANUARY 17, 1806.

The message and document therein referred to were in part read, and
ordered to lie for consideration.


_Purchase of Florida._

A confidential message from the House of Representatives, by Messrs.
BIDWELL and EARLY, two of their members, as follows:

Mr. PRESIDENT: We are directed by the House of Representatives, in
confidence, to bring to the Senate a bill, entitled “An act making
provision for defraying any extraordinary expenses attending the
intercourse between the United States and foreign nations;” in which they
request the concurrence of the Senate.

The bill was read and passed to the second reading.

_Ordered_, That the message and bill last read, be considered
confidential, and that secrecy be observed by the members and officers of
the Senate.


FRIDAY, January 24.

JAMES A. BAYARD, appointed a Senator for the State of Delaware, for the
term of six years, commencing on the fourth of March last, produced his
credentials, which were read; and, the oath prescribed by law having been
administered, he took his seat in the Senate.


FRIDAY, January 31.

_Purchase of Florida._

The third reading of the bill, entitled “An act making provision for
defraying any extraordinary expenses attending the intercourse between
the United States and foreign nations,” was resumed; and, on the question
to amend the bill, as follows: After the words “United States,” sec. 1,
insert “for the purpose of obtaining by negotiation, or otherwise, as he
may deem most expedient, the free navigation of the river St. Lawrence,
as His Britannic Majesty’s territory, lying south and east thereof, or
any other territory lying east of the Mississippi, and south of the
aforesaid river St. Lawrence not owned or possessed by citizens of the
United States.”

It was determined in the negative--yeas 10, nays 21, as follows:

YEAS.--Messrs. Adams, Bayard, Bradley, Hillhouse, Pickering, Plumer,
Smith of Vermont, Tracy, White, and Wright.

NAYS.--Messrs. Adair, Anderson, Baldwin, Condit, Fenner, Gaillard,
Gilman, Howland, Kitchel, Logan, Maclay, Mitchill, Moore, Smith of
Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of Ohio, Smith of Tennessee, Sumter,
Thruston, Turner, and Worthington.


WEDNESDAY, February 5.

The PRESIDENT laid before the Senate the report of the Commissioners of
the Sinking Fund, stating that the measures which have been authorized
by the Board subsequent to their report of 5th February, 1805, so far as
the same have been completed, are fully detailed in the report of the
Secretary of the Treasury to the Board, dated the 4th of the present
month; and in the statements therein referred to, which are herewith
transmitted, and prayed to be considered as part of the report. And the
report was read, and ordered to lie for consideration.

Mr. SMITH of Maryland, from the committee appointed the 15th of January
last, on that part of the Message of the President of the United States
which relates to the spoliation of our commerce on the high seas, and
informs us of new principles assumed by the British Courts of Admiralty,
as a pretext for the condemnation of our vessels in their prize
courts, made report, and the report was read, and ordered to lie for
consideration.

The motion, that it be

    _Resolved_, That a committee be appointed to inquire why the
    expenditures in the Navy Department, for the year 1805, have
    so far exceeded the appropriations for the same, and report
    thereon to the Senate;

was resumed and adopted; and ordered that it be referred to the committee
appointed on the 28th January last, to make inquiry into the specific
expenditures of the respective departments, to report thereon.

The bill making provision for the compensation of witnesses who attended
the trial of the impeachment of Samuel Chase, was read the second time,
and ordered to the third reading.


THURSDAY, February 6.

_Purchase of Florida._

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, entitled “An act
making provision for defraying any extraordinary expenses attending the
intercourse between the United States and foreign nations;” and,

On motion that the bill, and message from the House of Representatives
accompanying the same, be referred to a select committee, with
instructions to inquire and report to the Senate their opinion, whether
West Florida was or was not included in the cession of Louisiana to
the United States by the treaty with France, concluded on the 30th of
April, 1803, together with the evidence upon which such an opinion may
be supported; it was determined in the negative--yeas 8, nays 23, as
follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adair, Adams, Bayard, Hillhouse, Pickering,
    Plumer, Tracy, and White.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Bradley, Condit, Fenner,
    Gaillard, Gilman, Howland, Kitchel, Logan, Maclay, Mitchill,
    Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of New York, Smith of
    Tennessee, Smith of Vermont, Stone, Sumter, Thruston, Turner,
    Worthington, and Wright.

On motion to postpone the further consideration of the bill at this time,
and to take up the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the President be requested to lay before the
    Senate the instructions given to Messrs. Monroe and Pinckney,
    late Ministers of the United States to the Court of Spain,
    together with the facts and arguments exhibited by them, in
    their negotiation, in support of their claims to territories
    eastward of the Mississippi, as far as the river Perdido, and
    of territory on the western side of the Mississippi, as far as
    the Rio Bravo; the essay of Mr. Cevallos, the Minister of His
    Catholic Majesty, in answer to our Ministers, in relation to
    the western limits; and any other documents in his possession,
    tending to establish the rightful boundaries of Louisiana:

It passed in the negative.


FRIDAY, February 7.

_Purchase of Florida._

The Senate resumed the third reading of the bill, entitled “An act
making provision for defraying any extraordinary expenses attending the
intercourse between the United States and foreign nations;” and,

On motion to postpone the further consideration of the bill at this time,
and take up the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to renew our negotiations with the Spanish
    Government, in such a manner as may bring every subject in
    controversy between the two countries to a speedy termination,
    equally advantageous to both:

It passed in the negative.

On motion to strike out of the bill the words “two millions,” section
one, and in lieu thereof, insert “one million;” a division was
called for, and the question on striking out was determined in the
negative--yeas 13, nays 18, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adair, Adams, Bayard, Bradley, Gilman,
    Hillhouse, Logan, Mitchill, Pickering, Plumer, Stone, Tracy,
    and White.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Condit, Fenner, Gaillard,
    Howland, Kitchel, Maclay, Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith
    of New York, Smith of Tennessee, Smith of Vermont, Sumter,
    Thruston, Turner, Worthington, and Wright.

On motion to amend the bill by inserting after the word “applied,” in the
first section, the words “for the purchase from the Spanish Government
of their territories lying on the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico, and
eastward of the river Mississippi,” it passed in the negative--yeas 9,
nays 20, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Adair, Adams, Bayard, Gilman, Hillhouse,
    Pickering, Plumer, Tracy, and White.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Bradley, Condit, Fenner,
    Gaillard, Howland, Kitchel, Maclay, Moore, Smith of Maryland,
    Smith of New York, Smith of Tennessee, Smith of Vermont, Stone,
    Sumter, Thruston, Turner, Worthington, and Wright.

On motion to postpone the consideration of the bill until Monday next, it
passed in the negative.

On motion to agree to the final passage of the bill, it passed in the
affirmative--yeas 17, nays 11, as follows:

    YEAS.--Messrs. Anderson, Baldwin, Condit, Fenner, Gaillard,
    Howland, Kitchel, Maclay, Moore, Smith of Maryland, Smith of
    New York, Smith of Tennessee, Smith of Vermont, Thruston,
    Turner, Worthington, and Wright.

    NAYS.--Messrs. Adair, Adams, Bayard, Gilman, Hillhouse,
    Pickering, Plumer, Stone, Sumter, Tracy, and White.

So it was _Resolved_, That this bill pass.[29]


MONDAY, February 10.

The Senate resumed, as in Committee of the Whole, the consideration of
the amendments reported to the bill to suspend the commercial intercourse
between the United States and the French island of St. Domingo; and,
having amended the report, it was in part adopted, and the bill was
reported to the House accordingly; and the bill having been further
amended,

_Ordered_, That it pass to the third reading as amended.

A message from the House of Representatives informed the Senate that
the House have passed a bill, entitled “An act declaring the assent
of Congress to an act of the General Assembly of the State of North
Carolina;” a bill, entitled “An act declaring the consent of Congress
to an act of the State of South Carolina, passed on the 21st day of
December, 1804, so far as the same relates to authorizing the City
Council of Charleston to impose and collect a duty on the tonnage
of vessels from foreign ports;” also, a bill, entitled “An act to
regulate and fix the compensation of officers of the Senate and House
of Representatives;” in which bills they desire the concurrence of the
Senate.

The bills brought up for consideration were read, and ordered to the
second reading.

Mr. WRIGHT, from the committee to whom was referred, on the 31st of
January last, the bill for the protection and indemnification of American
seamen, reported it without amendment.

Mr. THRUSTON, from the committee to whom was referred, on the 5th
instant, the bill, entitled “An act for altering the time for holding the
circuit court in the district of North Carolina,” reported the bill with
amendments; which were read, and ordered to lie for consideration.


WEDNESDAY, February 12.

_British Aggressions._

The Senate resumed the report of the committee, of the fifth instant, on
that part of the Message of the President of the United States, which
relates to the spoliation of our commerce on the high seas, and of the
new principles assumed by the British Courts of Admiralty, as a pretext
for the condemnation of our vessels, in their prize courts, to wit:

    1. _Resolved_, That the capture and condemnation, under the
    orders of the British Government, and adjudications of their
    Courts of Admiralty, of American vessels and their cargoes,
    on the pretext of their being employed in a trade with the
    enemies of Great Britain, prohibited in time of peace, is an
    unprovoked aggression upon the property of the citizens of
    these United States, a violation of their neutral rights, and
    an encroachment upon their national independence.

    2. _Resolved_, That the President of the United States be
    requested to demand and insist upon the restoration of the
    property of their citizens, captured and condemned on the
    pretext of its being employed in a trade with the enemies
    of Great Britain, prohibited in time of peace; and upon the
    indemnification of such American citizens, for their losses
    and damages sustained by these captures and condemnations; and
    to enter into such arrangements with the British Government,
    on this and all other differences subsisting between the
    two nations, and particularly respecting the impressment of
    American seamen, as may be consistent with the honor and
    interests of the United States, and manifest their earnest
    desire to obtain for themselves and their citizens, by amicable
    negotiation, that justice to which they are entitled.

    3. _Resolved_, That it is expedient to prohibit by law the
    importation into the United States of any of the following
    goods, wares, or merchandise, being the growth, produce,
    or manufacture, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
    Ireland, or the dependencies thereof, that is to say: woollens,
    linens, hats, nails, looking glasses, rum, hardwares, slate,
    salt, coal, boots, shoes, ribbons, silks, and plated and glass
    wares. The said prohibition to commence from the ---- day of
    ----, unless previously thereto equitable arrangements shall be
    made between the two Governments, on the differences subsisting
    between them; and to continue until such arrangements shall be
    agreed upon and settled.

And, on the question to adopt the first resolution, as reported by the
committee, it was determined unanimously in the affirmative--yeas 28.


THURSDAY, February 13.

_British Aggressions._

The report of the committee, made on the 5th instant, on that part of
the Message of the President of the United States which relates to the
spoliation of our commerce, and of the new principles assumed by the
British Courts of Admiralty, was resumed.

Mr. ISRAEL SMITH said that he was extremely sorry that he could not
bring his mind to assent to the second resolution; because he viewed
it of great importance that there should be unanimity upon a subject of
this nature. He was not opposed to it from any constitutional objection,
arising from a belief that the Senate had no right to give their
advice and consent to the Executive as to the course and conditions
upon which they desired that an accommodation might be brought about;
but he was opposed to it from the peculiar impropriety of so doing,
deduced from the whole circumstances of the case, as it now presented
itself for consideration. It would be recollected by the Senate, that
many of our complaints against the British Government were of long
continuance; that they had been the subject of our pointed and repeated
remonstrances, and in a particular manner, the impressment of American
seamen; that, on a former occasion, they had committed vast spoliations
on our commerce, not under the sanction of the laws of nations, as
their subsequent transactions with our Government have acknowledged;
but under the authority of the particular orders of their Government,
thereby subjecting the property of our merchants upon the high seas,
not only to the restrictions and forfeitures incurred by the law of
nations, but also exposing it to all the vexations and forfeitures
growing out of the caprice of British orders of capture. The late
encroachments on our rights as a neutral nation, and which are now the
subject of consideration, are of a nature similar to those we have
before experienced, and proceed from the same unwarrantable cause; and,
further, are continued in full force and operation at the very moment our
Government is pressing upon their consideration the injustice of their
proceedings, by argument too strong and convincing to admit of doubt. And
how are they answered? By procrastination, and hints that the necessity
of the case is a sufficient justification. The Executive, indignant at
this evasion, and despairing of redress by any further appeal to their
justice and magnanimity, has turned to the National Legislature, and
informed them that what remained to be done on this interesting subject
must rest on the wisdom and firmness of Congress.

Mr. ANDERSON.--Mr. President: In discussing the merits of the resolution
now under consideration, it will be necessary that we keep constantly
in view the great principle of the one which has already passed this
House by a unanimous vote, because this second resolution is predicated
upon the principle of the first. In the first we declare, that the
capture and condemnation, under the orders of the British Government,
and adjudication of their Courts of Admiralty, of American vessels and
their cargoes, on the pretext of their being employed in a trade with the
enemies of Great Britain, prohibited in time of peace, is an unprovoked
aggression upon the property of the citizens of the United States,
a violation of their neutral rights, and an encroachment upon their
national independence.

In order to show that the ground we have taken is correct, I will take
leave to refer to a book (entitled An Examination of the British Doctrine
which subjects to capture a neutral trade, not open in time of peace)
ascribed to a gentleman high in office, who has deservedly acquired great
celebrity in the political world. It will be found that the principle
contended for in the resolution I have cited, obtained as early as the
first rise of regular commerce, and was even reduced to system as early
as 1338. To this doctrine Great Britain acceded by treaty with Sweden,
in 1655, and afterwards, in 1674, she actually claimed and enjoyed the
benefit of a free trade, she being at that time in peace and the Dutch
in war with France. With what kind of pretext can Great Britain pretend
to deprive us of the exercise of the very rights which she herself has
claimed and exercised, upon precisely the same principles? Besides,
those neutral rights have, by constant and very long usage, become the
established law of nations, and have from time to time been ingrafted
into many treaties even where Great Britain was herself a party. Upon
this doctrine, thus sustained, we request the President to demand and
insist upon the restoration of the property of our citizens, captured
and condemned on the pretext of its being employed in a trade with the
enemies of Great Britain, prohibited in time of peace, and upon the
indemnification of such American citizens for their losses and damages
sustained by these captures and condemnations.

It has been objected that the language of this resolution is too strong,
that the words _demand_ and _insist_ go too far; and that the absolute
restoration of our vessels, &c., will, by these words being retained, be
made _sine qua non_ of an accommodation with Great Britain. If, sir, we
were to express ourselves in less forcible language, we should, in my
opinion, subvert our own principles, and recede from the high ground we
have taken, which might eventually radically destroy our neutral rights,
and completely paralyze our commerce.

The words _demand_ and _insist_ are diplomatic, and as such most
proper to be used, and the more so, as they seem to be appropriate to
the principle of the first resolution. But, Mr. President, the latter
part of this resolution, by which indemnification may be made, and new
arrangements entered into with Great Britain, so far ameliorates those
precedent words that the President will possess ample powers, according
to a true exposition of the whole taken together, and he will not, in my
opinion, be trammelled in the manner the gentleman from Ohio conceives.
In settling national differences, it has ever been necessary in some
points to give a little, and in others to take, according to the peculiar
circumstances upon which the negotiation might happen to turn; either
upon a point of national honor, or an interesting point of national
commerce, or both so connected as not well to be severed.

Mr. MITCHELL said he hoped the re