VOL. XXXIV.                                           NO. 4.


                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                           APRIL, 1880.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                97
    DEATH OF SECRETARIES BUSH AND DASHIELL—DEATH OF
      MISS DELL SAFFORD                                       98
    MISSIONARY PERIODICALS                                    98
    THROUGH THE LIGHT CONTINENT                               99
    TWENTY PER CENT                                           99
    THE NEW PLEA                                             100
    CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH                           101
    IGNORANCE OF THE NEGRO QUESTION                          102
    AN ILLUSTRATED PRESS                                     103
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                     104
    GENERAL NOTES                                            105


  THE FREEDMEN.

    VIRGINIA, CARRSVILLE—Large Ingathering                   106
    NORTH CAROLINA, MCLEANSVILLE—Facts about the
      Taught and the Teachers                                107
    GEORGIA—NO. 1 MILLER STATION—A Struggling Church,
      etc.                                                   109
    GEORGIA, MACON—A Lady’s S. S. and Missionary Work        110
    GEORGIA, MCINTOSH, LIBERTY CO.—Communion Season          110
    GEORGIA—Church and School must Work Together             111
    ALABAMA—Notes from Marion—Mrs. Geo. E. Hill              113
    MISSISSIPPI, TOUGALOO—A Brother’s Devotion               114
    MISSISSIPPI—Report of the State Superintendent of
      Public Education                                       115
    LOUISIANA—Revival in Central Church—Theological
      Department—Church Dedication                           116
    TENNESSEE—Revival in Fisk University                     117


  THE INDIANS.

    CHURCH—CHRISTMAS—BIBLES                                  117


  THE CHINESE.

    OUR NEW FIELDS—DEATH OF ED. P. SANFORD, ESQ.             118


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    A VOYAGE TO AFRICA—PROF. CHASE TO HIS
      FOUR-YEAR-OLD BOY                                      120


  RECEIPTS                                                   121


  CONSTITUTION                                               125


  AID, STATISTICS, WANTS                                     126

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK.

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    ANDREW LESTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A.S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.

       *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXIV.      APRIL, 1880.         No. 4.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


Among the list of our workers in the February number, two names
were in some unaccountable way omitted. We hasten to supply them
here—Mrs. H. B. Northrop is our missionary at New Orleans, La., and
Rev. P. W. Young the pastor of our church at Byron, Ga.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our lady teachers are also missionaries. The lady missionaries
sent out by the Woman’s Boards often find their first and most
effective means of access to the people in the schools they start
for girls. Our one hundred and fifteen lady teachers are doing the
work of Christian training along with that of school teaching, and
are missionaries nearly as much as the seven ladies who devote
themselves exclusively to direct mission work. They have a right to
consider themselves as missionaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

We notice in the list of officers of the First State Sunday-school
Convention of Louisiana, the name of Rev. W. S. Alexander,
President of Straight University and pastor of the Central
Congregational Church of New Orleans, as one of the Vice-Presidents
and also of the Executive Committee. He was chairman of the
Committees of Credentials and on the Constitution. Dr. Roy was
also present. Certainly there is no cause for a complaint of lack
of recognition of those engaged in our work in the midst of such
examples as these.

       *       *       *       *       *

The question how to interest the Sunday-schools in missionary work
has met with a new answer in the cordial reception and use of our
Jubilee Concert Exercise. Five large editions have been exhausted,
and now a second Exercise has been prepared (No. 2), in which a
number of questions are to be answered by as many persons as there
are letters in the alphabet, covering the main facts of our various
work. Five Jubilee Songs are inserted to be sung by a choir, and
place is left for short addresses. We commend it to our friends,
who will receive as many copies as they need for use, gratuitously,
by applying to Dist. Sec. Pike.

       *       *       *       *       *


It is with profound sadness that we record the death of two of
our most esteemed co-laborers in the administration of missionary
work. The Rev. Charles P. Bush, D. D., for many years associated
with all our churches, especially in the Middle States, as the
District Secretary of the A. B. C. F. M., has not only enjoyed the
confidence, but won the love, of pastors and people on every hand.
We shall miss him greatly. The Rev. Robert L. Dashiell, D. D., the
Secretary of the Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, has been a tower of strength not only to the broad
missionary enterprises of that denomination, but, by his genial
sympathy and wise counsels, has added to the efficiency and courage
of his brethren in the work outside of his own organization.

       *       *       *       *       *

We much regret to learn of the death of Miss Dell Safford, formerly
a teacher under this Association. For six years, she labored
faithfully and conscientiously among the Freedmen in Talladega
and Selma, Ala. She was patient and untiring in her efforts for
the real good of those under her instruction, and her interest in
them did not flag even after she left the field, but showed itself
especially in the care she exercised over one of her pupils, whom
she had brought with her that he might receive the benefits of a
Northern education. After leaving the service of this Society,
she removed to Wisconsin. But a cold taken in the spring, when
she was already overworked and worn, could not be controlled,
and consumption followed. She died at the last very suddenly of
hemorrhage.

       *       *       *       *       *


One of the most hopeful signs of the times in the missionary field
is seen in the increasing demand and the corresponding supply of
missionary intelligence. The _Missionary Herald_ has enlarged its
space between the borders, and fills it with valuable matter. Its
strong point is, as it has been, its full and valuable letters from
the front. The _Foreign Missionary_ of the Presbyterian Board has
been of late renewing its youth, and coming up, until it has become
the most suggestive and vivacious of all the periodicals of the
kind which meet our eyes. But nowadays, when intelligent people
read the doings of all the world every morning at their breakfast
tables, and are no longer satisfied with the village or the county
news, they must have something which shall give them broader views
of the great field of missions, which is the world, than they can
obtain from the organs of special societies.

To meet this want, the societies themselves are increasingly
informing their constituency that there is other work being done
than that they do themselves. “The work of other societies”
is becoming a familiar heading. Even this, however, does not
answer the full demands—and that the day has come for missionary
periodicals, which are edited and circulated upon the same basis
as those which deal with scientific or material progress, shows
that the broader interests of the coming kingdom are taking more
fully their appropriate place in the hearts and minds of Christian
men and women. The _Missionary Review_, which has been published
for more than two years from Princeton, New Jersey, and which as
an unsparing critic of existing missionary societies, is adapted
to promote great circumspection in those who administer them, is
re-enforced in this general field by _The Gospel in all Lands_,
edited by Rev. Albert B. Simpson, and published by Randolph,
which will give itself to the broader aspects and principles of
missionary work, and to a compilation of fresh intelligence from
all quarters. We rejoice in all such methods for the diffusion of
knowledge, and the stimulation of interest, in carrying out “the
great commission.”

       *       *       *       *       *


“_Through the Light Continent_” is a comely octavo in elegant type,
from the London press, giving the observations of William Saunders
on a tour taken through our country in 1877–8. In a chapter upon
“Education in Atlanta,” after speaking of the Public Schools, he
says: “One of the most interesting institutions of Atlanta is
the University for the education of colored persons, under the
superintendence of Professor Ware. The Atlanta University has 175
students (the last catalogue made them 244), half of whom pay
the fees and cost of board. Many young negroes have worked, and
saved up $200 or $300 in order to come to the University. It will
thus be seen that the energy which the negroes are manifesting to
obtain education is not confined to the ordinary work of the Board
of Schools, but extends to the higher branches of learning. About
75 of the students are girls, and their progress is regarded as
universally satisfactory.

Professor and Mrs. Ware, who have devoted their lives to this work
with true missionary zeal, are now much cheered to find their
labors recognized and encouraged in quarters from which persistent
opposition was formerly experienced. When they came to Atlanta,
any manifestation of regard for the blacks was looked upon as an
act of hostility to the whites; but a great change has taken place
in public opinion, and it is now generally felt that national
advancement requires the elevation of the negro race, and those who
undertake their education are no longer regarded with disfavor.

There are many societies in the Northern States for promoting
numerous enterprises amongst the negroes. Before reaching Atlanta,
I noticed a large crowd of negroes at one of the wayside stations,
and found the occasion to be the leaving of a missionary, who had
been working amongst them for two or three years, and was then
changing his station. The respect and regard paid to him and to his
wife were pleasant to see; the missionary was a most intelligent
travelling companion, evidently devoted to his work in the genuine
spirit of Christianity.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TWENTY PER CENT.

The enthusiasm evinced at the last Annual Meeting, our freedom
from the long-borne burden of our debt, the general interest which
seemed to be renewed in the welfare of the Freedmen, and the
commencing and anticipated prosperity in the financial world, all
conspired to encourage us to plan and prepare for an enlarged work
and more abundant results. In carrying out these purposes, the
Executive Committee have appropriated about _twenty per cent._ more
than in the previous year to the Southern field.

The total receipts thus far have been very gratifying,—and yet,
when we come to analyze them, we find that they are, in a larger
measure than formerly, sent to us to be appropriated to special
departments of the work, or more often to special work not included
in our estimates. This is both gratifying and embarrassing:
gratifying, because it indicates an increasing familiarity with
the details of our work, and special sympathy with this or that
portion of the whole; but embarrassing, because it cannot fail to
be a diversion of funds which have been anticipated by us to meet
the appropriations already made to new fields, and often to create,
instead of covering, expense.

We recognize these needs, of student aid, of woman’s work, and of
special endowment, and we would not have these particular demands
neglected. It is only that if all the money were to be thus
specifically applied by the donors, there would be none left for
the main work, on which the ability to carry on all the specialties
depends. Don’t starve the body in order to enlarge the hand or the
foot. The best growth of all is that which comes from the food,
which enters by the mouth into the stomach, and, vitalized, is
carried through the whole system. If you appropriate all the fuel
on the steamer to the donkey engines, what will you do with the
great machinery whose work it is to revolve the main propeller? If
in your city water-works, you enlarge the side supply pipes and
leave the old mains, you get not more, but less, water into the
houses.

What do we ask, then?—1. That your _special appropriations be
special gifts_, additions to, and not diversions of, the moneys you
are wont to give to the general work of the Association. 2. That
you do not fail in your church, or from your private purse, to give
us something _this year_. 3. That as you have encouraged us to lay
out a larger work, you send us for general uses at least _twenty
per cent._ more than you did last year.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW PLEA.

Henceforth the basis of our appeal to the churches ought to be
gratitude, not necessity; thankfulness, not the cry of sharp
distress; the impulse kindled at the sight of opening fields,
widening opportunities, intelligent appreciation of service done
and rewarding results.

The large additions to the churches in the foreign field, their
increasing spirit of benevolence, the awakening interest in the
cause of education, the world-wide readiness and call for helpers,
the cheering indications of an abundant harvest of souls, soon to
be gathered, the overwhelming demand in our own land for immediate
work upon the frontier and at the South, among the depressed races
and the incoming population, the return of prosperous times, and
the ever-pressing command of Christ, are considerations so potent,
so eloquent in their united plea, that the first thought of him who
listens is, “How can any Christian heart resist the new plea!” What
can hinder a most liberal investment in causes that promise such
rich returns?

Instead of exhausting all the strength of the crew at the pumps in
a desperate endeavor to save the ship from sinking, has the time
not come, when, with canvas all spread, and the ship sea-worthy,
rightly headed and well under way, the main question shall be,
how to touch every harbor, explore every river, sail every inland
sea, and leave the precious freighting of the Gospel at every
port around the globe? Is it quite creditable to our piety, our
devotion, our loyalty to Christ, that we can resist appeals based
upon love, goodness, merciful interposition, glorious enlargement,
and wait until we are crowded to a reluctant response by the plea
of dire necessity, overshadowing peril?

There are most cheering indications that the new plea is becoming
effectual. We are informed of a number of instances in which
churches have lately nearly or quite doubled their contributions to
the American Board, and that, too, apparently with great heartiness
and joy. Gifts, also, from some private and unexpected sources
have been a cheering indication of the advance movement. The same
indications are, to a certain extent, true of the other Societies.

A mid-summer appeal for larger and extra contributions, in order to
prevent a deficit, ought to be anticipated, and made impossible, by
ample gifts now. The volume of offerings during the _first half of
the year_, ought to be so large as to remove all anxiety concerning
the state of the treasuries of these Societies when their accounts
close. How pleasant, if, at the annual meetings, the friends could
be surprised with reports of a surplus instead of deficits.

Ought there not to be a stern purpose to pay as we go, and to
pay with sufficient liberality to enable us to go with vigor and
dispatch to the utmost bound of a rapidly increasing demand? May
the plea of great interposition, great opportunity and great
ability find fitting response.—_The Advance._

       *       *       *       *       *


CONGREGATIONALISM IN THE SOUTH.

We reprint the following article from the _Christian Recorder_,
the able organ of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. It is a
significant endorsement of the church work done by the Association,
and from those who are most profoundly concerned in the Christian
elevation of the colored people of the land. We have not even
omitted the sharp criticism of the approving words of those who
gathered at Chicago to review our work, hoping that we may thus
escape the charge of “Phariseeism” in accepting the commendations
and congratulations of our brethren of the A. M. E. Church:

“The thirty-third Annual Report of the American Missionary
Association is before us. We wish that we could place the Report
in the hands of every A. M. E. preacher in the land. Years ago
we called attention to the fact that the A. M. A. was destined
to become the strongest competitor the A. M. E. would find in
the South. As we declared, it is even now seen. The twenty-three
Congregational churches of 1869 have become sixty-seven in 1879.
But it may be said, what is sixty-seven churches with a membership
of 4,600, compared to our thousands? They would not be much, to
be sure, were they of the same general material. But they are
not. They are, as it were, a picked body. In a sense they may be
said to occupy the same relation to our Church as the regular
army sustains to the volunteer force of the country. And we all
know what that means. A thousand regulars can do the work of ten
thousand volunteers. Is it asked, How is this? The answer is at
hand. Each Congregational church grew out of the school which the
Congregational preacher in the person of a teacher taught. Knowing
his material, and wielding it much as the potter wields the clay,
he occupied for his church a position decidedly advantageous; and
the result shows that he has not failed to profit by it.

“In nothing that we have said is it to be supposed that we are in
wrath at their manifest success. Of course, we have no patience
with the spirit of Phariseeism breathed forth in the report of the
Committee on Church Work in the South. Nothing that the typical
Pharisee of the New Testament said excels it; but for the work
itself of these, our companions in the kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ, we entertain the highest possible respect; begging,
however, the privilege of suggesting that next year’s report be not
so strenuously self-complacent.

“And now we repeat what we have so often said to our brother
ministers, especially of the South, where they are brought in
contact with this energetic body of men: Know, once for all, that
the Church possessed of the best cultured heads and the best
cultured hearts, is to win. That we are infinitely stronger in
numbers to-day than are the Congregationalists, argues nothing
for the future. It is with churches as with everything else, the
fittest survives. If African Methodism prove to be that fittest,
it will survive. If not, it must inevitably pass away, and only
be remembered as a thing of the past. To be the fittest, it
is required that she banish all ignorance, all immorality and
superstition from her midst. This must be done, let the cost be
what it may. Thin out the ministry of the church until there shall
not be found an ignorant man nor a bad man in the ranks. Thin out
the church itself. Expel the vicious. Drive out the notoriously
bad. Have a clean church. Let such steps as these be taken, and
African Methodism will have a future that will be to the glory of
God and the best interests of mankind. But if she draw back, let
her remember that God can take no pleasure in her.”

       *       *       *       *       *


IGNORANCE OF THE NEGRO QUESTION.

From a paper read by W. N. Armstrong, Esq., before the Yale Alumni
Association of New York in January, as printed in _The Present
Century_:

There is an astounding ignorance in the North regarding the
conditions and relations of the blacks and whites of the South. The
North in full control of the National Government for many years,
has had before it a vast and complicated problem in statesmanship.
Instead of working at it intelligently, it has lost itself in a fog
of political prejudice, and is not ready at this late day to take
an honest look into the matter.

For the last fifteen years what have we known of the South,
especially of the blacks? What steps have we taken to ascertain the
actual truth regarding four millions of negroes whom we suddenly
railroaded into our political system? When the General Government
wished to obtain facts concerning the geological, botanical and
mineral character of the Western territory, it sent out experts
skilled in examining, testing, classifying and surveying. These men
were kept in the field for years, and their reports fill a score
of volumes, and now we know something about the plains and the
mountains. For the intricate social questions of the South, that
vast tract of unknown land, that section of the Dark Continent in
America, we have neither expert or surveyor, or intelligent process
of examination, though the demands for accuracy in social science
are as imperative as in physical. Visiting statesmen have been
there. But was a visiting statesman ever known to report a fact
which hurt his party?

Northern men who are in the South for the purpose of getting office
will not tell the truth, because it may bear against them. Southern
men, as a rule, do not report the real facts, because they are
prejudiced. Northern men who have become prosperous in business
at the South, long since discovered that silence was golden, and
their lips are sealed to the public. The testimony of the blacks
is the most unreliable of all for reasons which will be given
hereafter. The poor Northern men who have failed to make a fortune
in the South have a grievance, and cannot be trusted. It is upon
the newspaper correspondent that the North has relied mainly for
information. But he is always under limitations. One of them (whom
you all know by reputation) said to me—“We correspondents are not
sent here to find out the actual truth, but to support the theories
of the papers which send us. It won’t do for me to say in my
letters that the nigger is to blame, when the editorial columns of
my paper say the white men are in the wrong.” The newspaper makes
its theory first, or it inherits a theory, and then sends out for
facts to fit it. Does not every one know beforehand how every daily
paper in this city will treat any given political event? The best
sources of information regarding the blacks are his educators.
These men, all of them from the North, know something about the
negro. Though little enough as yet, Congress has never asked
these teachers to tell what they know about him. Facts regarding
the lives or the motives of men are not obvious. The newspaper
correspondent cannot reach them in an hour, or even in a year.
I have been personally familiar with a number of events in the
South. I have never known one of these to be correctly reported.
Has any lawyer of this city ever known one of his cases to be
reported accurately in the daily press? Truth seems to be in a
deep well everywhere. The _Herald_ says Edison’s light is a great
success. The _Nation_ is doubtful about it. An electrician of rare
skill tells me it is a humbug. If we cannot get at the truth about
matters near at home, what shall be expected regarding matters in a
distant section of the country?

The Republican believes what his newspaper tells him about the
South, and the Democrat does not believe it. They never unite for
investigation. The historian will say hereafter that the real
outrage was in our criminal neglect to ascertain the truth. It is
easy to see that it is supremely difficult to get at the facts
about two races jostling together, like huge vessels thumping and
pounding against each other in a rolling sea.

Last year the negro paper in Charleston, South Carolina, advocated
the election of a Democratic mayor. The Republican papers had no
use for that fact. It did not indicate the existence of outrages.
It was rather in the line of what Tyndall calls the tragedy of
science—a beautiful theory killed by an incontrovertible fact.
For two years the Democratic party of Georgia has been so broken
up that as many as six or seven independent Democratic tickets in
local issues have been in the field in many counties, and the white
candidate, who has captured a negro vote, sees to it with rifle and
revolver that no other white opponent interferes with that black
vote.

Facts like these occur by the hundred in Southern politics, but the
Republican press ignore them. The Northern men who are educating
the negro regard Captain Thompson, superintendent of public
schools in South Carolina, as one of the most efficient men of the
South in extending negro education; but the _Tribune_ calls him
a bloody-shirt orator. The negro teacher is at present his best
friend, and his evidence about the whites should be credible if not
conclusive.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ILLUSTRATED PRESS.

We have received two communications lately in regard to the
importance of the Press in the education of the colored people—one
from an esteemed friend in the West, urging that other institutions
should follow the example of Hampton and Talladega in publishing
papers. We are not sure that this is altogether desirable. There
must be many favoring conditions to make it a success; otherwise
there is a certainty of pecuniary loss and wasted effort. The
other letter is from an English missionary in the West Indies, who
thus states the case as to the value of periodical literature to
supplement the influences of the church and the school:

“There remains, as a means of elevating and advancing the colored
people, the Press. The periodical Press has been of untold service
in promoting the civilization of the English and American white
laborers. It has come into their homes, arousing them, week by
week, with fresh power and stimulus. It has filled their homes
with pictures of beauty, which delighted themselves and their
children, and taught them, indirectly, (and therefore most
effectually,) lessons of thrift, neatness and refinement. Every
picture of a clean, neatly-dressed child, of a well-kept home, of
a happy fireside group, etc., etc., carried its lesson and left
its impress, suggesting imitation, and stimulating efforts for
improvement.

“Now, what periodicals are there in the whole wide world that
will thus encourage, stimulate and arouse the colored people? Not
one. I have not met with any English or American publication at
all suited to their needs. It is a common remark of the people
here, when asked to adopt some reform: ‘That will do for _white_
people; but it is not for we.’ And if the _British Workman_, or
any similar paper, is placed in their hands, it but intensifies
this feeling. The contrast between themselves and white people is
constantly before them. Week after week they will see pictures of
pleasant homes and scenes in home life, and in every case these are
connected with the home of the _white_ man. If, by chance, some
colored face is shown, it is as a curiosity, like a Modoc Indian, a
Chinaman or a Zulu.

“What is urgently needed is something that will meet the needs
of colored laborers, in periodical literature, as the needs of
the white laboring classes are now met. I think that there should
without delay be established in America some new periodical—or some
periodical now established should be so modified in the manner of
conducting it—that, pursuing the broad lines of humanity, would
secure two things:

“1.—In the illustrations, the manhood of the colored man would
receive recognition, and _his_ home, _his_ children, incidents
of _his_ life, would appear from time to time, in such way as
to convey to all colored people a feeling of emulation, a hope
and inspiration, stimulating them to achieve better things for
themselves.

“2.—In the letter-press, care would be taken to avoid those figures
of speech which carry with them an implied degradation of the
colored people. To illustrate, what is ‘foul’ would not be made
synonymous with what is ‘black.’”

There is certainly sound reason in the above suggestions, and it
would seem that good results might follow the proposed plan. Just
how it is to be done is the question. The paying constituency
of such a paper would probably be too small to make it a matter
of mere business enterprise. Perhaps to some one the good to be
accomplished may seem large enough and direct enough to warrant the
needed outlay of thought, time and capital.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

RALEIGH, N. C.—Great religious interest is reported throughout the
city. Our little church is sharing in the great blessing—church
members are being revived and others are inquiring the way of life.

WOODBRIDGE, N. C.—During the last two weeks we have had a
remarkable outpouring of the Spirit. On two afternoons we have had
to suspend the school exercises on account of those weeping over
their sins. Some little ones will not leave the house till they
feel forgiven. Almost all are from the Band of Hope. The older ones
look on in surprise at such a work among the children. Some have
tried to stop their children from praying, but they could come to
school and pray, or go out in the woods till they were converted,
and then they couldn’t help it. We have a daily prayer-meeting in
the school-house, in which all take part. Sometimes we have open
meetings for the children. We have nightly revival meetings, in
which the children are taking hold as far as it seems advisable.

_Later._—One Saturday, four came to tell us of sins forgiven. Since
then, for three weeks, almost every day has brought one or more,
till about thirty have believed, and several others are anxious.
Most of these are children; a few are pretty small. To-day some of
them have been praying, all their spare time, that they may be able
to hold out to the end.

It is a time of struggle here. People are so poor as to hardly have
enough to eat of the poorest fare, and clothing is pretty scarce.
No capital in the place. They spin and weave their own garments,
even to the thread.

MACON, GA.—Bro. B. arrived on the 23d of February, and we began
our special meetings the next night. We had several extra prayer
meetings the previous week, when much earnest prayer was offered
for God’s blessing to come upon us. All things seemed to be in
readiness, the brethren of the church are already quickened, and
the meetings have been very encouraging from the start. The members
have taken hold with commendable zeal, and seem to be thoroughly
united. The meeting last night (March 3d) was almost a Pentecostal
season. There are fifteen or twenty inquirers, of the most hopeful
class of young men and women, and some intelligent middle-aged men.
The work is quiet and deep, without noise or nonsense, and seems to
be spreading every day.

SELMA, ALA.—When I last wrote, I think we were anticipating the
week of prayer with hope of some awakening. We observed the days
with very good attendance and very good results in quickening
members, still the expected ingathering of souls has not been
realized. Otherwise we think the church is in quite a flourishing
condition. Since the week of prayer, we have sustained three or
four cottage meetings every week, with good results, and with the
Literary Society, sociables, ladies’ weekly and monthly meetings,
and regular prayer meetings and teachers’ meetings, we have managed
to keep quite busy.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Indians.

—The House Committee on Indian Affairs has agreed to a bill which
proposes to place all that part of the Indian Territory not set
apart to, and occupied by, the Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and
Seminole Indians, under the jurisdiction of the United States
District Court for the District of Kansas, held at Fort Scott,
in respect to the crimes of murder, manslaughter, arson, rape,
burglary and robbery. The exemptions, above stated, are placed
by the bill under United States District Court for Arkansas. The
bill further extends the provisions of the laws of the respective
States wherein are located Indian reservations to the reservations
themselves.

—A bill is now pending before the Indian Committee of the House,
upon which Governor Pound, a member of the committee and an
enthusiastic student of the Indian question, has made a favorable
report, providing for a number of Indian schools similar to that at
Carlisle; and it was in this connection that a visit of inspection
was recently made by Secretary Schurz, several members of the House
Committee on Indian Affairs, and two members of the Board of Indian
Commissioners. Besides the general advantages to result directly
from education of Indian youths, it is represented in support of
the measure that the presence of a number of children from each
tribe at schools in the East will be a most efficient guarantee of
good behavior on the part of the tribes.

It would seem, judging from the meagre opportunities for inspection
offered by a single visit to Carlisle, that the movement promises
to be an effectual aid, if not ultimately one of the chief
instruments, in settling the vexed Indian problem. If, however,
only a part of that which is expected is actually realized, still
it will have been a very profitable venture, both for the Indians
and for the Government.—_N. Y. Tribune._

       *       *       *       *       *


Africa.

Extract from a letter received by the London Missionary Society:

—“Food continues cheap and plentiful; the market is a great
blessing—it fluctuates frequently, but the cause can generally be
seen; a recent rise in prices was caused by the sudden arrival of
several caravans of ivory from Manyuema. We are doing a little
better with the garden just now. One of our new men formerly worked
in an Arab’s garden, and under his advice and care we have onions
now coming up, and some of the seeds from Cape Colony are showing
signs of life. We have a good plot of sweet potatoes. The vegetable
called nyumbo—mentioned by Livingstone as being very wholesome—is
now procurable in the market; we find them very good and much like
potatoes; in shape and size they are like good-sized long radishes
with blunt tails; in colour and texture like English potatoes, but
stringy outside. Good beef is not procurable. Fish, fowls, and
goat’s flesh are plentiful; also eggs and butter.

“Having a good supply of sugar we have tried preserving, and
succeeded very well with lemon marmalade and jam of bananas and
guavas. Mr. Hutley has acquired the art of bread-making, and we
occasionally have an excellent loaf. We both find the maize meal
wholesome; it is capable of being made into a variety of puddings.
If I were asked of what I am in want in the shape of food, I would
say, first, cabbages; second, rhubarb: and lo, only to-day, Mr.
Hutley tells me that some Savoy cabbage seeds are showing signs
of life! So we may yet, with care, obtain several of the English
vegetables, which beat anything in this country, with all its
luxuriance.

“Wheat planting begins in a few days, at which we shall also have a
try. I think it probable we shall be able to procure ‘whole-wheat
meal’ from Unyanyembe in the season at a reasonable price. Men who
know the roads in the forest go to Unyanyembe in eight days; this
seems to us very near.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

A large Ingathering.

MISS M. A. ANDRUS, CARRSVILLE.

Reading in the “Missionary” of the work done in the South, it
came into my mind to tell you of a work of grace here. Nearly all
of our Sabbath-school are converted. From sixty to seventy have
been baptized and received into this church, and since the 1st
of September the pastor has baptized 150. I have never before
labored in a Sabbath-school where I have felt so manifestly the
Spirit accompanying the word. It seemed to sink deep into the
hearts and take root there, and a harvest of souls is the result.
The pastor thinks the converts were more intelligent than usual,
and he imputed it to the instruction they had received in the
Sabbath-school. My method of instruction is, to expound the
Scriptures verse by verse, as read by each scholar, making special
application to each one individually, and so each one feels as if
he had a portion.

Sabbath before last, I had the blest privilege of seeing
forty-three of the converts all seated together in the front seats,
and it was to me an affecting sight. All ages were represented
there from the little child to the man of grey hairs.

I spoke to them of the joy it gave me to see them occupying such
a position, and of the joy to the angels of God over them, for
if there is joy in heaven among the angels over one sinner that
repenteth, how much more joy over such a number as I saw before me.

I read to them, “A charge to those who have just joined the
Church,” sent to me a few days before by Samuel B. Schieffelin
of New York, which seemed providentially to have come at that
time. They all listened with profound attention and seemed much
interested, and I trust a good and lasting impression was made upon
them.

After the reading, I presented each one with a copy of the
_Charge_, as it was in little book form, with which they seemed to
be much gratified.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

Facts About the Taught and the Teachers.

MRS. ALFRED CONNET, McLEANSVILLE.

We have been here seventeen months. During this time I have
refrained from expressing myself in regard to the negroes and our
work among them. Every day we are more and more convinced of their
deep degradation; in fact, it is entirely beyond anything we had
imagined.

They seem to be guilty of the whole category of sins, but,
perhaps, their untruthfulness is most prominent. We cannot have
a self-reporting system in school, but there are some noble
exceptions to the general rule.

The most pitiable objects are those women who have families, but
never had husbands. One such woman last fall told me that she was
going to gather “shoemake” (shumac) leaves that week, and get her
a pair of shoes. Saturday afternoon, she stopped on her way home
from the store. “Well, Aunty, did you get your shoes?” “No; Mr.
F. showed me so much purty caliker that I bought me a dress.” She
already had about a dozen calico dresses. “But what will you do for
shoes?” “I don’t know; but I prays to the good Lord to keep me from
getting sick when I get my feet wet.” I guess He heard her, for she
is well. In contrast with this, the woman who washes for us saves
up her wages and buys just what she and her child really need.

The women have not made as much advancement as the men; but there
is good reason for this. They have gone to the field as regularly
as the men, and have had their cooking and housework to do; and,
in addition to this, they have borne a child every year or two.
When they come to church they have these small children to care
for. They were pleased when they learned that the “new minister”
was glad to see them and their babies. It is hard to hold their
attention, they are so tired, and have so much to think about what
they shall eat and wear. We wish we could do them more good; but we
must turn our energies principally to the young.

Sin and temptation beset the young girls on every side, and, alas!
too many of them yield. One asked me in regard to that terrible,
nameless crime. I told her that the life of the child was just as
sacred before birth as after birth. She said that the crime was
quite common here. Mr. C. has since preached against it.

Faith in God is very strong in some of them. One dear Aunty, who
has a very large family, and much to do, said: “When I feels so
tired, I just ask the Lord to give me strength to finish this
washing, or whatever I am doing, and he does it.” Her husband is
our Sunday-school Superintendent, and their children are the best
educated of any in the neighborhood. This family belongs to three
races—white, black and red—the latter predominating.

Some of the people seemed to get the idea that we were so anxious
for their children to attend school that they could dictate to
us, and they encouraged their children to rebel against necessary
government. One girl who ran away from school wrote a note
acknowledging her wrong and asking forgiveness; of course she was
gladly received back. Seven young men and two girls are doing their
own cooking so that they can remain longer. Five others are paying
board.

We have some very dull scholars. We have some bright ones. One
young man, fourteen months ago, did not know his letters. Now he
reads in National Third Reader and United States history, has
commenced grammar and geography, and is in fractions in arithmetic.
One pupil, who is a minister, is over thirty years of age. Three
other scholars are twenty-nine. Nearly all the larger ones are
teachers, or are preparing to teach. I think they will do much good
for their people.

I may be mistaken, but it seems to me that the negro does not
investigate or reason much, but acts according to his feelings.
Even the babies do not tear up their playthings to see what is
inside of them.

They are full of signs and superstitious notions. Our little girl,
Addie, showed a very small hen’s egg to some little girls. One of
them said: “My mother never allows us to take one into the house,
it is bad luck; but it is good luck to throw it over the house, and
we always do that.”

Mr. C. and I both teach six hours per day. Sometimes after school
we take the carriage and go to see some sick person. Last week
we went three miles to see one poor sick woman, who has lost the
use of one eye and is nearly blind in the other. She is a great
sufferer, but said, “My many afflictions and tribulations bring me
near the Lord, and I am so proud to see you all.” Last Saturday we
went four miles to see an old man who is probably on his death-bed.
He was sixty-three years a slave, is a Christian, has united with
the church since we came, and said that if he never met us here on
earth again, he hoped to in heaven. We sent him some food suitable
for him.

We see so much destitution that we can’t help giving until we feel
it. We do almost entirely without butter, and frequently without
sugar. We live very plainly, but contentedly. One man told in
church how much good it did him, when Mr. C. visited him last
summer, and assured him that his child was not past recovery. It
was a long ride of fourteen miles on horseback under a burning
Southern sun; but it greatly encouraged these humble Christians.
They are so ignorant that when they get sick, they think somebody
has poisoned them. They do not seem to have any confidence in each
other. One young woman, who spent five years with Miss Douglass,
assured me that she would not take medicine from a colored doctor,
if he was ever so well educated—“Because I am afraid he might be
mad at me and poison me.” It seems discouraging when years of good
training fail to eradicate such silly notions.

We are in a Ku Klux neighborhood, twenty white families within a
mile of us; but only three of these have ever made us a social call.

Our children have no associates. I am glad that there are six of
them and not just one or two.

We are obliged to keep one of the older children out of school to
take care of the babies, aged two and four years. I think it would
be a sin to leave them in the care of any of these colored people,
the greater part of each day. They are so ignorant and sinful and
superstitious, that I am sure they would poison their young minds.
Perhaps that is the reason the Southern people have given so much
trouble, they have had such ignorant nurses.

Our Sunday-school is large and doing well. We have large classes
because we have so few competent teachers; we are trying to train
others. Church services are well attended. Our work is made up
of lights and shades, but we like it, and thank the Lord that He
permits us to be humble workers in this part of His vineyard.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

A Struggling Church—A Growing Temperance Work—Hindrances.

REV. J. R. McLEAN, NO. 1 MILLER STATION.

The school is doing well. I have enrolled 67 now, and have larger
scholars than at any time before. The Sunday-school is growing in
numbers and also in interest, and its work has had great power over
the people here for good.

The church has been pulling together quite well, and has raised
towards the work here about $30. A number of the people are not
able to do anything, for they need some one to help them to get
bread. None have joined the church this year thus far; still I hope
to have some come in before the year closes.

We have our house all ceiled inside, and now we are trying to get
it painted. I _do_ wish we could find some one to give us some
singing books, both for Sunday-school and church. We have only
three that we can use in worship. I like the “Songs of Devotion,”
but then anything else will do if we can get that.

The Temperance Society is doing good, but there is room for it to
do much more. At our meeting last Sabbath, five joined us. The band
numbers now about 50. Some, as might be expected, have broken their
pledges. I find it is those who are trained in our schools, and
those only, that take hold of our principles.

O, if more could be done for the children, and for a larger number
of them, there would be some hope for the race yet! What can be
done for them?

The white people are doing nothing to help them, as I shall tell
you when I get to it. But the old ones find it hard to leave off
the habits of slavery, which have been going on so long that they
have taken deep root, and how they are to be dug out I cannot tell.
But will not our Heavenly Father overlook many of these wicked
habits!

Our church grows slowly because we are trying all the time to get
the people out of their old ways, which most of the people like
best, and so they are held by the other churches.

The large rice planters are doing nothing for them, only to keep
them on their farms and get all the work out of them they can, and
pay them as little as possible for their work. How is this done?

By giving them great feasts on the Sabbath. At these feasts they
have the colored people come into the big house (this means the
white people’s house) and shout for them, as it is called here, but
I call it dancing. They are given ginger snaps, rum and wine. This
kind of a party, or feast, or shout, was given last Sunday (they
are called by all these names). I am told that the colored people
on a certain plantation ate two boxes of ginger snaps, and drank
two gallons of wine and four gallons of rum. They have them on the
Sabbath so as not to stop the work.

This is the way they hold them. I said in my haste last Sabbath,
if the white man was to tell them that on the other side of Hell
they could get as much rum and wine as they could get free, many of
them would try to cross over. Many of them have given up all they
have for it, and will go anywhere to get it. This is awful, but it
is the truth. Our work will tell in the end in saving those that
believe. Please excuse any rough expressions, but this is not half
like it is. I am not able to tell just how the people do act here;
still they are my people, and I must do all for them I can. Pray
for me, that I may have courage to do my part of the work.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Lady’s Sunday-School and Missionary Work.

MISS O. B. BABCOCK, MACON.

My infant class in Sunday-school has grown from five to forty-five
since I came; and, as I visit all my scholars, it keeps me busy.
Monday afternoons I give to practising music in the Sunday-school;
Wednesday, we have our school prayer-meeting; Thursday, a mother’s
meeting, for prayer and conversation. This last has always been an
interesting feature in my labors among the poor, and I trust it
will be so here. Friday evening, I have a meeting for Bible-reading
and prayer in the cabins near by. The reading is greatly enjoyed
by the people. Sunday evenings I usually spend in the same
way. Saturday, at 2 P.M., I have the sewing-school, numbering
seventy-five, and weekly increasing in numbers and interest. The
mothers are delighted, and the children not less so. As the entire
burden of the work rests on me, with no white help, you can see
that my moments at home are all occupied with cutting and basting.
I have finally succeeded in getting some colored teachers, and may,
in time, have help in preparing work. I try to visit the homes of
all the scholars, that I may know their condition and needs. This
is one of the very best means of access to the people, and helps
to fill up the Sunday-school with needy ones. I feel as much at
home as if I had always lived here, and can go to any part of the
city with perfect ease. I have visited Vineville, Unionville, East
Macon, Tybee, Sandy Bottom, etc., the suburbs of the city.

There was one dear old colored aunty here who was sick for months,
but always so tender and thoughtful of me that my visits were a
comfort and even pleasure. She went home last week, after a blessed
death, singing with her last breath: “I’se passed over Jordan!
Hallelu! Hallelu!” I wouldn’t have believed that I should miss her
as I do. I don’t find many like her.

I feel very grateful for the barrels that I have received; I
have received one barrel from Boston, a cask and barrel from
Newburyport, one from Wentworth, N. H., one from Chicago. I have
written letters to nine different Sunday-schools, and keep up a
constant correspondence with my own church and Sunday-school, also
with the Ladies’ Society in it. This was at first a burden to me,
but it becomes easier and more of a pleasure. I find I have made
150 calls during January, and though this is not a large number,
still it implies a great many miles of walking. I often can make
but one or two calls in half a day, the distances are so great
and there is no way to ride. I have spent a great many hours in
teaching children their A B C’s and reading to them. I carry
primers with me and find plenty of teaching to do.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Communion Season—District Meetings.

MISS E. W. DOUGLAS, McINTOSH, LIBERTY CO.

It was our Communion Sabbath and eleven united with the church,
one by letter. Five were baptized, four by sprinkling, one by
immersion. While a few went to the water to witness that ordinance,
the many gathered in the church for a season of prayer, and I think
that hour gave tone to the services of the day. I have seldom,
if ever, seen so much quietness and seriousness in so large a
gathering of this emotional people as there was that day. I refer
to the greetings after the close of the service. There is usually
much loud talking and laughing. The lesson of the morning hour was
that they should not forget that the object of the Lord’s table
was not to draw a crowd together to meet one another, but to meet
the Lord and “remember” Him, and the chapter read and explained by
the pastor when he returned from the water led our thoughts to the
Crucified One. Three of those who united with the church professed
conversion during the week of prayer.

As the members of this church are so widely scattered that it is
difficult for the pastor to visit them often, they are arranged in
seven districts, each having its “watchman,” whose duty it is to
sustain district prayer-meetings and to report to the pastor any
thing needing his attention. I have attended one of these district
meetings, and hope to attend at least one every week.

       *       *       *       *       *


Church and School must Work Together.

REV. S. E. LATHROP, MACON.

During the last session of the Georgia Conference at Savannah, a
debate took place on the subject of the church and school work as
of necessity going together in this Southern field, which impressed
me deeply. It was mainly carried on by the young colored brethren,
both ministers and laymen, and in matter and manner showed that
they knew whereof they spoke, and were deeply impressed with its
importance. Any person who may have doubted the vital necessity
of the school to the church work here, would surely have been
convinced by the earnest arguments of these brethren, most of
whom came to the church through the educational department of the
mission work.

Said one young preacher: “The school is the primary department
of the church. It trains the children and youth to think, and
hence to accept of a thoughtful religion like ours, instead of
the mere shouting and emotional style to which the ignorant and
untrained cling. The true religion is one which teaches us to love
God and our neighbor supremely, and this can be done best by the
intelligence which comes only through the school training.”

Another said: “Our people never had any mental training, or any
encouragement to think for themselves, and did not know how, until
the A. M. A. schools awakened these powers. We, as a race, are not
naturally a reasoning people. We are too much governed by impulse,
by emotion, by instinct, by passions, and too easily offended, with
little self-control. Slavery was a very poor mental discipline,
and when freedom came, there were many extravagant ideas and
ignorant impulses that led the people to extremes. The utter lack
of public schools for our race made us at first prize most highly
the advantages offered so generously by the A. M. A. Afterward,
as the slumbering intelligence slowly awoke, we saw not only the
intrinsic value of education, but we were more able to appreciate
the kindness which suggested the sending of these faithful teachers
and missionaries. Gratitude prompted us, in many cases, to break
away from the old superstitious churches, and growing enlightenment
helps us to see more clearly the superior advantages of an
intelligent religion. The consecrated teachers of the Association
have many of them done grand missionary work, although very few of
them are open to the charge of sectarianism. Congregationalism, by
its broad, liberal, unsectarian policy of churches and schools, has
done a vast amount of good to all the other denominations. They
are being leavened more and more by true intelligence, and the
ancient foundations of ignorance and hierarchy are slowly giving
way. Upon their ruins shall arise more beautiful temples to God,
more enlightened worship, more worthy conceptions of daily life and
religious duty.”

Another speaker claimed that “The day-school brings about sympathy
of the day scholars with the church and Sunday-school work. The
religious exercises of the schools cause the impression that there
is a soul as well as a brain to be trained. The knowledge that the
teachers are universally engaged in Sunday-school work, by the very
law of cause and effect, calls attention to that work also. The
sympathy that always exists between the preacher and teachers, and
the hearty interest in the children that is shown by the ministers,
cause both parents and children to think that the work is all one,
as it really is. New England ‘blossoms as the rose’ to-day, because
the church and the school-house have always been built together,
and in their mutual work are as inseparable as the Siamese twins.
May the day hasten when it shall be so in the South.”

The young delegate from Atlanta said: “The first church of Atlanta
is the outgrowth of the Storrs School, whose devoted teachers have
always sought after the spiritual as well as the mental welfare
of their scholars. They have been true missionaries and worthy
co-laborers in the Gospel with the pastors of the church.”

A young preacher, who is also the successful teacher of the
day-school in his parish, said that “The training of the school
children to be punctual at the morning roll-call, teaches also
the very necessary habit of punctuality at church, in which our
people are so deficient. The promptness, the discipline of order,
cleanliness, good behavior and attention, which is taught in
school, has also a corresponding effect in the church services.
If our people were educated and enlightened, perhaps the church
could get on without the school; but in their ignorance they must
be taught to think, before they can get a right idea of Bible
religion. The intellect must go with the heart, preparing the way
for the coming of the Lord. Superstition is still a formidable
enemy in our church work, and nothing but sanctified intelligence
will ever defeat that adversary.”

Said another delegate: “I came into the church through the
night-school. I was working hard all day and could not attend
day-school, but went at night and studied as well as I could. There
I first heard of the Congregational church. I found by inquiry that
it was a church which had been very active in the anti-slavery
times, and believed in free speech, free schools, free churches and
equal rights in church and state. That attracted me, and I inquired
more, until finally God forgave my sins and I united with the
church. I love more and more the freedom and fraternity I find, and
I believe in the church, which makes so much of schools, and has
educated so many of my people.”

Said another: “The church must go with the school, because
education alone only sharpens the mind for greater mischief. In
the very nature of things, every school teacher ought to be a true
Christian, to exert a Christ-like influence in the school, to
encourage pupils to attend church and Sunday-school. The teacher’s
power is greater over scholars here than in the North.”

Dr. Roy spoke of the many mission Sunday-schools and churches which
had sprung up around Talladega College, the result of labor by the
Christian students. He also recalled the history of the mission
schools in India, which, on account of some complaints, were at one
time given up, to the great detriment of the missions.

This is but an outline of the remarks made upon this important
subject, which would have cheered the hearts of all philanthropists
to hear. The decorum and general manner of expression throughout
would have done honor to the most dignified deliberative body.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Notes from Marion.

MRS. GEO. E. HILL.

Sundays are our grand working days. As we have services morning and
night, the afternoon is left free to meet the people in other ways.

Sometimes the women come to the “Home” for a prayer-meeting, or
the little children come in to hear Bible-stories told or read.
Sometimes I have a Bible-reading for _boys_. They come, bringing
their Bibles, and pencil and paper, and I read them some of the
precious verses marked in my own Bible, or choose some story like
that of the Shunamite, which they are not familiar with.

Many of them read imperfectly, and so lose the full meaning of
the words, and we find that the “old, old story” becomes new and
strangely sweet as we read it aloud to them, with fresh emphasis
and expression.

An old man once said to me, “If I had a hundred dollar bill, I’d
give it in a minute if I could read the Bible.”

Last Sunday, I invited several boys to come and see me. I seated
them round a table, and gave them eight or ten copies of “Life
and Light” and “Missionary Herald” to look over. Choosing for my
text the _pictures_, I talked an hour with them, and selected an
interesting fact or incident for each one to give that night at our
monthly missionary meeting.

A fine, large missionary map has been donated to the church by the
Sunday school in Weymouth, Mass., which is very useful in showing
the people the great world, about which they know so little.

The girls’ sewing-class has sent $38 to the Mendi Mission.

Our Sunday-school numbers about eighty, and is the pleasantest
and most orderly school I have seen at the South. The children
come to their classes neatly dressed, after the Saturday’s washing
and ironing, and give quiet attention during the hour. We find
blackboard illustrations helpful in fixing the thoughts of the
lesson. One Sunday, twenty maps of Palestine were handed in, in
connection with the lesson.

The Sunday-school concerts are a special attraction, and are
attended by many from other churches. At our last, several
prominent white citizens were present.

We wish our friends at the North could see how well these colored
children carry through the Bible Exercises and other recitations.

Every Monday at 4 P. M., the women meet at the “Home” for an hour
of prayer. They have no clocks to tell the time by; but as most of
them live in sight, I hang a white flag on the gatepost, fifteen
minutes before the hour. We call this our “Gospel flag!”

The prayers of these women are marked by an unquestioning trust.
They ask directly for what they want, without getting entangled in
the formalities of more educated Christians, and they evidently
feel that they speak into a listening ear.

Their faces often beam with pleasure as they hear the reading
of the Bible. “What a glorious chapter this is!—it _feels so
holy_!”—one of them said.

They need these hours of prayer, for life with them is hard, and
pinched, and poor, and in their small houses of one or two rooms,
full of little children, washing and ironing, and cooking, these
mothers have no “closet” where they may shut themselves in for
communion with Jesus, and get patience and strength for the day.
But are not their prayers heard, as they stand by the tub, washing
for the rich?—or bend over the cradle, in which, for some, there is
always a baby—or cook the meal, which to us would seem so scanty?
A woman once told me, that in slavery times, she went down in the
garden, among the butter-beans, to pray—and there she had such a
season of joy, that when she came in, and took her place at her
master’s table, to brush away the flies, “’pear’d like glory was in
de fly-brush!”

For the last five months, we have had an afternoon school for
children under 14 years of age, here at the “Home.” A large room
on the back gallery was fitted up for them, and here twenty-five
children come every day and are taught from 1 to 4 o’clock.

Besides the ordinary book lessons, their young teacher instructs
them in good manners, neatness and simple fancy-work, and gives
each day a half-hour talk on birds, plants or animals, illustrated
by pictures on the blackboard.

The children are quick to learn and eager for all kinds of
information, which they take home and repeat to their parents, when
the work of the day is done.

Some of these parents who cannot even read themselves, are “proud”
to hear their children talk intelligently about Washington, or
Napoleon, or Henry Bergh.

This is our third winter among the Freedmen, but we feel that we
are just learning how to be missionaries, and how to get at the
people, and meet them in their great needs. Are we happy in our
work? Yes; happy and content. Even in our “small corner” we have
the Master’s presence, and feel it a privilege to work among His
lowly ones.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

A Brother’s Devotion.

MRS. G. STANLEY POPE, TOUGALOO.

When we first came to Tougaloo, two years ago last fall, we found
a young man who had been here a few days, Frank H——. He had run
away from his uncle, because of his cruelty to him. He was then
about nineteen years old. He was anxious to get an education;
and although he had not a cent of money, he proved to be such a
faithful boy, both at his books and at work, that with but little
help he managed to earn his board and pay his way in school. He
had been a very wicked boy, but Christ wrought a great change in
him, and before the year closed, he became a most conscientious
Christian.

He remained right here, working on the farm during the summer, and
studying when school was in session, until about two months ago,
when he left and went to work. He had often spoken of a sister who
was still with his uncle, and he was anxious to get her away, and
have her in school. A little over a week ago, he received his pay
for his work, and went to get his sister. He tried to persuade
his uncle to let her go, but he would not listen to it, and said
she should never leave him. Frank found out from her that she was
greatly abused, and that she wanted to leave and come with him. She
is not more than fourteen years old, and small for her age, but
when Frank found her she was burning brush and helping to clear up
new land. Her whole work has been in the field, plowing and hoeing,
picking cotton and “pulling fodder.”

Frank finally made up his mind to “kidnap” her; so a little after
dark, when she was feeding the mules, he told her his plan, and
they left at once for the swamp, as it would be less easy to track
them there. After going through that, they walked till nearly
midnight to get to a railroad station farther away than the one
they usually went to, as Frank knew his uncle would be down there
in the morning to find them. The girl, whose name by the way is
Leah, had no clothing on except a cotton dress and a bit of an
old shawl over her head; so, early in the morning, Frank went
to a store and got calico for two dresses, and hired them made,
both being finished (after a fashion) by night, he paying a dollar
apiece for the work. He also bought her some shoes and a few other
things, and a little after dark they took the cars for this place,
arriving here about midnight. Frank stayed over the Sabbath, and
then went back to his work to earn money to keep her in school. He
said to me, “she’s all the sister I’ve got, and I want her to do
well.” She did not know a letter, but she is quick and bright, and
during the few days she has been in school she has done well; she
knows nothing about housework, but is willing and tries to learn.
I asked her yesterday if she knew about God. “Not much.” “Have you
ever been to Sabbath-school?” “No.” “Ever been to church?” “Twice.”
“Do you know about Jesus?” “Never heard of him.”

Oh, Christian women of the North! do you need to go to India or
Turkey to find heathen? I assure you, Leah is not an isolated case;
she is a fair sample of thousands in the South.

Your “Woman’s Board of Missions” is doing a good work for God and
humanity. I would not underestimate its value; but while you are
responding so liberally to the calls for help from afar, are you
not forgetting this work of no less importance which lies nearer
to you, the work of giving Christian education to the despised and
degraded colored women of the South?

We are very sorry to have Frank out of school. He can not afford
it, neither can you afford it, for if he could be in school for
one or two years longer, he would make a very fair teacher for the
country schools.

He hopes to be here next year; but if he has to clothe himself and
his sister, and pay seven dollars apiece a month for their board,
I don’t see much chance for him. Does any one feel called upon to
take the responsibility of her board bill?

       *       *       *       *       *


Report

  _Of the State Superintendent of Public Education to His
  Excellency Governor J. M. Stone, and the Honorable Legislature of
  the State of Mississippi._

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

This institution, under the direction and control of the American
Missionary Association, is doing a most excellent work in the
education of the colored youth of the State. For a number of years
after its establishment an annual appropriation was made by the
State, supplementary to the funds contributed by the Society, and
a Board of Trustees was appointed on the part of the State. This
Board still exists; but inasmuch as the last Legislature failed
to make appropriation for the University, and as the property
belongs to the Missionary Society, it would appear to be useless.
The Principal, writing on the 20th of December, 1879, says:
“The improvement in the school is very marked. This is seen in
the general training of students, in the greater number who are
desiring to complete the regular course of study, the increased
number in attendance in the higher grades, in more frequent visits
from patrons, and by the friends it is making among the whites
where our students have been at work.

The management of the institution is admirable, its teachers
are superior, and everything connected with it is in excellent
condition, as I have had occasion to learn from personal
observation. As a recognition of the good work being done by the
American Missionary Association in the education and elevation of
the colored people of the State, it is recommended that a liberal
appropriation be made, that it may be rendered still more useful.”

                                             J. A. SMITH,
                              _State Supt. of Public Education_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Revival in the Central Church—Theological Department—Church
Dedication.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER.

The hope expressed in my last letter that I might have glad tidings
to send you, has been fully realized, and it is my happiness to
record one of the most precious revivals in the history of the
Central Church. I do not forget the history of the past four years,
and the seasons of spiritual awakening through which the church
has passed. The present movement differs from the preceding, if
at all, in a more intelligent grasp of the truth, and in a deeper
spiritual tone. The past summer was a time of preparation for the
scenes that were to follow. The Revival was the constant theme
of conversation and prayer. It was the one burden upon their
hearts. Sunday, January 4, the first day of the week of prayer,
was marked by evident signs of deepening interest. On that day,
eight were received to the church, of whom three came on profession
of their faith. For twenty-seven consecutive evenings, we met in
our lecture room. The Gospel was preached with directness and
earnestness. A “church in earnest” took hold of the work and
pressed it forward. Beginning with an audience of 75, the numbers
in constant attendance rapidly increased to 200. The interest
suffered no diminution to the last night, when six came forward to
the “mourners’ seats” with the cry, “Pray for us.” Some continued
in an anxious state for two, three or four weeks, while others,
coming in from motives of curiosity merely, were stricken down by
God’s Spirit, and as quickly brought into the light and liberty of
believers.

An old man of 70 years was brought into the Kingdom, and is as
happy as the youngest convert. Another, much in political life, and
who publicly said, “I have been an awful sinner,” seems now to be a
reformed and converted man.

Four of our University students have joyfully professed Christ.

While incidents occurred daily which touched our hearts, and added
to the tenderness and deep solemnity of our meetings, they cannot
of course be faithfully recorded, and I do not attempt it.

Let me say that there was no undue excitement, and not the
slightest approach to merely physical and emotional demonstrations.
The work was too intelligent, too spiritual for that. In prayer, in
song, and in appeal, human agency was forgotten, and the converting
power of the Divine Spirit was reverently recognized.

Sunday, Feb. 1st, was our “Feast of Ingathering.” Of the _thirty_
converted in the meetings, twenty-four were received to the
fellowship of the church, with two who came to us by letter. The
people brought flowers for the pulpit and communion-table. Of the
250 present in the audience, 150 received the sacrament. “The Lord
hath done great things for us whereof we are glad.”

_The Theological Department_ is larger than in any previous
year. It numbers twenty members, young men of zeal and promise,
not only willing but eager to be instructed in the truths and
doctrines of God’s word. Four of the class are ordained ministers,
of whom two are pastors of churches in New Orleans. Not all of
them have the ministry in view. Those who have not, are hoping
through this instruction to become more useful and efficient in
the church. Three theological lectures are given each week, and
there are besides sermons given by the students before the class
for criticism, and discussions on religious topics. Our great
lack is books of reference. We have no systems of theology, and
no commentaries to which the young men can have access. In the
“good time coming,” these we trust will be supplied, and so the
efficiency of the department be increased.

_Church Dedication._—In response to an earnest invitation from the
Congregational Church in New Iberia, I went down on Saturday, the
14th inst., to assist in the dedication of their new church. The
terrific windstorm of last September laid their tasteful and really
beautiful house of worship in ruins. The building was a total
wreck. The storm, as it swept up the bayou, left only desolation
in its track. The people, with commendable energy and self-denial,
bating not one jot of heart or hope, set themselves to the work of
rebuilding. They purchased more ground, put up a larger and better
building, and the machinery of the church is again in working
order. They have expended something like $450, and urgently need
$200 more for painting and furnishing. The people feel that they
have exhausted their resources. It is a noble enterprise, and
should be encouraged. Loyalty to our Congregational polity in
Louisiana should call forth a hearty response to their appeal. At
the service of dedication, the house was crowded to its utmost
capacity. Both morning and night the word was received with all
readiness and gladness of heart. Southern Louisiana is a beautiful
country, unsurpassed for productiveness, and should be dotted all
over with churches where the Gospel in its simplicity, clearness
and power may be preached. God speed the day!

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Revival in Fisk University.

PROF. H. S. BENNETT.

A quiet but deep work of grace has been in progress since the week
of prayer in our institution. The week of prayer was observed as
usual with us, but without any special increase of interest. The
question then came up, “Shall we pass through the year without our
usual work of grace?” This led to earnest prayer and consecration
on the part of teachers and Christian students. The result was
soon perceptible in greater earnestness among Christians, and
a wide-spread spirit of inquiry among the impenitent. At this
point the attendance on the half-hour prayer meetings was largely
increased. From six to ten inquirers presented themselves for
prayers from night to night, and from this time the work went
forward. Four students were converted on one Sabbath, and others
were brought out into the light. Thus the work went forward
hopefully but quietly, until, up to this time, fourteen students
have expressed a hope in Christ. This is the second season of
interest during the present scholastic year. Before Christmas, a
brief season of spiritual awakening brought seven students out
upon the Lord’s side, so that the results of the year have been
twenty-one conversions. Several others are still inquiring, and the
work goes on, though with less manifest power than a few weeks ago.

The results of the revival have been seen in the deepening of the
earnestness of Christians, so that much of the power of the good
work does not appear.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHURCH—CHRISTMAS—BIBLES.

REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH, WASH. TER.

The first Sabbath in this year we received five members into our
church, three of them on profession of faith, two of whom were our
older scholars. One of the scholars whom we received a year ago
died some time since. It was on the Sabbath, and after his brother,
also a member, had returned from church, he took his brother’s hand
and held it until he died, urging him to hold steadfast to his
Christian profession to the end.

We have, to our great regret, been obliged to discipline two
others for misconduct, suspending them for three months.

On Christmas I arranged so that a dinner was prepared for the
oldest Indians, who are unable to support themselves. They enjoyed
it, coming through storm, snow and cold in order to get it. It was
the first affair of the kind we have had for them alone. Between
Government and the Indians, feasts have been prepared for the
Indians in general, but never for the old decrepit ones. They are
nearly always neglected.

For more than two years I have been serving as Local Agent of our
Territorial Bible Society. On making my report for the last year,
I find that I have sold books to the amount of $32.19, viz. thirty
Bibles and forty-five Testaments. Of these, twenty-one Bibles and
eighteen Testaments have been bought by the Indians, for which they
have paid $22.72. These have varied in price from the five-cent
Testament to the royal octavo Bible, gilt, reference, the latter
having been for a newly married couple, both of whom have been in
school.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S.
H. Willey D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D.,
Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E.
P. Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John
Kimball, E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR NEW FIELDS.

It will be remembered by such of our friends as keep a close
watch of our movements, that on or about the first of February,
we commenced work in three new fields, Oroville, Grass Valley and
Marysville. They will read with interest the subjoined extracts
from letters already received:

_Marysville._—I requested Lee Haim to stop at Marysville, on his
way to Oroville, and spend the Sabbath there, preaching as he had
opportunity. I also invited Lem Chung, our helper at Sacramento,
to accompany him, and to spend a week there assisting to start the
school. A postal from Lee Haim and Lem Chung, written in Chinese
and addressed to “The Brethren of the Congregational Association
of Christian Chinese,” has been translated for me as follows:
“Dear Brethren, We write to tell you that we arrived safely
in Marysville a little after 4 P. M. An hour later we went to
Chinatown, and on the street we preached to our countrymen. A large
crowd was gathered at first by our singing, and they listened to
both preaching and singing with great interest. At 7 o’clock the
same evening, we had so large an audience in our school-room that
many went away on account of lacking seats. Our hearts were filled
with joy, and we preached to them from the Chinese Testament, and
explained to them the meaning of the hymns we sang. We trust the
seed sown will soon spring up to a good harvest. Our countrymen
here in school treat us very kindly, and we know this is due to
your and Mr. Pond’s prayers. Please pray for us continually.”

Miss Mattie A. Flint, the teacher, writes: “I have 25 names on the
roll, with an average attendance of about 15. They all take a great
deal of interest, especially in the singing. Already they can sing
three or four of the hymns on the card very well. We have organized
a Sunday-school. Visitors drop in occasionally and express much
interest. I myself am deeply interested, and will do all in my
power to teach them of their Heavenly Father. They are learning to
read very fast.” The Christian co-operation of Rev. P. L. Carden,
pastor of the Presbyterian Church in Marysville, has much to do
with the good promise of the work there.

_Grass Valley._—Rev. F. B. Perkins reports orally, that he
has succeeded in renting a school-room already tolerably well
furnished, and expects to pay the rent by donations made upon the
field. The average attendance thus far is but eight—owing partly,
perhaps, to the fact that the school-room is rather remote from the
Chinese quarter. But there is a good prospect of increase. I wish I
could dare to send a helper to each of these points.

_Oroville._—Lee Haim wrote as follows after spending a fortnight in
his new field: “The school was opened on the 5th day of this month”
(the room not being ready before). “Only had school two evenings.
Then we have vacation two days for New Year’s. At New Year’s day I
made a call at every store (Chinese) in Oroville. On the second day
of our new year I went to the other Chinese town three miles from
here, and when I reached there I first made a call on every store.
After that I preach to them and sing several hymns in Chinese in
the opening” (_i. e._, of his street service). “It seems to me,
by my own judgment (so far as I could judge) they were pleased to
hear. Twenty were present at our last prayer-meeting, and when
the school was opened again, the school-room was quite crowded. I
hope the Almighty God will send His Holy Spirit to remove (move)
their heart, and still lead them coming; that they may hear this
wonderful word, and repent, to be the children of God.”

At a later date Miss Waterbury writes: “We are going on very well,
and have as many as we can teach with any degree of profit. Last
night I should judge there were fifty or more. It is impossible to
tell the exact number, as many come in, take a lesson, and leave
before the school is closed. Two-thirds, I should think, began at
A B C. Many of these are now spelling words. [After less than a
fortnight’s instruction.—W. C. P.] Last night I had twelve or more
in their letters, and taught them from a card hung upon the wall,
till lungs and strength gave out. Among them were two little boys
about six years old, uncommonly smart and quick. Several old men
have been spelling “dog,” “man,” etc. with great patience. The
school is a new thing and creates much interest. Sometimes several
will crowd around, looking over the shoulder and listening eagerly
to the one who reads. I do not think this will always last, but I
think there is a great field here for good. Oh, to be filled with
the spirit of God, that I may be the channel of grace to these dark
souls! Who is sufficient for these things?”

I add an extract from a letter from Miss Helen E. Clarke, teacher
in one of our old fields—Santa Barbara. It is written in the
familiar terms of a friendly correspondence, and not at all as a
formal report; but it gives, for that, all the more graphic picture
of the “ups and downs” of our work:

“I am very sorry to say that Ah Sing has left Santa Barbara.
We shall miss him very much in the school. He went to the gold
mines in Mexico, I think. He said he would write you when he got
there. Gin Gem took the wash-house, [previously carried on by Ah
Sing.—W. C. P.] It makes quite a difference whom they have there,
and I am very glad he has it, for I think him a very good boy. He
said the reason he wanted the place was, so that he could come to
school every night. He and Gin Foy expect to unite with our church
to-morrow.”


EDWARD P. SANFORD,

a director in our California Auxiliary, from its organization, for
many years Superintendent of the Chinese Sunday-school of the First
Congregational Church in Oakland, was transferred to the church
above on Feb. 16th. A fearless friend of all who are unbefriended
by the world at large, an eager, efficient and prayerful follower
of Jesus, a strong pillar in the church, a man who united a careful
and intense energy and an unflinching and unspotted integrity,
with the gentleness and kindliness sometimes supposed to adorn
womanhood alone, genial, generous, helpful everywhere,—how _can_ we
spare him? But how high and holy and beneficent must be the service
prepared for him above, since the Master who never mistakes,
thought good to take him there!

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A VOYAGE TO AFRICA—PROF. CHASE TO HIS FOUR-YEAR-OLD BOY.

       *       *       *       *       *


MY DEAR LITTLE BOY:

It is a good many days since papa left you and mamma, and he has
been sailing on the water most all of the time. I was in the boat
that you and mamma left me on twelve days, as many as you have
fingers on both hands and two more. Then I was on land three
nights. Then I came on this ship, and have slept on it as many
nights as you and mamma both have fingers on your two hands. The
little beds on this boat are just like those you saw.

The boat stopped a little while at some places, and I saw people
without much clothes, like the pictures you saw in the book, and
little boys and girls, as big as you, who had not any clothes at
all. They did not seem to care; but I think they would feel very
fine if they had nice little sailor suits like yours. These black
people eat real funny. On the little boats that came out to get
things from this big boat they had little stoves with one pot. A
boy about as big as Johnnie C——, with no clothes but one piece
tied around him—no hat, no shirt, no coat, no pants, no socks, no
shoes—made the fire and cooked the food. He took some fishes that
he had caught in the water and cut them into small pieces, and then
took some rice, and put the pieces of fish and the rice into the
pot over the fire with some water in it. Then he put something into
a hole in a big log and pounded it with the end of a shovel-handle,
and when he had pounded it enough he poured it on the fish and rice
in the pot. By and by he poured what was in the pot into a large
tray and all the men began to eat. But they did not eat as we do.
They did not have any plates, nor any knives, nor any forks. They
just had one spoon. One took this spoon and ate a little, and then
handed it to another and he ate a little. The others put their
hands into the tray and took out a handful of the fish and rice
and made it up into a ball, as boys where you are make snow-balls,
and then ate it as people eat apples. I don’t think you would like
to have your papa and mamma eat in that way, and I don’t think
you would like to eat just fish and rice, no meat, no potatoes,
no bread, no butter, no pie, no cake. But the rich people here in
Africa have _some_ nice things to eat. Mr. Smith bought a lot of
nice oranges for about a cent apiece. They were real sweet and
juicy and do not make my teeth sore, and we have some real nice
bananas—I wish you and mother had some of them—and where we are to
stop next, pine-apples grow.

It is not cold here as it is where you are. The sun is real hot
and the trees are all covered with leaves and oranges, and bananas
and pine-apples are growing on the trees and just getting ripe. I
expect to leave this ship to-morrow. The next day will be Sunday,
and we shall spend that day in Sierra Leone. Then we are to ride in
a small boat that black men will make go with their oars, like that
boat the boy took us to see the soldiers in last summer, when you
were just a little afraid it would tip over and spill us out into
the water. Don’t you remember?

So in four days more we are to stop going, going, going on the
water, and live on the land in a house once more.

                                     From your loving papa,
                                                      T. N. C.

P. S.—We reached Sierra Leone Sunday morning, and found a little
steamer bound for Good Hope, to which we have been transferred. We
went ashore yesterday and attended church at the Wesleyan Mission,
at which a native minister preached, and took lunch with Rev. Dr.
Godman, who is in charge of the Wesleyan Missions. The boat is to
leave at 12 to-day, and we plan to go ashore meanwhile.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR FEBRUARY, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $394.68.

    Andover. Mrs. Eldridge Poor                               $2.00
    Augusta. John Dorr                                        15.00
    Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       151.18
    Bethel. ESTATE of Mrs. Sarah J. Chapman, by A.
      W. Valentine, Ex.                                       20.00
    Blanchard. “A Friend of Missions”                          5.00
    Brownville. Hon. A. H. Merrill                           100.00
    Dennysville. Mrs. Samuel Eastman                           5.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch.                                10.60
    Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Minot. “A Friend”                                          1.00
    Monson. Rev. R. W. Emerson                                20.90
    Orland. “A Friend”                                         7.00
    Orono. “A Friend”                                          5.00
    Searsport. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Winslow. Cong Ch. and Soc.                                20.00
    Yarmouth. First Ch. and Soc.                              17.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $374.27.

    Alstead. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.11
    Amherst. W. D. L.                                          0.50
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.35
    Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.80
    Concord. “A Friend”                                        1.00
    Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             11.01
    East Pembroke. John Rand, deceased, by W.
      Martin.                                                  2.00
    Fisherville. J. C. Martin                                 10.00
    Fitzwilliam. Dea. Rufus Phillips                           5.00
    Gilmanton Iron Works. Cent Charitable Society
      of Cong. Ch.                                             7.30
    Keene. “A Friend,” $100; Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $63                                                    163.00
    Langdon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $36.11; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $10.                                              46.11
    Lyndeborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.25
    Marlborough. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C.
      _for Talladega C._
    New Boston. Presb. Ch. and Soc.                           11.10
    Plymouth. Cong. Soc., $24.14; H. W. H. $1.                25.14
    Rochester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             25.00
    Salem. Mrs. G. D. K.                                       0.50
    Troy. M. W. W.                                             1.00


  VERMONT, $207.84.

    Berlin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                11.00
    Coventry. M. C. Pearson                                    5.00
    Craftsbury. Correction. ESTATE of Mrs. Deborah
      W. Lewis in March number should read Mrs.
      Deborah W. Loomis
    East Hardwick. Cong. Sab. Sch. (adl.)                      8.00
    Hardwick. —— _for Ag’l Dept., Talladega. C._               5.00
    Hartford. Second Cong. Ch., $93.61.
      Incorrectly ack. in Feb. number
    Jamaica. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $27.57; Centre
      Ch., $11.06                                             38.63
    North Cambridge. Miss M. K.                                1.00
    North Ferrisburgh. ESTATE of Sylvia Dean, by
      J. M. and W. L. Dean, Ex’s                              15.00
    Pittsfield. Dea. H. O. G.                                  0.50
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    64.20
    Salisbury. J. F.                                           1.00
    Saxtons River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          3.00
    Shelburn. “A Friend”                                      15.00
    Strafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    West Danville. “A Friend”                                  0.51
    Windsor. “A thank offering for a departed
      Mother” by her daughter                                 20.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,615.07.

    Ballard Vale. J. L.                                        1.00
    Barre. Evan Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. JOHN S.
      ROPER, L. M.                                            30.00
    Boston. Mt. Vernon Ch., ad’l $20; G. F.
      Kendall, $5                                             25.00
    Boxford. Miss Mary L. Sawyer, $2, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._ Mrs. J. K. Coles’ S. S.
      Class $1, for _Savannah, Ga._                            3.00
    Brockton. Mrs. T. C. P. 50c.—Bbl. of C.                    0.50
    Brookline. Sophia B. White                                10.00
    Buckland. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Amesbury. Mrs A. L. Bayley                                20.00
    Amherst. Wm. M. Graves $20—Miss Coit and Mrs.
      Field, Box of C., _for Talladega C._                    20.00
    Andover. Rev. A. D. Smith, $2.15, _for Freight
      on books, for Talladega C._;—“Friends,” by
      C. E. Towle, Box of C., _for Savannah,
      Ga._—Bbl. of C.                                          2.15
    Ashfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., $14, by
      Clarissa Hall, Treas.; B. Howes, $1.30                  15.30
    Cambridgeport. Miss H. E. M., 50c; Mrs. H. L.
      B., 50c.                                                 1.00
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              69.81
    Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                        61.93
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         24.90
    Danvers. Maple St. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Dedham. Young Ladies’ Mite Box, $7; Ladies’
      Soc., $3, _for Teacher, Selma, Ala._                    10.00
    Dunstable. Cong. Ch.                                      20.00
    Essex. “Howard,” _for Chapel, Wilmington, N.
      C._                                                  1,000.00
    Fall River. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      12.75
    Granville Corners. Mrs. Clement Holcomb                    5.00
    Groveland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              4.00
    Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           7.00
    Hanover. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        20.00
    Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Harvard. Evan Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Indian
      M._                                                      6.25
    Holliston. Bible Christians of District No. 4,
      by John Batcholder                                      25.00
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch., Bbl. of table
      linen, and $5, _for Freight, for Savannah,
      Ga._                                                     5.00
    Lenox. A.J. Holman                                         5.00
    Loudville. Mrs. W. S. R.                                   1.00
    Marion. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                                 5.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., $25, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._; Hervey Goodell, $2; John
      P. Lovell, $2; Mrs. H. C., $1: D. B., 50c.;
      Tyler Waters, $5                                        35.50
    Millford. —— (of which, $2.50, _for Indians_,
      and $1.50, _for Chinese M._)                             7.00
    Monson. Miss Anna M. Bradford, $2; E. A. W.,
      50c.                                                     2.50
    New Bedford. “A Lady Friend”                              30.00
    Newburyport. Philip M. Lunt, $25.50; Foster W.
      Smith, $5; J. D., $1                                    31.50
    Northborough. Mrs. A. E. D. F.                             0.50
    Palmer. ESTATE of Mrs. Betsy Barton, by Wilson
      Brainard and John C. Brainard, Ex’s                    489.80
    Pittsfield. S Frissell, M.D.                               1.50
    Roxbury. S. W. B. and J. F. 50c. ea.                       1.00
    Salem. N. C. Robbins, $5, _for rebuilding
      barn, Talladega C._; South Cong. Ch., Bbl.
      of C. _for Talladega, Ala._                              5.00
    Saxonville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            30.92
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                    112.86
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.00
    South Dartmouth. Mrs Mercy P. Staples                      2.00
    South Deerfield. “A Friend”                                5.00
    South Hadley. Mt. Hol. Sem., “A Friend”                    2.00
    Sudbury. “A Friend”                                        2.00
    Taunton. Sewing Soc. of Winslow Ch., $25, _for
      Student Aid_; also Box of C., and $2, _for
      Freight, for Talladega, Ala._                           27.00
    Tewksbury. Mrs. Geo. Lee, _for Savannah, Ga._              5.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
    Waquoit. Mrs. V. N. H.                                     1.00
    Westborough. Evan Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $133;—Mrs. Sarah Fisher, Box of C., and
      $1.50, _for Freight, for McIntosh,
      Ga._—Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of C.                    134.50
    Westfield. Mrs. H. O. C.                                   1.00
    Westford. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                  1.56
    West Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $32.75; “A
      Friend” $10                                             42.75
    Williamstown. A. M.                                        0.50
    Wilmington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Woburn. Mrs. G. A. B.                                      0.50
    Worcester. Union Ch. quar. coll., $47.59; “A
      Friend,” $1; Mrs. M. P. J., 50c.; G. M. P.,
      50c; Benj. C. Moore, a Melodeon                         49.59
    Worcester Co. “A Friend,” to const. MRS. MARY
      W. HARRIMAN, L. M.                                      30.00
    —— “A Friend,” _for Communion Service for
      Midway Ch., Macon, Ga._                                 44.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $5.00.

    Tiverton Four Corners. Amicable Cong. Soc.                 5.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,159.57.

    Bethlehem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             17.50
    Bridgeport. Rev. Chas. Beecher, $1.50, _for
      Freight_; J. B., $1                                      2.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                        83.70
    Buckingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             2.52
    Canton Centre. S. B. H.                                    1.00
    Collinsville. Cong. Ch., ad’l to const. MRS.
      MELISSA LANE. L. M.                                      2.00
    Cornwall Hollow. Mrs. H. S.                                1.00
    Guilford. Daniel Hand, $100; First Cong. Ch.,
      $20                                                    120.00
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            9.45
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford, $50; Cong. Ch.,
      $10.04                                                  60.04
    Hartford. South Cong. Ch., $150; Windsor Av.
      Cong. Ch., Mrs. C. T. Hillyer. $30, to
      const. MRS. DOTHA B. HILLYER, L. M.                    180.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               27.70
    Lyme. Grassy Hill Cong. Ch.                               16.00
    Mansfield Centre. J. L. Hinckley                           2.00
    Mount Carmel. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._ and to const.
      SAMUEL H. ARMSTEAD, L. M.                               30.00
    New Britain. Miss. Julia A. Kelsey, $5, _for
      Indian M._—Mrs. W. H. S., 50c.                           5.50
    New Haven. Alfred Walker, $5; Mrs. S. P. C.,
      $1; Rev S. W. Barnum, books (val. $12)                   6.00
    Newington. Laura. C. Kellogg                               3.00
    New London. M. A. R. Rogers                                2.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., ($10 of which _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._)                              115.21
    Norwich Town. First Cong. Ch.                             50.00
    Old Lyme. E. M. P.                                         1.00
    Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                                  70.00
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       13.00
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               19.47
    South Windsor. Second Cong. Ch., $25.84, and
      Sab. Sch., $11.27                                       37.11
    Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.75
    Thompsonville. D. P.                                       1.00
    Unionville. Cong. Ch.                                     55.53
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     491.59
    Westbrook. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. WILLIAM
      N. KIRTLAND, L. M.                                      30.00
    Wilton. Rev. S. J. M. Merwin, _for Chinese M._           100.00
    Winstead. E. E. Gilman                                    10.00
    Winthrop. Miss C. P. and Mrs. M. A. J., $1 ea.             2.00
    Woodbury. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                   10.00
    —— “A Friend,” ($200 of which, _for Woman’s
      work for Woman_)                                       502.00


  NEW YORK, $482.39.

    Austerlitz. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Mrs. H. P.
      Bake, $2; Sab. Sch. Concert, $1.46                       3.46
    Bangor. Mrs. E. T. and Miss L. K., 50c. ea.                1.00
    Brighton. E. C. A.                                         1.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs. M. L. H., $1; Central Cong.
      Sab. Sch., by George H. Shirley, Chairman of
      Mis. Com., a second hand Organ                           1.00
    Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     60.00
    East Hampton. Mrs. S. S.                                   1.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Ch.                                 16.02
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch., ($50 of which from
      Mrs. U. M. Place)                                      112.65
    Goshen. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Jefferson. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                         4.00
    Lima. “A Friend”                                           5.00
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                       72.92
    Middlesex. Mr. and Mrs. Lester Adams                      10.00
    Moravia. Cong. Ch.                                        16.10
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                     7.32
    New York. Z. Stiles Ely, $50: Gen. Clinton B.
      Fisk, $30, to const. MISS IRENE E. GILBERT,
      L. M.; Mrs. Elizabeth Merritt. $10; Mrs. E.
      L. Congdon, $5; Miss J. A. V. A., 60c.; T.
      R. W., Jr. 50c.                                         96.10
    Oswego. Mrs. Martha Dodge                                  2.00
    Penn Yan. F. O. Hamlin                                    25.00
    Rochester. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 5.00
    Rushford. W. W.                                            0.51
    Saratoga Springs. Mrs. S. S. and Mrs. A. M.
      W., $1 ea.                                               2.00
    Spencerport. Alvin Webster                                 2.00
    Volney. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                              8.25
    Warsaw. Cong. Soc.                                        19.40
    Watkins. Mrs. F. B.                                        0.66
    West-Winfield. Henry Smith                                 5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $127.27.

    Bricksburgh. Rev. G. L.                                    1.00
    Englewood. Rev. Geo. B. Cheever                           26.27
    Morristown. Miss Ella M. Graves, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                       100.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $112.50.

    Canton. H. Sheldon                                         5.00
    Philadelphia. Mrs. James P. Dickerman, $100;
      Rev. H. L. P., 50c.                                    100.50
    Pittston. A. S. H.                                         1.00
    Prentissvale. C. L. Allen ($5 of which, _for
      Communion Service_)                                      6.00


  OHIO, 314.03.

    Alliance. Mrs. Miriam Thomas                               2.00
    Austinburgh. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega, Ala._              4.00
    Burg Hill. Mrs. H. B. and J. C. J.                         1.50
    Cherry Fork. J. W.                                         1.00
    Dayton. Mrs. Jane McGregor                                 5.00
    Elyria. M. L. R.                                           1.00
    Franklin. Miss F. G.                                       0.51
    Granville. G. P. Bancroft                                  5.00
    Gustavus. ——                                               1.00
    Harmar. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           29.34
    Harrison. Dr. John D. Bowles.                              5.00
    Hartford. Mrs. E. and M. Brockway, $5; S. C.
      Baker, $1.50; A. N. and Miss H. J., $1 ea.;
      Mrs. R. H. P. and H. B. P., 50c. ea.                     9.50
    Jersey. E. R., $1; Mrs. J. P., $1                          2.00
    Kirtland. Mrs. E. B. W.                                    0.26
    Madison. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., $40; O. F.
      L., $1, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._—R. S.
      Wilcox, $10; “Friends,” by Mrs. M. St. John,
      $2, _for Teacher, Selma, Ala._                          53.00
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      $75, _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._;
      Second Cong. Ch., $24.11; J. B. C. $5.50               104.61
    Sandusky. Individuals by Josiah Strong                     2.50
    Saybrook. Dist. No. 3, _for Tougaloo U._                   5.00
    Seville. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    South Newbury. “Young Ladies’ Miss. Soc.,” $9,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._; Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., Box of C., _for Talladega C._                 9.00
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer, $2, Mrs. M. S.
      $1; Miss M. M., $1                                       4.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $17.81:—
      Ladies of H. M. Soc., $10, by Lottie R.
      Carter, _for Tougaloo U._                               27.81
    Strongville. Elijah Lyman                                 10.00
    Tallmadge. Ladies, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._, $2.05; Ladies, _for Freight_, $1.95                 4.00
    Toledo. Mrs. M. A. Harrington                              5.00
    Unionville. “Friends.” by Mrs. H. B. Fraser,
      _for Teacher, Selma, Ala._                              10.00
    Willoughby. Mrs. C. A. G.                                  1.00
    Windham. W. A. P.                                          1.00


  ILLINOIS, $203.68.

    Altona. Cong. Ch.                                          3.70
    Aurora. Mrs. A. F. S.                                      0.51
    Cambridge. Cong. Ch.                                       6.50
    Danville. Mrs. A. M. Swan                                  5.00
    Downers Grove. Cong. Ch., $6.45; J. W.
      Bushnell, $5                                            11.45
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                          42.69
    Galesburg. ESTATE of Warren C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard                                     23.25
    Kewanee. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Liberty Co., Ga._, by Mrs. C. C.
      Cully                                                   57.00
    Millington. Mrs. C. L. O. V., $1; Mrs. D. W.
      J., $1                                                   2.00
    New Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                     9.00
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Payson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   20.00
    Plymouth. Edward Whipple                                   5.00
    Rockford. Gertie G. Page, _for Chinese M._                 1.05
    Rosemond. Mrs. B. A. P.                                    0.50
    Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell                                   10.00
    Victoria. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    Correction. $100 ack. in Dec. number, from
      Bureau Assn. should read Wyanet and
      Providence Cong. Ch’s, $23; Buda, Ladies’
      Soc. of Cong. Ch., $20; Kewanee, Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., $57


  MICHIGAN, $265.52.

    Allegan. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                  37.86
    Blissfield. W. C.                                          0.50
    Church’s Corners. Cong. Sab. Sch., $12; A. W.
      Douglass, $3; J. F. Douglass, $3; Cornelius
      Clement, $2; 12 Individuals, $1 ea.; P. H.,
      50c.                                                    32.50
    Clinton. Mrs. S. R.                                        0.50
    Cross Village. Mrs. A. C.                                  0.25
    Detroit. Rev. C. C. Foote, $15; Individuals,
      $3, by Mrs. N. A. E. Nutting                            18.00
    Greenville. Mrs. E. P. C.                                  0.51
    Hudson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.00
    Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch., $83.33, and Sab.
      Sch., $7.17, ($30 of which, to const. MRS.
      CHESTER M. KINGSLEY, L. M.)                             90.50
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                       9.00
    Lowell. J. S.                                              0.50
    Memphis. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Monroe. “A Friend,” _for Agl. Dept., Talladega
      C._                                                      2.00
    Northport. First Cong. Soc.                                4.80
    Olivet. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            1.00
    Parma. Mrs. M. B. Tanner                                   2.00
    Romeo. Mrs. A. B. Maynard $10; Mrs. S. L.
      Andrews, Miss T. S. Clark, Mrs. E. F.
      Fairfield, $5 ea.; “Little Sunbeams,” $10,
      _for Lady Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._ and to
      const. MISS HATTIE A. MILTON, L. M.                     35.00
    Stockbridge. W. B. C.                                      1.00
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                   2.00
    Whitehall. B. H.                                           0.60


  WISCONSIN, $193.98.

    Alderly. Mrs. E. Hubbard $3, Mrs. Annie Reid,
      $2                                                       5.00
    Appleton. J. Lanphear                                     10.00
    Brodhead. First Cong. Ch.                                  5.25
    Big Springs. Rev. D. A. C.                                 0.50
    Evansville. Loretta C. Winston, deceased, by
      N. Winston                                               1.50
    Koshkonong. Gentlemen of Cong. Ch., by Mrs. A.
      V. Mills                                                10.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Mazo Manie. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       7.00
    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch., $32.17; Rev. H. D.
      K., $1;—“Friends,” Box and Bbl. of C., _for
      New Orleans, La._                                       23.17
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Racine. First Cong. Ch., $14.05; Miss Mary
      Johnson, $10; Mrs. Dr. J. T., $1; Mrs. A.
      B., 51c.                                                25.56
    Raymond. Rev. G. W. W.                                     1.00
    River Falls. Samuel Wales, $19; Wm. A.
      Newcomb, $6                                             25.00


  IOWA, $151.58.

    Almoral. Cong. Ch.                                         1.90
    Bellevue. Ladies’ Missionary Soc.                          2.00
    Cherokee. Mrs. C. E. W.                                    0.50
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Talladega, Ala_
    Decorah. G. C. Winship, _for Mendi M._                    10.00
    Eldora. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Elk River. Cong. Ch.                                       3.00
    Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch,
      $7:—Ladies of Cong. Ch., $3, _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Green Mountain. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                         1.15
    Grinnell. Mrs. James Chaplin, $10: H. L.
      Muscatt, $5, _for Talladega C._; Lonnie
      Walker’s S. S. Class, $3.22; F.P.B., $1,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         19.22
    Keokuk. Mrs. Elizabeth M. Wilson                           5.00
    Lyons. Cong. Ch., to const. MISS MYRA DAVIS,
      L. M.                                                   35.00
    Marshalltown. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                           3.50
    Monona. Cong. Ch.                                         11.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15.28; Young
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., Sewing Machine and
      Cash, _for Freight_, $3.05; “Lady Friends,”
      Box of C., _for Talladega C._; H. Woodward,
      Sab. Sch. Class, $6.50, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           24.83
    Tabor. “A Friend,” $5, _for Tougaloo U._; By
      J. E. W., $1                                             6.00
    Toledo. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                                 1.00
    Wittemberg. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                       10.48


  KANSAS, $14.50.

    Bavaria. Richard Porter, $1.50; A. M., $1                  2.50
    Brookville. Mrs. E. E. S. and Mrs. T.J., $1 ea.            2.00
    Manhattan. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        10.00


  MINNESOTA, $34.23.

    Litchfield. Mrs. S. B. C.                                  1.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Church                              16.23
    Plainview. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                             10.00
    Saint Paul. Rev. R. H.                                     1.00
    Waseca. “C. and R.”                                        6.00


  NEBRASKA, $46.66.

    Ponca. Rev. G. H. S.                                       1.00
    Red Willow. “A Friend”                                    24.00
    Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                  21.66


  COLORADO, $0.51.

    Colorado Springs. Miss A. R.                               0.51


  CALIFORNIA, $110.00.

    Oakland. S. Richards                                     100.00
    Santa Cruz. Pliny Fay                                     10.00


  VIRGINIA, $10.00.

    Valley Grove. Peregrine Whitham                           10.00


  TENNESSEE, $406.00.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          187.00
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      219.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $119.13.

    Fayetteville. E. C.                                        0.50
    Raleigh. Washington Sch., Tuition, $25.50;
      Sab. Sch., $2.88                                        28.38
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                          90.25


  GEORGIA, $620.39.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $285.44, Rent,
      $3:—Atlanta U., Tuition, $128.60, Rent,
      $15.25                                                 432.29
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, 56.70, Rent,
      $1.50: Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $3.40                    61.60
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $115.50, Rent,
      $11                                                    126.50


  ALABAMA, $349.57.

    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition.
      $144.57; Rev. H. S. De Forest, $30. _for
      Talladega C._, and to const. MRS. HELEN M.
      BIRGE, L. M.                                           174.57


  MISSISSIPPI, $99.20.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $73.05, Rent,
      $26.15.                                                 99.20


  LOUISIANA, $179.25.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition.               179.25


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $500.00.

    —— “A Friend”                                            500.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $10,100.72
    Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 29th                     $68,923.91

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    New York, N. Y. Z. Stiles Ely                             50.00
    Previously acknowledged in Jan. Receipts               1,217.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                             $1,267.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR SCHOOL BUILDING, ATHENS, ALA.

    Litchfield, Mich. First Cong. Ch.                         13.28
    Previously Acknowledged in Jan. Receipts                 419.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                               $432.28

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Waltham, Mass. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 Bbl’s of C.
    Goshen, N. Y. “A Friend,” Bundle of C.
    Jefferson, N. Y. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                   2.00
    New Lebanon Center, N. Y. Ladies’ Soc., Box of
      C.
    West Bloomfield, N. Y. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 35.00
    West Alexander, Penn. ——                                   5.00
    Mansfield, Ohio. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of First
      Cong. Ch., by L. L. Patterson, Sec., Box of
      C., Val. $68.95
    Homer, Ill. Cong. Ch.                                      7.25
    Wilton, Iowa. Dr. C. E. Witham and Friends                17.50
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                                 66.75
    Previously acknowledged in Jan. Receipts                 180.50
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                               $247.25

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Leeds, Eng. Robert Arthington, conditional
      pledge, £3000
    London, Eng. Collected by Rev. O. H. White             1,433.42
    Previously Acknowledged in Dec. Receipts               1,615.34
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                             $3,048.76

       *       *       *       *       *

  Receipts for February                                 11,664.17
  Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 29th                     $73,919.20
                                                       ==========

                               H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                              56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14, La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 6.
_Africa_, 2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 70.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.,
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn,; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 24. Total 44.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 253;
among the Chinese, 21; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
296. STUDENTS—In Theology, 86; Law, 28; in College Course, 63;
in other studies, 7,030. Total, 7,207. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK  H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON    Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO   Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    32d SEMI-ANNUAL STATEMENT

                              OF THE

                      TRAVELERS INSURANCE CO.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                _Hartford, Conn., January 1, 1880._

                              ASSETS.

  Real estate,                                       $735,911.87
  Cash on hand and in bank,                           353,855.01
  Loans on bond and mortgage, real estate,          2,015,522.91
  Interest on loans, accrued but not due,              51,015.37
  Loans on collateral security,                         3,200.00
  Deferred Life premiums,                              49,320.41
  Premiums due and unreported on Life policies,        34,122.35
  United States government bonds,                     277,150.00
  State, county, and municipal bonds,                 348,380.00
  Railroad stocks and bonds,                          409,350.00
  Bank stocks,                                        607,662.50
  Hartford City Gas Light Co. stock,                   18,000.00
  Adams Express Co. stock,                             52,500.00
                                                   —————————————
      Total Assets,                                $4,955,990.42

                           LIABILITIES.

  Reserve, four per cent., Life department,        $3,192,438.80
  Reserve for re-insurance, Accident dep’t,           268,694.66
  Claims unadjusted and not due, and all
    other liabilities,                                198,406.00
                                                   —————————————
      Total liabilities,                           $3,659,539.46
                                                   =============
  Surplus as regards policy-holder,                $1,296,450.96

                 *       *       *       *       *

                   STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1879.

                         LIFE DEPARTMENT.

  Number of Life Policies written in 1879,                 1,711
  Whole number of Life policies in force,                 11,352
  Amount Life Insurance in force,                 $18,182,132.00
  Total claims paid in Life Department,            $1,395,517.92

                        ACCIDENT DEPARTMENT

  Number of Accident Policies written in 1879,            54,540
  Cash Premiums received for same,                   $992,033.90
  Gain in Policies over 1878,                             11,432
  Gain in Premiums over 1878,                        $216,451.39
  Whole number Accident Policies written,                572,525
  Number Accident Claims paid in 1879                      7,545
  Amount Accident Claims paid in 1879,               $395,678.30
  Whole number Accident Claims paid,                      41,594
  Whole amount Accident Claims paid,               $3,437,630.24

                 *       *       *       *       *

       Total Losses paid, both Departments,        $4,883,148.16

                 *       *       *       *       *

                   JAS. G. BATTERSON, President.
                   G. F. DAVIS, Vice-President.
  RODNEY DENNIS, Secretary.
               JOHN E. MORRIS, Assistant Secretary.
                                          GEORGE ELLIS, Actuary.
  EDWARD V. PRESTON, Sup’t of Agencies.
               G. P. DAVIS, M. D., Medical Examiner.
                       J. B. LEWIS, M. D., Surgeon and Adjuster.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          NEW YORK OFFICE

                         TRIBUNE BUILDING.

                      R. M. JOHNSON, Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           GET THE BEST.

                           The “OXFORD”

                          [Illustration]

                         TEACHERS’ BIBLES

                     IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                   At prices to suit everybody.

          Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

                        THOS. NELSON & SONS,

                            42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

        Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.

        Special attention given to CHURCH BELLS.

         ☞ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             WEBSTER’S

                           NEW EDITION.

Contains 1928 Pages, over 3000 Engravings, Four Pages Colored
Plates, about 120,000 Words and Meanings, and much more matter than
is found in any other English Dictionary. Over 32,000 copies of
the Unabridged have been placed in the Public Schools by official
action. The sale of Webster is 20 times the sale of any other
series of Dictionaries.—=The National Standard.=

        G. & C. MERRIAM,
                                  Publishers, Springfield, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        BUY THE BEST GOODS

                          BOGLE & LYLES,

              Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place      NEW YORK.

                            Dealers in

                       CHOICE CANNED FRUITS

                  VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,

                          Sole Agents for

                       RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’

                       Extra Yellow Peaches.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        DEMOREST’S MONTHLY,

                    The World’s Model Magazine.

A grand combination of the entertaining, the useful and the
beautiful, with fine art engravings and oil pictures in each
number. PRICE 25c.; YEARLY, $3, with an unequalled premium; a $10
copy of Reinhart’s great picture, “Consolation;” the finest and
best as well as the most interesting oil picture ever published.
Mounted on canvas, transportation 50c. extra. Send postal card
for full particulars. Address W. JENNINGS DEMOREST, 17 East 14th
Street, New York.

MME. DEMOREST’S Spring and Summer “Portfolio of Fashions,”
containing over 500 large illustrations of the most novel, useful,
and beautiful styles for ladies’ and children’s dress for the
Spring and Summer of 1880. Every lady wants this illustrated
panorama of the Spring and Summer fashions. Price 15 cts., post
free. “What to Wear,” 15 cts.; both together 25 cts., post free.
Mammoth “Bulletin of Fashions,” 35 cts.; or all three sent together
for 50 cents, post free. Address, MME. DEMOREST, 17 E. 14th St.,
New York.

MME. DEMOREST’S semi-annual “Portfolio of Fashions,” 15 cents;
yearly, 25 cents.

MME. DEMOREST’S quarterly “Bulletin of Fashions,” 15 cts.; yearly,
50 cents.

MME. DEMOREST’S “Quarterly Journal,” 5 cts.; yearly, 15 cents.

Or all four publications for one year, post free, for $1.

Address:                      MME. DEMOREST, 17 E. 14th St., N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


=A printing press= for =75= cents. With ink roller, =90= cents.
Both by mail =$1.60=. A complete Printing Office, viz., press,
roller, font of type, type tray, ink, leads, furniture, gold
bronze, and 50 cards, =$2.25=. All by mail for =$3.25=. Sample
package of =40= varieties of cards, =10= cents. Specimen Book of
type, &c., =10= cents. YOUNG AMERICA PRESS CO., =19= Murray Street,
New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         PUZZLING PUZZLES.

    15 BLOCK GAME. 16 BLOCK GAME.
                               GAME OF 34, LITTLE BUTTERCUP,

All these brain-crackers, only 25 cents. Agents and dealers
supplied. 200,000 sold.

                       HARTFORD PUZZLE CO.,

                         Charter Oak Building, Hartford, Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Brown Brothers & Co.

                          59 WALL STREET,

                             NEW YORK.

=Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great Britain and Ireland,
France, Germany, Belgium and Holland, =Issue Commercial and
Travelers’ Credits=, =in Sterling=, available in any part of the
world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and Guadaloupe.

                Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

    Between this and other countries, through London and Paris.

=Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all parts of the United
States and Canada, and of =Drafts drawn in the United States= on
Foreign Countries.

=Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash deposited or
satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In Dollars for use in the
United States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds Sterling for
use in any other part of the world. Applications for credits may
be addressed as above direct, or through any first-class Bank or
Banker.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,

                     26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,

                Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                           INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         SABBATH READING.

                    Superintendents & Teachers

Should examine this Paper, it is so well suited for the UPPER
CLASSES in the Sunday-school.

                          A WEEKLY PAPER.

In schools where papers are distributed once a month, the
subscription can be for one-fourth the number required. Thus, if
you want twenty copies a month for the Bible classes, subscribe for
5 copies of

                         SABBATH READING.

You will thus have a variety which is very desirable.

                       Only 50 Cts. a Year.

                             5 COPIES,

                      260 Papers, $2 a Year.

Three sample copies sent to any Minister or Teacher FREE. Apply by
letter or postal card.

Address,

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.

                    7 Frankfort St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    The Perfected Type-Writer.

                          [Illustration]

                  THE MINISTER’S BEST ASSISTANT.

Writes faster than the pen, making beautiful manuscript for the
pulpit, or copy for the printer.


            EQUALLY VALUABLE FOR ALL BUSINESS PURPOSES.

Machines Improved and Prices Reduced. Send for Circular and Terms to

                         FAIRBANKS & CO.,

  Agents for the World.                          311 Broadway, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                           J. & R. LAMB,

                       59 Carmine St., N. Y.

                         CHURCH FURNISHERS

                Memorial Windows, Memorial Tablets,

                Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                        SEND FOR CIRCULAR.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    Every Man His Own Printer.

                          [Illustration]

                  Excelsior =$3= Printing Press.

Prints cards, labels, envelopes, &c.; larger sizes for larger work.
For business or pleasure, young or old. Catalogue of Presses, Type,
Cards, &c., sent for two stamps.

               KELSEY & CO., M’f’rs, Meriden, Conn.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N. Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

[Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

                         Founded in 1832.

                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.

                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,

                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                 *       *       *       *       *




THE THIRTY-FOURTH VOLUME

OF THE

American Missionary,

1880.


We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the increasing
appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the past year, and purpose to
spare no effort to make its pages of still greater value to those
interested in the work which it records.

Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for 1880?

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under able editorial supervision, aided by the steady contributions
of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in all parts of the
field, and with occasional communications from careful observers
and thinkers elsewhere, the AMERICAN MISSIONARY furnishes a vivid
and reliable picture of the work going forward among the Indians,
the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in
the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it, and
assist in its circulation. Begin with the next number and the new
year. The price is only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 126.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                      56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are thousands of
Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors and Teachers in
Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
a specially valuable medium for advertising Books, Periodicals,
Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of Learning, Church
Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged for
space in its columns, considering the extent and character of its
circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

          THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                      56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious punctionation misprints have been corrected.

On Page 126, “Othe” changed to “Other” (Other Schools).







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 34, NO. 04, APRIL, 1880 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.