VOL. XXXII.                                           No. 12.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          DECEMBER, 1878.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    ABSTRACT OF THE REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF
      THE A. M. A.                                               353
    ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION           356
    ADDRESS OF REV. SYLVANUS HEYWOOD                             371
    ADDRESS ON CHINESE MISSIONS IN AMERICA: Rev. E. S.
      Atwood                                                     373
    ADDRESS UPON THE AFRICAN MISSION: REV. G. D. Pike            377
    THE ANNUAL MEETING                                           379
    PARAGRAPHS                                                   381
    ITEMS FROM SCHOOLS AND CHURCHES                              382


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ATLANTA, GA.--Students’ Reports of Summer Work:
      Mrs. T. N. Chase                                           383
    TENNESSEE.--Woman’s Work among Women: Miss Hattie
      Milton                                                     385
    NORTH CAROLINA.--Students Want to “Batch”: Rev.
      Alfred Connett                                             387
    TALLADEGA, ALABAMA.--The Story of Ambrose Headen             388
    A GRATEFUL WARD                                              389


  AFRICA.

    THE MENDI MISSION: Rev. A. E. Jackson                        389


  THE INDIANS.

    SISSETON AGENCY: E. H. C. Hooper, Agent                      392


  RECEIPTS                                                       394

       *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           A. Anderson, Printer, 23 to 27 Vandewater St.




                _American Missionary Association_,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Rev. JONATHAN BLANCHARD, Ill.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. SILAS MCKEEN, D. D., Vt.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. D. M. GRAHAM, D. D., Mich.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. EDWARD L. CLARK, N. Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. H. M. PARSONS, N. Y.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN WHITING, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago, Ill._

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    A. P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to
either of the Secretaries as above.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the branch offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. Drafts
or checks sent to Mr. Hubbard should be made payable to his order as
_Assistant Treasurer_.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in
which it is located.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXII.      DECEMBER, 1878.      No. 12.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


ABSTRACT OF THE THIRTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE
A. M. A.

The Report opens with an expression of thanks to God for the general
prosperity of its work, obituary notices of the Rev. Silas McKeen, D.
D., of Bradford, Vt., a Vice-President, and Mrs. Benjamin James, of the
Mendi Mission, and a brief review of the marked progress of the last
thirty-two years in the line of its aim and effort.


The Freedmen.

The educational work of the Association has been vigorously sustained,
with increasing numbers, and at the cost of great self-denial on the
part of both teachers and pupils. New buildings have been erected
for the Emerson Institute at Mobile, Ala., for the Lewis High School
and Norwich Chapel at Macon, Ga., for the Straight University at New
Orleans, La., and for the Beach Institute at Savannah, Ga., under
the supervision of Prof. T. N. Chase, of Atlanta. They are simple
but commodious, and admirably adapted for their uses, better located
than formerly, and cost no more than the insurance received for the
buildings which they replace. The institutions of the Association are
excellently located.

The early educational work was, of necessity, altogether primary. As
the States assumed the support of common schools, the Association gave
itself more and more to Normal teaching, and has always found a demand
for more teachers than its schools could furnish. A few more each year
are advancing into the collegiate and professional courses. Its one Law
and three Theological classes have been well sustained, and it has also
co-operated with the Presbytery of Washington in the support of the
Theological Department of Howard University. The practical and moral
importance of the Industrial Departments is also referred to. During
the year small amounts have been added to the salaries of a number
of common-school teachers, graduates from its institutions, enabling
them to extend the time of their school-year from three or six to nine
months.

The need of this work is emphasized by the fact that there are still
3,500,000 over ten years of age in the South who cannot read, over
1,135,000 of whom are legal voters. The need of permanent endowments
and of student aid are also dwelt upon. A depiction of the influence of
these institutions in the homes, the common schools, the churches, and
upon the sentiment of the people of the South, and especially of the
positiveness of their religious influence, concludes this part of the
Report.

The report of church work adds five new churches organized during the
year to its list. Judged by the measure of accessions to membership by
profession of faith, these sixty-four churches have not been dead nor
fruitless. Fifteen of them report from eleven to fifty such additions
each, making an average of over twenty-four, and amounting to 368 in
all. Indications of growth are also found in increased efforts for
self-support and for systematic giving. The Sunday-schools of the
churches not only are well sustained, but the teachers go out into
churches of other orders, and into mission work, thus reaching many
thousands of youth and children.

The cause of temperance has been advancing in these churches. The six
local conferences have, by their annual meetings, shown progress and
done good. The difficulties of a rapid extension of church work in the
South are referred to, and the hope expressed, of surmounting such of
them as may be overcome under the field-superintendence of Rev. Dr.
Roy, who will very soon be in his headquarters at Atlanta.

In summing up the work among the Freedmen, encouragement is drawn
from the fact that some of the best pastors and teachers now in
the field were taken from the streets by the missionary teachers
of the Association, and have developed under its care to be its
fellow-helpers; also, that results appear to be more permanent and
substantial.


Africa.

Four missionaries were sent, Feb. 8, to the reinforcement of the five
who sailed the September before. The outlook was discouraging in both
its material and spiritual aspects. But they went to work practically
and hopefully, and have labored with good success. Twenty-two new
members have been received into the church at Good Hope. Preaching
services and Sunday and day-schools have also been opened at Avery and
Debia.

The missionaries desire increased facilities for taking the children
into their homes under their constant care, a work which they have
begun already. The industrial work at Avery has been revived. These
missionary families, numbering fifteen souls in all, have endured the
trying climate, and that through its sickly season, as well as could
have been hoped. All of them have been sick; one of their number has
died; none of them are in impaired health, so far as can be learned.

The report speaks of the intention to strengthen this mission as it may
seem to demand, of the need of means with which to do it, and of the
missionary interest awakened in the South, and especially at Hampton
and Fisk.


The Indians.

The necessity of changing agents has made much unexpected work, and
the difficulties of supplying their places are referred to. The
work of Rev. Mr. Eells at S’Kokomish is spoken of. The Indians show
increasing interest in education, but the unsettled condition of their
affairs prevents the best success. The recommendations made by the
representatives of the various religious denominations to the Board of
Commissioners are recited. The possibility of a transfer of the Indians
to the War Department is alluded to, and deprecated as a long step in
retreat.


The Chinese in America.

The outcries against the Chinaman, and the abuse he receives on every
hand, are alluded to as having had already an influence in diminishing
the number of those coming to our shores.

The Association has sustained eleven schools during the year, with
1,492 pupils. The Chinese Congregational Association and the Bethany
Home have been kept up, with increasing usefulness. Seventy-five have
been hopefully converted during the year. The indebtedness of the
Association to Rev. Wm. C. Pond, its superintendent in that work,
is heartily acknowledged. The desire of the Chinese converts for the
conversion of their own people in their native land is referred to as a
convincing proof that they have entered into the spirit of the Master.
The new Chinese embassy to this country is spoken of as full of promise
in regard to all the questions affecting that race.


Finances.

The receipts of the year have been $195,601.65; the expenses have been
$188,079.46, leaving a balance of $7,522.19. The current receipts are
not equal by $13,063.23 to those of the preceding year, the falling off
being mainly in legacies; and the $17,904.92 in cash (and $6,950 in
pledges) for the debt may have somewhat lessened the regular gifts.

The debt, two years ago, was $93,000; one year ago it was $63,000;
what has been received and saved for it together this year amounts
to $25,427.11, which has reduced it to $37,389.79, and pledges are
held for $6,950, which, when redeemed, will further diminish it to
$30,439.79.

The Committee recognize the hand of the Lord, and the hearts of His
people in this good showing. The Report makes special mention of the
gifts from the field for this object, and yet the remaining debt is
deeply deplored as preventing the enlargement of the work. The careful
and wise use of the funds in its hands encourages the Association to
ask for the removal of this its last hindrance.


Sundries.

References to the co-operation of the Freedmen’s Missions Aid Society
in England, the return of the Jubilee Singers, the changes successfully
made in the form and editing of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY, and the
generous aid of the American Bible Society, conclude the Report.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

_Statistics of its Work and Workers--General Summary._

Workers.

_Missionaries_--at the South, 69; among the Indians, 1; in the Foreign
field, 9; total, 79.

_Teachers_--at the South, 150; among the Chinese, 17; among the
Indians, 10; Native helpers in the Foreign field, 6; total, 183.

_Matrons_, 9; in Business Department, 9. Total number of Workers, 280.


Churches.

_Churches_--at the South, 64; among the Indians, 1; in the Foreign
field, 1; total, 66.

_Church Members_--at the South, 4,189; among the Indians, 19; in the
Foreign field, 44; total, 4,252. Total number Sabbath-school Scholars,
7,517.


Schools.

_Schools_--at the South, 37; among the Chinese, 11; among the Indians,
6; in the Foreign field, 3; total, 57.

_Pupils_--at the South, 7,229; among the Chinese, 1,492; among the
Indians, 245; in the Foreign field, 177; total, 9,143.


Details of School Work at the South.

_Chartered Institutions_, 8.--Hampton N. and A. Institute, Hampton,
Va.: Number of pupils, 332; boarding accommodations, for 180. Berea
College, Berea, Ky.: Number of pupils, 273; boarding accommodations for
180. Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.: Number of pupils, 338; boarding
accommodations for 150. Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga.: Number
of pupils, 244; boarding accommodations for 150. Talladega College,
Talladega, Ala.: Number of pupils, 272; boarding accommodations for
100. Tougaloo University, Tougaloo, Miss.: Number of pupils, 193;
boarding accommodations for 90. Straight University, New Orleans, La.:
Number of pupils, 287; no boarding accommodations. Normal Institute,
Austin, Texas: Number of pupils, 146.

_Other Institutions_, 11.--Normal School, Wilmington, N. C.: Number of
pupils, 126; Washington School, Raleigh, N. C., 435; Avery Institute,
Charleston, S. C., 294; Brewer Normal School, Greenwood, S. C., 58;
Storrs School, Atlanta, Ga., 701; Lewis High School, Macon, Ga., 93;
Trinity School, Athens, Ala., 158; Emerson Institute, Mobile, Ala.,
117; Swayne School, Montgomery, Ala., 436; Burrell School, Selma, Ala.,
421; Le Moyne School, Memphis, Tenn., 184; Common Schools, 18;--total,
37.


Pupils Classified.

Theological, 88; Law, 17; Collegiate, 106; Collegiate Preparatory, 160;
Normal, 1,459; Grammar, 1,016; Intermediate, 2,048; Primary,
2,398                                                             7,292

Studying in two grades,                                              63
                                                                  —————
                                                                  7,229

Scholars in the South, taught by our former pupils, estimated at
100,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


THIRTY-SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

The American Missionary Association held its Thirty-second Anniversary
in the Broadway Congregational Church, Taunton, Mass., commencing
October 29, 1878.

President Edward S. Tobey called the Association to order at three
P. M. Rev. Edward H. Merrill, D. D., of Ripon, Wis., conducted the
devotional service, reading selections from the Scriptures, and leading
in prayer. Rev. Leverett S. Woodworth, of Campello, Mass., was elected
Secretary, and Rev. Samuel Harrison, of Pittsfield, Assistant Secretary.

The President appointed the following Nominating Committee: Rev. Lyman
S. Rowland, Rev. George M. Boynton, Rev. Thomas K. Fessenden and J. E.
Porter, Esq.

Rev. George M. Boynton presented the Annual Report of the Executive
Committee. On motion, the report was accepted, and its various portions
referred to appropriate committees.

The report of the Treasurer was presented by Henry W. Hubbard, Esq.,
Assistant Treasurer, and was referred to the Committee on Finance.

The Committee on Nominations reported the following list of committees:

1. _Committee of Arrangements._--Rev. Mortimer Blake, D. D., Rev.
Morton Dexter, Rev. E. S. Atwood, Chas. H. Atwood, Esq., Dea. E. H.
Reed, H. B. Palmer, Esq., Rev. T. T. Richmond.

2. _Committee on Business._--Rev. S. M. Newman, Rev. C. L. Woodworth,
Eleazer Porter, Esq.

3. _Committee, on Nominations._--Rev. Lyman S. Rowland, Rev. George M.
Boynton, Rev. Thos. K. Fessenden, Dea. Edwin Talcott.

4. _Committee on Finance._--Hon. E. H. Sawyer, A. S. Barnes, Esq., A.
L. Williston, Esq., Geo. H. Corliss, Esq., S. D. Smith, Esq., Hon.
Rufus Frost, Abiel Abbott, Esq.

5. _Committee on Moral and Religious Education_ (especially among
colored women of the South).--Rev. H. P. DeForrest, Rev. C. D. Barrows,
Rev. Albert H. Heath, Rev. Henry Hopkins, Rev. I. C. Thatcher, Rev. E.
W. Allen, Rev. Geo. A. Tewksbury.

6. _Committee on Normal and Higher Education in the South._--Rev. Wm.
W. Adams, D. D., Rev. J. W. Wellman, D. D., Rev. Frederick Alvord,
Rev. E. H. Merrill, D. D., Rev. H. J. Patrick, Rev. R. K. Harlow, Rev.
Calvin Cutler.

7. _Committee on Church Extension in the South._--Rev. Edward Strong,
D. D., Rev. Wm. L. Gaylord, Rev. A. H. Plumb, Rev. A. E. Winship, Rev.
D. O. Mears, Rev. O. T. Lanphear, D. D., Rev. M. Burnham.

8. _Committee on Chinese Missions in America._--Rev. E. S. Atwood, Rev.
E. H. Byington, Rev. G. R. W. Scott, Rev. J. D. Kingsbury, Rev. Charles
B. Sumner, Rev. Henry M. Grout, D. D., Rev. J. M. Bell.

9. _Committee on Indian Missions in America._--Hon. A. C. Barstow, Rev.
Geo. F. Wright, Rev. Cyrus Richardson, Col. Franklin Fairbanks, B. C.
Hardwick, Esq., Rev. A. P. Marvin, Rev. Franklin P. Chapin.

10. _Committee on African Missions._--Rev. Reuen Thomas, D. D., Rev.
Geo. A. Oviatt, Rev. G. R. Leavitt, Rev. Franklin Ayer, Rev. W. S.
Hubbell, Dea. Edward Kendall, Rev. John C. Labaree, Rev. G. D. Pike.

11. _Committee on Religious Services and Prayer-Meeting._--Rev. Horace
Winslow, Rev. R. B. Howard.

I. Paper by Rev. M. E. Strieby, D. D. Subject--“The Work of Half a
Generation among the Freedmen.” Committee--Rev. Daniel T. Fiske, D. D.,
Rev. Geo. E. Street, Rev. James H. Lyon, Rev. E. P. Blodgett, Rev. Geo.
E. Freeman, Rev. Henry A. Blake.

II. By Rev. Stacy Fowler. Subject--“The Element of Present Time
all-important in what we do to save this Country.” Committee--Rev.
Jacob Ide, Jr., Rev. W. W. Woodworth, Rev. Chester W. Hawley, Rev.
Davis Foster, Rev. Henry E. Barnes.

III. By Rev. Geo. Leon Walker, D. D. Subject--“The Denominational
Polity of the American Missionary Association.” Committee--Rev. Samuel
P. Leeds, D. D., Rev. Ephraim Flint, D. D., Rev. Henry W. Jones, Rev.
J. B. Clark, Rev. John V. Hilton.

IV. By Rev. Ebenezer Cutler, D. D. Subject--“A Revival of Righteousness
in the Prosecution of Christian Work among the Despised Races of
America.” Committee--Rev. B. F. Hamilton, Rev. Wm. V. W. Davis, Rev. H.
D. Walker, Rev. Henry R. Craig, Rev. Wm. T. Briggs.

V. By Rev. C. L. Woodworth. Subject--“America’s Opportunity the World’s
Salvation.” Committee--Rev. J. M. Green, Rev. Samuel Bell, Rev. G.
F. Stanton, Rev. Chas. P. Nason, Rev. Franklin S. Hatch, Rev. J. K.
Aldrich.

Rev. Stephen M. Newman reported the order of exercises for the ensuing
sessions. Secretary Strieby urged upon the Association the need of
prayer in the meetings. The President called upon the Rev. E. B.
Hooker to lead in prayer. After singing, the Benediction was pronounced
by Rev. E. H. Merrill, D. D. The Association then adjourned until 7.30
P. M.


Evening Session.

At 7.30 P. M. the President called the Association to order. Scriptures
were read and prayer offered by Rev. Daniel T. Fiske, D. D. Rev. Samuel
E. Herrick, D. D. delivered a sermon from I Peter, ii. 9. Secretary
Strieby offered the closing prayer. The Association then adjourned
until nine A. M. of Wednesday.


Wednesday, October 30.

At 8.15 a prayer-meeting was conducted by Rev. Horace Winslow. At nine,
the Association was called to order by Pres. Edward S. Tobey. Prayer
was offered by Rev. John O. Means.

Rev. Stacy Fowler, of Cambridge, read a paper on “The Element of
Present Time all-important in what we do to save this Country.”

Rev. George Leon Walker, D. D., read a paper on “The Denominational
Polity of the American Missionary Association.”

District-Secretary Chas. L. Woodworth read a paper on “America’s
Opportunity the World’s Salvation.”

After singing, the Association adjourned until two P. M.


Afternoon Session.

At two P. M. the Association was called to order by President Edward S.
Tobey. The session was opened with singing “How firm a foundation ye
saints of the Lord,” and with prayer by Rev. Stephen H. Hayes.

Rev. Ebenezer Cutler, D. D., of Worcester, read a paper upon “The
Revival of Righteousness in the Prosecution of Christian Work among the
Despised Races of America,” which was referred to a committee.

Hon. Amos C. Barstow, of Providence, R. I., read the report of the
committee on the Indians as follows:

  The Committee to whom was referred so much of the Annual Report as
  relates to the work of the Association among the Indians, are glad
  to be able to approve the action of the Executive Committee for the
  past year, both with respect to its missions and its agencies. They
  beg also to indorse and emphasize the sentiment--twice repeated in
  the Report--that “the unsettled condition of the Indians, growing out
  of their frequent and enforced removal, sometimes for long distances,
  and at short notice, continues to rob the efforts put forth in their
  behalf of much of their rightful success.”

  Like the dove sent out from the Ark, the Indian has found no rest
  for the sole of his foot. Of the 275,000 Indians in what is now our
  country, fifty years ago 130,000 were east of the Mississippi River,
  where now but 25,000 remain.

  At first we were content to crowd them beyond the Mississippi, but our
  example at the East has proved contagious among the settlers of the
  new States west of the Mississippi, and now all these States, by their
  influence over the General Government, are emptying their Indians into
  the Territories. The Pawnees and Poncas, and the great bands of Sioux
  Indians, under those famous chiefs Red Cloud and Spotted Tail--in all
  15,000--have been pushed out of Nebraska within two years. The great
  States of Iowa and Kansas have but 1,000 each remaining in their
  borders, and Missouri has none. At the present moment, Colorado is
  making an effort to push the 3,200 Ute Indians, who have always lived
  upon her soil, either beyond her borders or up into the mountains,
  7,000 feet above the sea level, and far above the possibility of
  self-support.

  The Stockbridge Indians, whose original home was amid the beautiful
  valleys of old Berkshire, in Massachusetts, and who, while there--130
  years ago--enjoyed the stated ministry of David Brainard, and
  afterwards of Jonathan Edwards, were moved west as far as the State
  of New York, ninety years ago. Since then they have been moved five
  times, and now a remnant of the tribe occupy a little reservation in
  Northern Wisconsin. Why should they have been exposed to such perils
  as haunt a people, thus violently and repeatedly torn up by the roots,
  and compelled to make new homes far distant from the graves of their
  sires? Or, rather, civilized and Christianized as they are and were,
  why should they not long ago have come to individual homestead rights
  of portions of their land in fee, _with citizenship_, as do multitudes
  of foreigners, of far less education? Instead of girding the Indians
  about with bands of love, and holding them to their ancient homes,
  where they could be easily reached by Gospel influences, the nation
  has taken it for granted that the “wilderness and solitary place” was
  the only fit home for them; and therefore, in the expressive language
  of Red Cloud, has “kept them on wheels.” We have been crowding them
  before the ever-increasing column of our Western emigration, and even
  now, the hand of the nation does not spare, neither does its heart
  relent. The Santee and other bands of Indians, fully civilized, are
  now petitioners for the right to take up homesteads that shall cover
  the present allotments, already cultivated and improved by them. Their
  petition is indorsed by the Indian Bureau and Interior Department,
  and though urged upon Congress last winter by all the added influence
  of the Board of Indian Commissioners, nothing was done. Congress has
  always shown more willingness to _feed_ the Indians than to _locate_
  them. To secure progress in civilization, we must locate them--give
  them permanent homes, with all the motives for industry which they
  will inspire. To herd and feed them from the public crib permanently,
  like cattle, is to degrade and pauperize them, rather than to civilize
  and bring them to self-support.

  There is a feeling quite too common in the community, that Indians,
  after all, are only _outlaws_, _Ishmaelites_, _savages_, “having no
  rights which white men are bound to respect,” and no elements of
  character which encourage efforts for their improvement.

  A popular encyclopædia affirms that, “as a race, the animal
  propensities in the Indian strongly preponderate over the
  intellectual, and render their civilization, even with the help of
  education and Christianity, an event _hardly to be hoped for_.”
  Neither the experience of Christian philanthropists, nor the facts of
  history, will justify this sweeping assertion.

  We do not claim that they have taken on them the nature of angels.
  We only claim that they are MEN, and that our Divine Master made no
  mistake in giving His Gospel to enlighten them, His blood to redeem
  them, or His command to us to publish that Gospel to them. If Eliot
  and Brainard and Edwards found encouragement for Christian efforts in
  their behalf, why may not the Christians of this generation labor for
  them with hope? Are we wiser or better than they? Or are the Indians
  worse and their condition more hopeless, than in the days of our
  fathers?

  It is safe to affirm, in spite of all the obstacles in their path,
  that, under the efforts put forth in their behalf, many of the Indian
  tribes are making commendable progress in civilization, and large
  numbers of them are bringing forth in their lives the peaceable fruits
  of righteousness.

  We, therefore, recommend not only that the Association continue its
  work for the evangelization of the Indians, but that it enlarge and
  extend it, as fast as God in His providence may open the way.

                                          A. C. BARSTOW,
                                          COL. FRANKLIN FAIRBANKS,
                                          REV. A. P. MARVIN,
                                          REV. GEO. F. WRIGHT.


On motion, it was voted that the report be accepted, and taken up for
discussion on Thursday forenoon.

The report of the committee on the paper of Rev. George L. Walker, D.
D. was read by Rev. Samuel P. Leeds, D. D., who opened the discussion
of the report, followed by Rev. Samuel Harrison, of Pittsfield, and
Rev. Addison P. Foster, of Jersey City. Secretary Strieby was invited
to speak upon the pending question. Rev. George Juchau and Rev. David
O. Mears continued the discussion.

On motion of Secretary Strieby, it was voted “That the papers read
before this body, together with the reports of the committees thereon,
be accepted and referred to the Executive Committee for publication at
its discretion.”

Rev. Benj. F. Hamilton, D. D., gave the report of the committee on the
paper presented by Rev. Ebenezer Cutler, D. D. The report was discussed
by Rev. Benj. F. Hamilton, Rev. Albert H. Plumb, Rev. Jesse Jones, Rev.
G. B. Willcox, D. D., and Rev. George F. Wright.

Rev. Jeremiah K. Aldrich, of Nashua, reported in behalf of the
committee upon the paper presented by Dist. Sec. Chas. L. Woodworth.
The report was discussed by Secretary Strieby, and Rev. Geo. F.
Stanton, of Weymouth. The report was accepted, and the following
resolution, appended thereto, was adopted:

  _Resolved_, That, as God raised up His ancient people, and made them
  the repository of the truth, to prepare the way for the advent of the
  Saviour, when the fullness of time should come, so He has raised up
  this nation to carry forward that truth to its final consummation,
  and that it becometh us to put forth every possible effort for
  accomplishing this work, in humble reliance upon the direct agency
  of the Holy Spirit, believing that God will bless well-directed,
  earnest Christian effort, energize and apply the truth by the personal
  presence and power of a living Christ; and that we regard the American
  Missionary Association as one of the most direct and efficient
  agencies for securing this end, and would press its claim upon our
  churches for an increase in benevolent contributions, that its work
  may be enlarged and prosecuted with increased vigor.

At 5.15 the Association adjourned to meet at 7.30 P. M. Benediction by
Rev. Daniel T. Fiske, D. D.


Evening Session.

7.30.--President Edward S. Tobey in the chair. Rev. Thomas T. Richmond
offered prayer. The evening session was occupied by those who were
formerly in the employ of the Association.

Addresses were made by Rev. Charles M. Southgate, of Dedham., Rev.
Sylvanus Heywood, of N. H., Rev. Martin L. Williston, of N. Y., and
Rev. Walter S. Alexander, of New Orleans, President of Straight
University.

During the evening the choir sang several Jubilee Songs.

Adjourned at 9.30 P. M. to meet Thursday morning at nine A. M.


Thursday Morning Session.

Rev. D. O. Mears conducted a prayer-meeting at 8.15 A. M. President
Tobey called the Association to order at 9.15 A. M. Prayer was offered
by Rev. William Mellen.

Rev. Davis Foster read the report of the committee on the paper
presented by Rev. Stacy Fowler.

Rev. Daniel T. Fiske, D. D., read the report of the committee on the
paper presented by Secretary Strieby.

Hon. Edmund D. Sawyer gave the report of the committee on Finance as
follows:

  The Committee appointed to consider and examine the Financial
  statement of the American Missionary Association, covering the
  receipts and expenditures for the year ending September 30th, 1878,
  respectfully submit the following Report:

  The receipts from all sources have been $195,601.65, or about thirteen
  thousand dollars less than for the preceding year. The expenses,
  including amounts paid for church and educational work, publications,
  cost of collecting funds and cost of administration, have been
  $167,728.23. There is due the Tillotson Normal and Collegiate
  Institute $2,446.31, and there has been paid towards cancelling
  the debt $25,427.11. Of the amount paid upon the debt, the sum of
  $17,904.92 was contributed directly for the purpose, and $7,522.19
  has been saved from the income of the year. Your Committee are happy
  to testify, that the administration of the affairs of the Association
  appears to have been conducted with wisdom, ability and faithfulness.
  While the work for the year has not been curtailed, the receipts have
  been less. Yet from them quite a sum has been saved towards cancelling
  the indebtedness. It is greatly to be regretted, that the receipts
  during the year have not been sufficient to pay in full the debt, as
  there still remains unpaid, and unprovided for, the sum of $30,439.79.
  Certainly it would seem that our churches could easily contribute this
  sum, which, if done, would give your Executive Committee new courage
  to plan for the extension of work now so well established and wisely
  conducted.

  Your Committee would suggest that an effort be made to extend
  the paying circulation of the monthly publication, the “AMERICAN
  MISSIONARY,” which is now so attractive and desirable, communicating
  as it does, information relating to the operations and needs of the
  Association, and the progress made in the different fields of its
  occupation. The administrative expenses seem to us small, compared
  with the magnitude and importance of the work accomplished, giving
  evidence that this department is conducted with great economy, and
  most conscientious fidelity.

  When we consider the nature and extent of the work committed to the
  care of this organization, and that the appeal comes to us as a
  Christian duty, to help educate and Christianize these millions of our
  own citizens, now living in a condition of ignorance and degradation,
  we are forced to the conclusion, that our churches do not realize
  sufficiently, either their obligation or privilege, to meet the call
  with liberal and glad contributions.

  The annual receipts of this Association, engaged in Christian work
  second in importance of no other, ought to be greatly increased. May
  we not ask the Pastors of our churches, to bring to the attention
  of their congregations, the necessities of those for whom this
  Association is laboring; and we urge individual Christians to such
  faithful labor and consecration as will extend a knowledge of the
  needs and deepen the interest felt in this great and good work, so
  that contributions may be largely increased.

  From an examination of the various statements submitted, showing in
  detail the operations of the Association, and the condition of the
  property interests it has in charge, your Committee are prepared to
  commend it most heartily to the continued confidence and sympathy of
  our churches, and to recommend that every effort be made to secure
  enlarged receipts, so that the debt shall speedily be paid and the
  increased work that so needs to be done can be undertaken.

                                                  E. H. SAWYER.
                                                  A. L. WILLISTON.


The report was discussed by Secretary Strieby, District-Secretaries
Woodworth, Pike, and Powell, Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. George F. Stanton,
Rev. Addison P. Foster, Rev. Cyrus W. Wallace, D. D., Hon. Edward S.
Tobey, Rev. Rowland B. Howard, Rev. Albert H. Plumb.

Rev. John S. Ewell led in prayer.

On motion, it was voted “that a committee of three be appointed to
present to the churches the expression of the Association concerning
its debt.” The Rev. George A. Oviatt, Rev. George F. Stanton and Rev.
William L. Gaylord were appointed such committee.

Rev. Heman P. DeForrest read the report of the committee on “Moral and
Religious Education,” as follows:

  The Committee, to whom was assigned the topic of “Moral and Religious
  Education, especially among the colored women of the South,” offer
  their Report with a deep conviction of the central and commanding
  importance of the work thus indicated. The two faculties which, in the
  Freedman, need chief attention, are his intellect and his conscience.
  Of these, the moral faculty must take precedence in importance. By the
  effect of slavery, and its accompanying influences, acting through
  many generations, a blight amounting, in some directions, well-nigh to
  extinguishment, has fallen upon his moral sense. His education, under
  the old system, did not develop this faculty, for it was only the hard
  education of rough contact with life and with men, which, indeed,
  sharpened his intellect sometimes, but buried conscience yet deeper
  under the weight of false teaching and falser custom. His religion
  did not help him here, for it has been a sensuous and emotional
  experience, not deemed inconsistent with the grossest violations of
  moral law. It is the work of Associations like this to solemnize,
  in his behalf, the marriage, subject to no subsequent divorce, of
  religion and morality. And it is, we believe, a happy quality of the
  genius of Congregationalism, that it will not pour oil upon the flame
  of emotional piety, but will chiefly emphasize the spiritual truths
  and moral laws which forever underlie all true religion.

  But now the question arises, whether, in all our planning and thinking
  for the Freedman, too little has not been said and thought by our
  churches in regard to the Freedwoman.

  She, like her brother, has been debased by slavery; debased, moreover,
  in the very citadel of her sacred womanhood, until the very instinct
  on which the sanctity of the home must rest, if it exist at all, has
  become almost extirpated.

  There can be no elevation of the Freedman that does not rest upon
  the moral restoration of the Freedwoman. The position of woman is
  everywhere the measure of moral attainment, and here, where she has
  become the sport and lawful prey of two races, she more than ever
  holds the key of the situation.

  The feeling, gaining strength through all the experience of our
  missionaries and teachers and superintendents, that an effort needs
  to be made for her benefit distinctly, now demands expression in the
  councils of this body.

  Your Committee has no new light upon this subject; it has no specific
  to offer for the evil which makes so great a demand upon our sympathy.
  We can only appeal to this body, and to the churches, whether now,
  in the spectacle of two and a half millions of Freedwomen, of whom
  only a mere fraction are yet under the influence of schools and pure
  churches, lifting up their cry, not “from Greenland’s icy mountains,
  nor India’s coral strand,” nor whence “Afric’s sunny fountains roll
  down their golden sand,” but from the sunny half of these United
  States of America, we have not a call of God, which the dullest ear
  cannot fail to hear. And we, brethren and sisters, are charged with
  the duty of responding to this cry, with no uncertain sound.

  The Committee feel the responsibility which rests upon them in
  undertaking to propose new measures, and hesitate to offer too radical
  suggestions. Yet, they cannot be deaf to the appeal of this kind
  of work, or content themselves with vague and general exhortations.
  We hail as a good omen, and as an indication of Providence as to the
  course to be taken, the fact that already, through the influence of
  one Christian lady of the Northwest, a lady missionary, specially
  instructed to labor among the homes of the Freedmen, by personal
  contact, for the moral and religious education of the colored woman,
  is now actually at work. Our recommendation is that, following out
  this beginning, Christian women of mature experience and wise tact be
  appointed, to such an extent as funds will permit, who shall labor
  for the elevation of the Freedwomen, by those methods of personal
  influence which are, of all, most efficient. We believe that in no
  other way can we strike so nearly at the root of the ignorance and
  immorality which, in behalf of the Freedmen, we contend against.

  But, obviously, it would not be right to take the funds appropriated
  for education or church extension for this purpose, and thereby
  curtail a work which needs, on the contrary, to be at once extended.
  Whence shall the support of these lady workers come, then?

  We feel constrained, in reply, to appeal to that large and earnest
  body to whom we are not wont to appeal in vain--the Christian women of
  our Northern churches. Suppose that in each church an appeal should be
  made to the ladies, already doing much in missionary work, and sending
  generous supplies of clothing and other necessaries to the Freedmen,
  to assume the responsibility of supporting, either themselves or in
  conjunction with neighboring churches, these female workers among the
  Freedwomen. Could they, would they resist the appeal of this sister of
  theirs, upon whom iron despotism has set its mark of deep degradation,
  through no fault of hers, and who now lifts up appealing eyes,
  pleading to be restored to the sisterhood of the pure and the holy,
  to whom manhood owes all that is noblest and highest in its proudest
  development? We know them better than to imagine any such refusal. We
  believe the Christian women of the North, when once this channel is
  opened, will see in it their choice opportunity, and respond in a way
  that shall set forward our work by a great advance.

  And we further offer the suggestion, following again a thought which
  has been born, and has already, to a degree, taken form, in the field
  of labor, that in the principal centres of the Southern field, local
  organizations of women may be constituted, which shall have special
  charge of this work, and through which the funds raised may be applied
  to their purpose.

  By this three-fold chain of operations--the appointment of Christian
  women of mature character to special labor among the Freedwomen,
  the organization of local boards of women at the several centres of
  operation, and support by the Christian ladies of the North--it seems
  to the Committee that this important and too long neglected work
  may be simply and effectually accomplished. And, as rapidly as the
  developments will allow, we believe the work in the field should be
  passed into the hands of the elevated and Christianized Freedwoman
  herself, who, not only by visitation, but by the example of her own
  holy womanhood, and her own Christian home, shall disseminate the
  forces of light through all the darkness of the land where she lives.

                                             REV. H. P. DEFORREST.


Rev. G. S. Pope, of Tougaloo, Miss., spoke upon the topic.

The report of the committee on the “Normal Work of the Association” was
presented by Rev. W. W. Adams, D. D., as follows:

  Your Committee congratulate the Association on the work of the year,
  as represented in the Report. It is but seventeen years since the
  first school for Freedmen was opened, and but twelve years since the
  first Normal school was started. Last year 7,229 pupils were under
  instruction in the schools of this Association, of whom 1,459 were in
  Normal schools. The increase in the number of pupils of all grades
  last year, over the number of the year before, was 1,789; in Normal
  schools the increase was 126; in college and professional schools, 50.
  The eagerness of the colored people to obtain at least a rudimentary
  education has ever been a most encouraging sign. The young man who
  last year walked fifty miles with his trunk upon his back that he
  might enter school, recalls the zeal of the late Dr. Goodell, of
  Constantinople, who, in his youth, also walked sixty miles, with a
  trunk strapped upon his back, that he might enter the Phillips Academy
  at Andover. The demand for teachers from the Normal schools--quite
  beyond the ability to supply them--is one of the surest indications
  that the schools are meeting an urgent need. But the tendency of
  some pupils to consider themselves qualified to become teachers,
  after obtaining the merest rudiments of knowledge, is earnestly to be
  deprecated and discouraged. It needs to be dealt with as an easily
  besetting sin. The replacing of the burned buildings by new ones, at
  a cost within the amounts of insurance recovered, the better location
  of some of them, the increasing, and increasingly expressed sympathy
  of the better classes of Southern whites with the educational work of
  the Association, are also occasions of congratulation. The devotion
  of a portion of the time of pupils to manual labor is to be commended
  on grounds of economy, of industrial training, of the best and most
  diversified moral culture.

  We very earnestly commend to the friends of the Association the appeal
  of its officers for permanent endowments of the higher institutions.
  The elevation of the colored race must be in large measure the work
  of colored men and women. But they must first be trained for their
  work in institutions established among them. Without endowment there
  is no assurance of permanence in the institutions we have already
  given them; without endowment they are not established; the labor
  of the past is not secured from total loss in the future. It needs
  to be distinctly emphasized, also, that the permanent establishment
  of educational institutions of a high order is the great work
  of this Association among the colored men, and the foundation
  for all uplifting work beside. The continuous training of our
  schools--intellectual, industrial, social and moral training, all
  in one--is needed for the development of higher ideals and nobler
  types of character, and, we are happy to add, has already resulted in
  such development in not a few of the pupils. This training is needed
  as a counterpoise to the operation, otherwise mischievous because
  unbalanced, of some prominent forces of the African temperament;
  needed to hold the imagination within the limits of reason and
  righteousness, to curb emotional excess, to save life from becoming
  the sport of changeful impulses. Experience has proved that the
  training given changes the type of piety greatly for the better. It
  is not less fervent, but it is less exclusively and wildly emotional.
  It becomes more rational, more consistent; it has more of principle
  and character in it; it is more truly a service of righteousness, more
  reputable, more effective for good. In order that church membership
  may be helpful rather than harmful to righteousness, and that church
  life among the Africans may be genuinely Christian, there is urgent
  need of a worthier Christian education of the African ministry. It
  is peculiarly our work to give that education. The general education
  provided for through our Normal schools is indispensable, that the
  colored people may deserve and command the respect of their white
  fellow-citizens at the South; that they may clearly understand their
  rights as citizens; may know how to secure them and make wise use of
  them.

  It has been truly said that the work of uplifting the colored race
  is, from beginning to end, a long, slow process of education. In that
  process the Normal schools and higher institutions of the American
  Missionary Association have a place second in importance to no other.
  We have begun a good work; the question now is, whether we shall do it
  or leave it undone through lack of establishing the institutions we
  have founded.

                                         REV. WM. W. ADAMS, D. D.
                                         REV. J. W. WELLMAN, D. D.
                                         REV. E. H. MERRILL, D. D.


Remarks were made upon the report by Rev. Edward H. Merrill, D. D.

After singing, the Association adjourned to meet at two P. M.


Afternoon Session.

At two P. M., the Lord’s Supper was celebrated; Rev. Joshua W. Wellman,
D. D., and Rev. Cyrus W. Wallace, D. D., officiating.

The Association was called to order at 2.45 P. M., President E. S.
Tobey in the chair.

The committee on the debt of the Association, to which Secretary
Strieby was added, presented the following statement and suggestions:

  The American Missionary Association at its meeting in Taunton, Mass.,
  adopted the following statement and suggestions respecting its debt:

  The debt of this Association has been, and still is, a great hindrance
  to its progress, preventing that advance which is so much needed
  along the whole line of endeavors. The Association welcomes, with
  hearty thanks to God, the report of its treasurer, announcing the
  still further reduction of the debt, bringing the amount down, if
  all pledges are paid, to $25,000. An effort having been made at this
  meeting to secure pledges of $25 each, encouraging responses were
  made, amounting to over $3,000.

  In view of these facts it was resolved that an effort be made for
  the total extinction of the debt, and the following suggestions are
  offered as to the methods in which our friends may aid us:

  1. Individuals and households, who are interested in our work, may
  send pledges of one or more shares (of $25 each), as their ability
  and benevolence may suggest, the more wealthy being asked to remember
  that if the debt is paid, some of the contributions must be large and
  liberal.

  2. Pastors may invite their congregations to make such pledges.

  3. Pastors may (as some have volunteered at this meeting to do) bring
  the subject before the local conferences, and awaken an interest in
  securing such pledges.

  4. The Day of Thanksgiving is near at hand, and a glad offering for
  this purpose may be an acceptable gift to the God of all mercies, as
  well as helpful to the Association.

  5. The holiday season, not far distant, may be made the occasion of
  like offerings. The Association intrusts to its Executive officers the
  duty of selecting and carrying out the best methods for laying these
  suggestions before the friends of the despised races of America.

The report was accepted and adopted.

Rev. Edward Strong, D. D., read the report of the Committee on Church
Extension, as follows:

  The Committee to whom was referred the portion of the Annual Report
  which relates to Church Extension at the South, submit the following:

  We notice that the church work, like the educational, is growing on
  our hands. Five new churches--especially if each prove a metropolitan
  or mother church--is a gain for which to give thanks and from which
  to take courage. Sixty-five churches in all, though most of them
  are connected with our educational institutions, or near them, is
  certainly not a bad showing for thirteen years of labor.

  We notice also, with pleasure, a cheering growth the last year by
  conversions from the world. In fifteen only of the churches, this
  growth gives a total of 358 additions, an average of twenty-four. Have
  our Northern churches done so well? It is equally gratifying to learn
  what kind of Christians our churches South are making, or seeking to
  make; to know our students are pledged to work; what these converts
  think of the standard of morality enjoined by the Gospel; the honesty,
  purity and truth--in short, the practical righteousness which God
  ordains. We rejoice to know that this Association has planted, and is
  training, these Southern churches to be the salt of that part of the
  earth--cities on a hill, lights in dark places--so recognized, having
  the reputation of being Bible Christians--industrious, virtuous,
  zealous of good works--thus already having obtained a good report.

  It is cheering to learn that some of the best of the pastors of these
  sixty-five churches have been raised not only from bondage, but from
  all the degradation of slavery--boys picked up in the street, and
  polished like diamonds, for the Master’s use.

  We have certainly made a beginning in the matter of church extension,
  as in that of education. Not the least gratifying feature is seen
  in the character, the growing influence, and reputation, even among
  the whites, which these churches enjoy, though some of them are
  numerically small. By your instrumentality and the grace of God, they
  have learned what a Christian character is, and that Christ’s friends
  are not those who can sing loud and pray loud, whether they are honest
  or thievish, tell the truth or lies, are virtuous or licentious; not
  those who, with these immoralities, crowd sanctuaries and make them
  echo; but, rather, those who keep the commandments of God.

  This Association crowded the years before the war fighting against the
  extension of slavery; then crowded the years during the war, and those
  immediately following it, with efforts to teach the colored people
  to read the Bible; and later, devoted itself to the work of planting
  higher institutions--as at Hampton and Nashville and New Orleans--in
  order to make of the blacks men of a higher, nobler type, teaching and
  preaching men, worthy to lead their host. Shall it now set them to no
  grand work of evangelization among their fellows?

  The question is, whether you, who have always been identified with
  Congregationalism, and still love it, after long trial and large
  observation, will give it a fair trial South? We rejoice in your plan
  to move slowly in this, and wisely. We warmly approve your selection
  of Dr. J. E. Roy to reconnoitre the whole field, and report.

  Palfrey says, “Faith in God, faith in man, and in work,” was the
  brief formula taught by the founders of New England. May we not, the
  children of the Pilgrims, have faith enough in God and in these men to
  give them the church polity of these founders?

  We are encouraged to recommend the planting of Congregational churches
  among the blacks, because we have great advantages in so doing. The
  eager aspiration of the blacks to be men, will help. Congregationalism
  has a clean record South. Has any other of our leading denominations?
  There is no prejudice to be overcome by it, as a polity. In the
  competitions of the denominations on the ground, will not there be
  an advantage for us? Then, again, the colored people look upon this
  Association as a tried friend, and trust it. Is not this an advantage?
  And, further, has not Providence opened the South to our polity, as
  well as piety, in a marked manner? The work already accomplished has
  shown the tree to be good, and given it favor widely, even among the
  old masters. Hence the aid given to our institutions by several of
  the States. Hence the high hope of many whites, that our work will do
  much to tone up the blacks in all that belongs to good citizenship,
  good morality, and proper church discipline. As Mohammedan Turkey,
  and Pagan Hawaii and India, have welcomed the Christian homes planted
  among them by the missionaries, and as the mission churches have been
  a leaven of light in their social and political life, so it has been,
  and will more and more be, as you establish your church centres over
  the South.

  In conclusion, then, we approve what seems to be the thought of the
  Executive Committee--to “advance its activities in the direction of
  saving souls at the South, and organize churches of our polity, as
  really missionary centres of leavening influence. Let the trial of our
  polity at the South be a fair and full one, carrying out our ideas
  of Christian doctrine and morality. Thus, as we pray and believe,
  will that wilderness the sooner bud and blossom like the rose.” We
  recommend, therefore, the adoption of the following resolution:

  _Resolved_, That this Association approves the plan of its Executive
  Committee--to make a careful examination of the field at the South,
  and infuse new activity into its church work, organizing churches,
  where the way is open, on the principles of the Congregational order.

                                        REV. EDWARD STRONG, D. D.
                                        REV. WM. L. GAYLORD.
                                        REV. A. H. PLUMB.
                                        REV. D. O. MEARS.
                                        REV. O. T. LANPHEAR, D. D.

The resolution was adopted.

Rev. Edward S. Atwood, of Salem, presented the report of the committee
upon the “Chinese in America,” as follows:

  The Committee, to whom was referred that portion of the Annual Report
  which relates to mission work among the Chinese in America, would
  respectfully submit the following:

  We recognize with satisfaction the positive and demonstrable success
  of the Association in this department of labor--a success emphatically
  evidenced by the 1,500 gathered into the day-schools; the increased
  usefulness of the Bethany Home; the seventy-five conversions during
  the year, and the ardent desire of these newly-born souls for the
  Gospel light to shine on their native and beloved land. Were we to
  stop here and content ourselves with the mere statistics of progress,
  we should have no hesitation in saying to the officers and the
  missionaries of the Association, “Servants of God, well done!”

  But simple justice compels a larger view of the matter. There is
  something to be taken into account besides these nominal assets. The
  chief worth of the work done lies in the fact that, in the doing of
  it, the Association has been loyal to its old and fixed theory, that
  a man is a man everywhere and always, with a soul to be saved, and
  a Saviour sufficient for its needs. Questions of nationality are
  irrelevant. The simple fact of humanity is all that needs to be known
  in order to institute a legitimate claim for the giving of the Gospel,
  by those who have it in trust. In this department of work, loyalty
  has not been an easy matter. The rough, unreasoning passions of the
  mob have glanced fiercely against it. Iniquity, baptised with the
  name of legislation, has endeavored to thwart it. The conciliatory
  conservatism of timid, good men, has been eager to dispense its
  soporific platitudes, and generous in prescribing its universal
  panacea for all difficulties--“Let us have peace!” The unwarrantable
  enmity to the Mongolian on the Pacific Coast has been supplemented
  and reinforced by the unaccountable apathy on the Atlantic shore of
  the continent. Yet, undaunted by these accumulated obstacles, the
  Association has said, like the great Missionary Apostle; “None of
  these things move me.” “The waves of the Yellow Sea,” it has said,
  “break on a land peopled by men for whom Christ died. If we can reach
  them without crossing thousands of intervening leagues of ocean, so
  much the better.” In spite of hostility, often white-hot; in spite of
  statute books, whose leaves were blistered with iniquitous provisions;
  in spite of the furious rage of lawless crowds, the Association has
  passed through the thick and peril of opposition of every sort,
  and taken by the hand the despised Mongolian, against whom so many
  scowling faces were set, and so many angry hands raised, and called
  him “Brother,” claiming kinship, and tendering the richest offices
  of help. For this, especially, the constituency of this Association
  should say to its management: “Vastly well done.” The old banner under
  which the Society was organized is still “full high advanced.” It is
  no small honor in these degenerate times to find men who are faithful
  to their trust at any cost.

  But more than this, it is believed that in this department the
  Association is doing germinal work. The few early ears that have
  ripened for our encouragement are types and prophecies of a greater
  coming harvest. In any other view of the matter the religion of the
  Gospel is spiritual class legislation. It is suited to the needs of
  the few and not the many. The Cross loses its power under the shadow
  of the Great Wall; and men scorn, as well they may, such a deduction
  as that; they are shut up to the only other possible conclusion, that
  the school, the mission work, the unfolded Word, will effect in the
  Pacific Coast, and among the Chinese immigrants, just what it effects
  here and among us. And, therefore, we say to the Association that its
  high mission in this hour is to push its work. Let it turn a deaf ear
  to all pleadings to stay its hand, however plausible those pleadings
  may be, and from whatever quarter they may come. Let it distrust the
  shallow expedients of so-called statesmen, who are even shallower than
  their expedients. Let it give no heed to the unreasoning taunts and
  empty rage of Communism, but push its work; secure in the fact that
  back of its efforts is the intelligent Christian public sentiment of
  the land; and still more encouraged by the greater fact, that the God
  who has made of one blood all nations, and provided one Gospel for all
  men, is saying with an emphasis that cannot be mistaken, “Go forward!”

                                              REV. E. S. ATWOOD.
                                              REV. G. R. W. SCOTT.

The report was discussed by Rev. E. S. Atwood, Rev. Jesse H. Jones, of
North Abington, Rev. Geo. E. Freeman, of Abington, Rev. A. P. Marvin,
of Lancaster, Rev. S. H. Emery, of Taunton, and Col. Amos Tappan, of
Ipswich. The report was accepted, and the resolution adopted.

Rev. Geo. A. Oviatt gave the report in behalf of the committee on the
“Work of the Association in Africa” as follows:

  Your Committee on so much of the report of the Executive Committee
  as relates to the Mendi Mission in Africa, beg leave to submit the
  following:

  At the time of the last Annual Meeting of this body, the first company
  of colored missionaries was on its way to the Mendi Mission. The plan
  of sending out to Africa men and women of African descent redeemed
  from American slavery, converted and educated at the South, was long
  and thoroughly considered before it was adopted for action. Great care
  was exercised in selecting this first band of colored missionaries,
  and it is evident that the right workers were sent forth to test the
  experiment--persons of deep, earnest piety, of more than ordinary
  common sense, and of sound education, as their communications to the
  Executive Committee show. In February two other missionaries, and
  their wives, were sent out to help the too small number of those who
  set sail for Africa in September.

  This year’s trial has proved two things: (1) That persons of African
  descent can endure the sickly climate of the country of which their
  ancestors were natives, better than white missionaries: and (2) That
  converted and educated Freedmen and women are equal to the work
  of wise, thorough missionary labor in the land of their fathers.
  Everything at the stations to which these brethren and sisters were
  sent, seems to have been improved under their management. Converts
  have been multiplied and pupils gathered into the schools in augmented
  numbers.

  The call is for an enlarged number of missionaries to occupy this
  promising field, and for more ample provisions to enable them to take
  a larger number of native children into their homes, “to be under
  their care, as well as removed from the debasing influences of their
  heathen surroundings.”

  The Executive Committee express the hope that, with the strengthening
  of these mission stations, “they may be made the point of departure
  for a mission into the interior of Africa.”

  It is a grand, inspiriting idea, that the men and women the best
  adapted to civilize and Christianize the millions of Africa, are to
  be found among those who, at the South, were so lately in bondage,
  and fitted for their work as foreign missionaries in Normal schools,
  Colleges, and Theological Seminaries, planted and sustained by
  Northern philanthropists and Christians, not on Northern but Southern
  soil.

  The Executive Committee can only delay to enlarge these missionary
  operations in Africa on account of the too limited amount of means in
  the Treasury of the Association.

  Your Committee present the following _Resolutions_:

  1. That we recognize with heartfelt gratitude to God, His evident
  approval of the plan of attempting to evangelize Africa by the sons
  and daughters of Africans born in this country, brought out of slavery
  under the Proclamation of Emancipation of President Lincoln, and here
  converted and educated for this glorious work in their fatherland.

  2. That we cannot do otherwise than lay on the churches the
  responsibility of increasing their contributions in aid of this
  Association, so as to enable it, at once, to enlarge its operations
  connected with the Mendi Mission, in the hope of sending from this, as
  a centre, bands of laborers into the interior of the continent.

                                             REV. GEO. A. OVIATT.
                                             REV. FRANKLIN AYER.
                                             REV. JOHN C. LABAREE.
                                             REV. G. D. PIKE.

The resolutions were adopted.

The report was discussed by Rev. G. D. Pike, and was then accepted, and
the resolution adopted.


Rev. George M. Boynton presented, as the report of the Nominating
Committee, the following nominations:


PRESIDENT.

  HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.

  Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
  Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
  Hon. WM. CLAFLIN, Mass.
  Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
  Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
  WILLIAM C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
  Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
  Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
  Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
  Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
  Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
  Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
  Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
  HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
  Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
  Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
  DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
  Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
  SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
  Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
  Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
  Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
  Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
  Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
  EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
  DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
  Rev. W. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
  Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
  A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
  Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio
  Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
  Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
  Rev. GEO. THATCHER, LL. D., Iowa.
  Rev. A. L. STOKE, D. D., Cal.
  Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
  Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
  Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
  S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
  PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
  Dea. JOHN WHITIN, Mass.
  Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
  Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
  Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
  Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
  Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
  Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
  WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
  J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
  Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D.,
  DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
  A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass
  Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
  FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
  JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

  Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., N. Y.


DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

  REV. CHARLES L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
  REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
  REV. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.
  EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer_, _N. Y._
  H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer_, _N. Y._
  REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_, _N. Y._


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

  ALONZO S. BALL.
  A. S. BARNES.
  EDWARD BEECHER.
  GEO. M. BOYNTON.
  WM. B. BROWN.
  CLINTON B. FISK.
  A. P. FOSTER.
  E. A. GRAVES.
  S. B. HALLIDAY.
  SAMUEL HOLMES.
  S. S. JOCELYN.
  ANDREW LESTER.
  CHAS. L. MEAD.
  JOHN H. WASHBURN.
  G. B. WILLCOX.


By vote of the Association, the officers named by the committee were
elected. President Tobey made remarks appropriate to his election as
President.

By vote of the Association, the report of the committee on the Indians
was taken from the table, and discussed by President Tobey.

By invitation, Rev. Dr. Rust, Corresponding Secretary of the Freedmen’s
Aid Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church, addressed the
Association.

District-Secretary Powell extended an invitation from the
Congregational Churches of Chicago to the Association, to hold the next
Annual Meeting in Chicago. The Association voted to recommend to the
Executive Committee that, if deemed expedient by them, the invitation
be accepted.

The Secretary then read the minutes, which were adopted.

After the Benediction by Rev. Stephen M. Newman, the Association
adjourned to meet at 7.30 P. M.


Thursday Evening.

An audience filling the church assembled at 7.30 o’clock. The services
opened with a voluntary by the choir. Prayer was offered by Rev.
Jonathan Edwards, of Grantville, Mass. The hymn “Great God of nations”
was then sung by the choir and congregation. Secretary Strieby, then
read a paper on “The Work of Half a Generation among the Freedmen.” The
hymn, “The morning light is breaking” was sung. An address by Rev. Dr.
Hartranft, of Hartford, followed. The hymn “My country, ’tis of thee”
was sung. An address was then made by Rev. Albert H. Plumb, of Boston.
The following vote of thanks to the churches of Taunton, for their
reception of the Association, as proposed by Secretary Woodworth, was
unanimously passed:

  The American Missionary Association renders hearty thanks to the
  Congregational churches of this city, for the invitation to hold its
  Thirty-second Anniversary in Taunton. Especially to the Broadway
  church, for the use of its house of worship for the different sessions
  of the meeting, and of its chapel and parlors for the Committees and
  friends in attendance; to the Winslow church, for the use of its
  chapel and parlors for the entertainment of their numerous guests from
  abroad; to the families of the Congregational churches, for abounding
  and pleasant hospitality; to the Committee of Arrangements, for wise
  and generous plans to meet all demands of the meeting and the wants
  of the guests; to the chorister and choir of this church, for most
  delightful aid in the service of song, and to all who have contributed
  to render the meeting a pleasure and a profit to those who have been in
  attendance.

  Also, it renders sincere thanks to the writers of the different
  papers, and to the Committees and speakers who have given time and
  thought, and so greatly aided in the power and success of the meeting.

A response was made by Rev. Dr. Blake, of the Committee of
Arrangements. The closing prayer was offered by Rev. A. H. Plumb, of
Boston. The Doxology was sung, and, with the Benediction by Rev. Dr.
Hartranft, the Association adjourned.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS OF REV. SYLVANUS HEYWOOD.

MR. PRESIDENT AND CHRISTIAN FRIENDS:

  I do not feel that I can stand here to give any instruction, nor
  scarcely any stimulus, in the work you are engaged in. Your presence
  is enough for that. But there are four or five points which seem to
  need special emphasis at this time--points upon which there appears to
  be some doubt in the minds of the people of the North.

  First, is there absolute necessity of a higher education for the
  Freedmen in the United States? I do not say of a common-school
  education, for all admit the necessity of that. But I apprehend that
  there are many people who doubt the policy of founding universities
  at the South. I have a suspicion that thousands of dollars have been
  withheld from this Association for that very reason. This seems to me
  a most important work. I think upon it depends the vital principle
  of equal rights for all. You may enact laws, and hedge them about
  with penalties for securing the rights of the blacks, but law alone
  will prove a failure. But give to them the highest Christian culture,
  and they will not only demand, but command, their rights. Give them
  a common-school education, and it will be a blessing to them; but
  with nothing more, they will remain but hewers of wood and drawers
  of water. They will be _in_ society, but not _of_ it. But give them
  the highest culture among cultured men, and the case will be far
  different. It is too late in the day to raise the question whether
  they are capable of this. This Association has demonstrated that, day
  by day. I have spent ten years as a teacher among the whites, and two
  among the blacks; and I must say that I accomplished more in those two
  years than in the ten--more in the way of giving instruction. I say it
  is too late to raise that question at all. It is already demonstrated.
  Let them be educated with broad culture. Let them have the training
  that will put them in possession of practical skill, such as shall
  win success. Let them have their own lawyers, well trained in legal
  lore, so that they shall be able--in that natural eloquence in which
  they excel--to carry conviction to dignified courts. Let them have
  clergymen, not only earnest and sanctified, but able to cope with the
  deep things of science and theology--men able to stand before the most
  learned bodies. Let them have statesmen, well grounded in philosophy,
  history and government, so that they will be able not only to win
  victories upon the stump, but in the halls of legislation. Let their
  homes become homes of Christian culture and social refinement Then,
  and not till then, will they cease to struggle for their rights, and
  will take them; and not a dog will dare wag his tongue against them.

  I feel that this is a subject of the most vital importance. Whoever
  considers it, I think will say that this Association has been wise in
  planting these influences at the South. I believe that here lies the
  master-key to its social and political problems.

  The next point to which I would call your attention is the necessity
  of planting new churches all over the South--Congregational churches.
  People ask if they need such churches down there now. Certainly; and
  it is practically impossible to work there without them. We must work
  there with them. We have heard to-day that the old churches in
  the shadow of our institutions have grown purer and better. It is
  absolutely necessary that there should be an influence from the outside
  upon these churches. Men ask after the Uncle Toms of the South--ask if
  it is all imagination. By no means. The Uncle Toms of the South are met
  just about as frequently as the Harlan Pages of the North.

  Men say that the old churches largely stand in the way of their own
  people. People testify that one of the greatest obstacles in the way
  of this educational question is to be found in the pastors themselves
  of those churches. As a class, they do not want their flocks to
  know more than they do. This is one of the greatest difficulties to
  be contended with. We must have churches outside of the old ones.
  Does not the grace of God abound in them? Yes, I believe there are
  multitudes who have it. But when that question is asked, I am always
  reminded of that familiar anecdote of the old clergyman who had a fair
  daughter who was noted for her violent temper. A young man became
  enamored of her, and asked for her hand. The old man was not willing
  to palm off damaged goods. He said, “It is not wise to take her.”
  “Why not?” said the young man; “isn’t she a Christian; isn’t she
  converted?” “Yes,” said the old man, “but you must remember that the
  grace of God can live where you and I can’t.” So the grace of God can
  bring forth influences to serve Him down there, but these churches
  stand as an obstacle. It is absolutely necessary to form new churches,
  that we be not burdened by the old effete organizations. I believe in
  Congregationalism. It may be very well for those of a different polity
  to talk of the God of the hills and the valleys and the dry places and
  streams; but our God is the King of the whole earth. It may be well
  for those of a different polity to quote their different authorities,
  but the only authority we recognize is the authority of Him whose
  dominion stretches from sea to sea and from pole to pole. Such is
  Congregationalism. It is adapted to every human being God has made. It
  may indeed take on different forms. You have pure, limpid water. Pour
  it into different vessels, but it will be the same limpid water still.
  So, take Congregationalism in the tropics or wherever you please, and
  it will be Congregationalism still.

  Brother Pike would not pardon me if I did not allude to Africa. The
  ways of God are mysterious. We must walk by faith, and not by sight.
  We hear His voice saying, “This is the way; walk ye in it.” In this
  darkness we see His hand. The providence of God towards this nation,
  for generations, was exceedingly mysterious. But during the last forty
  years it has been becoming exceedingly clear. In the raising of this
  Society and the doing away with slavery, we can see almost visibly the
  hand of God displayed upon the midnight sky, pointing to that dark
  continent, saying we should send these freemen forth as apostles of
  light, to purify and make glad their ancestral homes. And I believe
  the providence of God is leading us to still greater achievements.

  This Association, born amid the throes of slavery, is almost the
  only organization that stands for that principle which underlies the
  oneness of humanity. It seems to have been raised up that through
  it the churches might bring their influence to bear upon the vital
  issue of the hour. What is it? The same as it has been from the
  beginning of this nation--the same as in India--caste is the barrier
  everywhere. The battle rages to-day from Maine to California between
  classes of men. It is for this Association to stand up and contend
  against the foes that arise against whatever is good and right. If
  this Association ever hesitates thus to stand, whether it be in South
  Carolina, Massachusetts, or the Black Hills, then will its prestige be
  lost. But, thank God, there is no such fate for this Society. When the
  wolves of Communism are barking about our doors; when the shrieks of
  degrading socialism come up into our ears, it is no time to hesitate.
  It is time to resist their filth and set up the banner of that pure
  Gospel, under whose folds can be no bondman--neither Chinaman nor
  black--but where all shall enjoy the equality of the sons of God. We
  can almost see the hand of God visibly pouring into this nation from
  all sides as into the extended hopper of a mighty mill, that here they
  may be amalgamated. Here He brought the red man of the forest; then
  the Anglo-Saxon race; then He reached out to Africa and plucked
  up the black diamond; then He sent the phlegmatic Teutons and the
  Scandinavians; and even now He is opening old Cathay and pouring upon
  us swarms of Asiatics. “He hath made of one blood all nations of men
  that dwell upon the face of the whole earth.” There is no proposition
  which so awakens the fiendish hate of mankind as this. States and
  nations are rising up in indignation against this purpose of God. It
  belongs to Christian people to stand up and denounce God’s curse on
  whoever shall deny His will. Accursed be he who dares to keep out
  any nation or tribe under the heavens! Accursed any political party
  that goes through the country trying to raise a quarrel between men!
  Yea, accursed will be the nation itself that dares to make enactments
  to separate or make distinctions between races of men! It belongs
  to Christian people to stand up, and, in the teeth of antagonism,
  in defiance of States, governments, legislatures, and Protestant
  Congresses in the United States--to declare, “What God hath joined
  together, let not man put asunder.”

  There are many insects from which we shrink with loathing. But here
  comes the naturalist who takes his lens and pours in upon the insect
  the solar ray, and we stand back in amazement at the beauty and
  perfection of the work of God. It is the duty of us all to act the
  part of the naturalist towards these despised races--these degraded
  classes. Let us put them under the lens of that wonderful utterance:
  “Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these ye did it unto
  me.” Pour into that lens the light of the last day, and we shall see
  them endued with the majesty of the Most High God.

  I believe this the pressing duty of the hour. If we shall take counsel
  of our fears--if we are afraid to let Christianity grapple with
  infidel Romanism, even with heathenism, God will remand us back to
  forty years in the wilderness, but will bring in our children to drive
  out these Anakim of our faithless terror.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS ON CHINESE MISSIONS IN AMERICA.

REV. E. S. ATWOOD.

  I am requested to add to the written report a few words, which will
  be unreasonably brief, in view of the importance of the subject.
  I count it a great misfortune that we should have been obliged to
  postpone to the last, weary, unenthusiastic hours of our meeting, the
  consideration of a subject which is one of the great problems this
  Association is set to solve. It would have been well for us if we had
  been allowed time to open the information that is accessible to us on
  this subject. There are many who think the Chinese question a very
  small affair. We get but faint rumors of it on these Eastern shores.
  Yet that little cloud on the Western horizon, not larger than a man’s
  hand to-day, is destined to cover the whole land, and will either
  be found to be filled with tempests or refreshing rain, according
  as the people meet the exigencies of the hour. The Chinese question
  will by-and-by, I believe, assume a proportion quite equal to that of
  the negro question. There is this peculiarity about it--almost every
  other department of work in this Association is amply provided for.
  The question of the evangelization of the Indian is comparatively a
  temporary question; for not many generations will pass before only
  a scattered remnant of Indian tribes will be left in this land.
  The welfare and lifting up of the black race is continually under
  consideration. But who cares for the Chinese? The discussion in regard
  to them is limited and local. And yet their presence on this continent
  is a matter of national interest. It starts grave problems, that have
  somehow to be studied and solved.

  There are three classes in the land to-day who are studying this
  question, and are giving us their conclusions upon it. First of all,
  we have the Communists, east and west, who are trying to grapple with
  the question, and settle it. We have one Dennis Kearney going up and
  down the land, and men say he is a loud-mouthed demagogue, whose
  utterances have no weight of public opinion behind them. Not at all,
  Mr. President. Dennis Kearney is a representative man--a John the
  Baptist, crying, “Prepare ye the way of the Devil, and make his paths
  straight.” Communism, as a whole, proposes to deal with the Chinese,
  by driving them out from the land. If you doubt that assertion, look
  at the facts. Documentary statements in regard to the matter, compiled
  by B. S. Brooks, an eminent counsellor on the Pacific Coast, have been
  presented to a Joint Commission of both Houses of Congress. I wish they
  could be put into the hands of every Christian man. Unfortunately, the
  books that give any real information on these statistics are somehow
  not easily accessible. This setting forth of facts in the documents
  of Mr. Brooks, shows incontrovertibly that Communism in California is
  murderous in its intent towards the Chinese.

  It has put its intention into acts. It has outraged unoffending men,
  and struck them down relentlessly in the public street. Violence
  of that sort is comparatively safe. The testimony of the Chinaman
  cannot be taken in opposition to the white man. The only chance a
  Chinaman, who is about to be murdered, has to obtain justice, is to
  secure a white witness to see it done. The rougher element on the
  Western coast is bound to annihilate the Chinaman. And all for no
  good reason. They are not numerous. There are only 100,000 Chinamen
  scattered up and down the coast. They foment no disturbances. There
  are only two offenses charged against them--grave offenses--and these
  are, that they live economically, and don’t get drunk; and so are able
  to work for lower wages than the masses of the Irish and native-born
  population.

  There is another power trying to solve this problem, and that is the
  politicians. They are no more successful than the Communists. They
  have secured the enactment of certain statutes, but those statutes are
  often iniquitous. The Legislature of California has enacted what seems
  to me the most infamous laws that ever disgraced any statute-book. The
  Fugitive Slave Law was a Golden Rule in comparison. Let us see. It is
  well known that the Chinamen are laundry men. They do their work in
  their shops, and carry it out themselves. Forthwith, the Legislature
  of San Francisco enacts that every laundryman who carries his work
  out with a horse shall pay a dollar a month; but every laundryman who
  carries it out by hand shall pay FIFTEEN dollars a month.

  The Chinese are gregarious. They crowd together in tenement-houses,
  from which people of other nationalities are excluded. By Section
  Second of an Act approved April 3, 1876, by the Legislature of
  California, it is provided that “Any person or persons found sleeping
  or lodging, or who hires or uses for the purpose of sleeping, any room
  or apartment which contains less than 500 cubic feet of space in the
  clear, for each person so occupying such room or apartment, shall be
  deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be punished
  by a fine of not less than ten, or more than fifty dollars, or by both
  such fine and imprisonment.” That is, says Mr. Brooks, as a penalty
  for lodging in rooms containing less than 500 cubic feet of space,
  they are to be thrust into prison cells of less than one-fifth the
  dimension. Certainly

           “For ways that are dark, and tricks that are vain,
            The heathen Chinee is [NOT] peculiar.”

  Mr. Luttrell moved in Congress that the steamboat bills be so amended
  as to forbid the employment of a Chinaman in any capacity whatsoever.
  Congressman Shelley, of Alabama, introduced a bill providing that all
  Chinamen coming to the United States, except officially, be taxed $250
  per capita, or serve five years in the penitentiary. The Chinese in
  California are made to pay more than $42,000 school taxes annually,
  while their children are not admitted to the public schools, neither
  are there other schools provided for them. Thirteen hundred Chinamen
  asked the California Legislature for school privileges for 3,000 of
  their children, seeking only such as are provided for those of African
  and Indian descent. Their petition was immediately laid on the table,
  and stigmatized as dangerous. This is only a specimen of this class
  legislation on the Pacific Coast. They are very ingenious there. Just
  as fast as one law is decided unconstitutional, they have another.

  Communism crushes the Chinese. The politician says, “They sha’n’t
  come here if we can prevent it by oppressive legislation.” As a
  protest against the unreasonableness of this course of procedure, the
  testimony of Postmaster-General Key is of special value. In a recent
  conversation, he gave the following as the result of his observations
  during his visit to the Pacific Coast: “The politicians,” said Mr. Key,
  “are almost to a man against the Chinese, and antagonize them bitterly.
  The merchants, the manufacturers, the farmers, and nearly the entire
  employing class, are very fond of the Chinese, and prefer them to any
  other laborers. They speak in the highest terms of the Chinese; they
  say that they are docile, obedient, obliging, punctual, hardworking,
  and faithful; they are exceedingly thrifty and economical; they are
  temperate in their habits, do not drink liquor of any kind, eat very
  little meat, and live almost entirely on rice. It is wonderful to see
  how little a Chinaman can live on. Their economy struck me as something
  marvellous. Large numbers of them sleep in a single ill-ventilated
  room; they constantly violate the fundamental laws of health, yet they
  are seemingly very healthy. I was astonished to learn they had no
  hospital. I was shown through the Chinese Quarter of San Francisco by
  the Mayor, and saw everything in that locality; but there are a number
  of places here in Washington fully as bad, if not worse, than anything
  I saw in Chinatown. I also observed that the railroad companies
  employed a large number of Chinamen, and found them excellent workmen.”
  Evidently, the politicians are not competent to the settlement of the
  Chinese question.

  The American Missionary Association takes hold of the matter in the
  right way. It says: Let the Chinese come and be treated as men.
  Let them have the gospel preached to them, and be lifted into a
  civilization that is level with your own. Communism has not succeeded,
  so far. The politician has not succeeded. The American Missionary
  Association has shown itself able to grapple with the question. They
  have got hold of the right end of the rope. If they are encouraged by
  the churches of America, they will solve this problem.

  There appeared in the _Congregationalist_, some weeks ago, an
  editorial of great merit, in which this radical mistake was made: it
  was a sort of apology for the Chinese, because they were so few in
  numbers. It said they were decreasing instead of increasing. Why, Mr.
  Chairman, look across the ocean and see that great nation, covering
  one-tenth of the globe, and holding one-third its population. So
  crowded is it that millions (even more than our entire population)
  who never have a home upon land, are born, live and die floating
  upon rivers and canals. A more industrious race is not; neither can
  agriculture, which still ranks far above any other employment, be
  found anywhere else carried to such perfection of thoroughness. There
  is no idleness among these millions. The monstrous human ant-heap is
  astir. They are also an educated people, nimble in figures, as well
  as in all kinds of labor. There is but one written language for all
  the population, which has been transmitted, with even no dialectic
  changes, for at least 2,500 years. It is a nation industrious and
  frugal. We talk about the heathen Chinese, but we had better talk
  about the heathen Anglo-Saxon. What useful art is practised to-day
  that China has not had for centuries? What we count the great
  discoveries of modern science, may turn out not to be so modern
  after all. I saw a statement made within ten days, that it has been
  discovered that Edison’s phonograph was known in China two hundred
  years before Edison was born. China has a history--a record which
  cannot be ignored.

  We do vastly ill when we talk about the “heathen Chinee.” Their
  religion is something against which we set our faces; but their
  character is worth commendation. I was talking, the other day, with
  a gentleman who had passed the greater part of his life in China. He
  said there was not an element in the Japanese character that was not
  in the Chinese, and of the two, he considers the Chinese the more
  hopeful. In dealing with the Chinese, we are not dealing with refuse
  material. China is a great nation. It has its place among the foremost
  of the earth. It is a sad thing for this great nation of ours, if it
  cannot endure the little leaven on the Pacific Coast. Do you suppose
  it will affect the great mass of Christianity unfavorably?

  Over 300 of the Chinese have already been received as members of
  the Protestant Churches in California, and 700 are under Christian
  instruction, studying the doctrines of our faith, while 1,000 attend
  Sunday-school, and two young men are preparing for the Christian
  ministry. Even those who do not come under the influence of such
  instruction can scarcely be said to be the worst people in the land.
  In 1875, of the 7,643 arrests for drunkenness, not one was a Chinaman;
  of the 3,263 paupers admitted to the alms-house, only six were
  Chinamen; of 83 murderers hanged during the last year in the United
  States, not one was a Chinaman.

  If any other race, born or naturalized, on this continent, can show a
  similarly good record, let them step to the front and declare it.

  The truth is, Mr. President, we are only standing on the threshold
  of this great question. I believe if you and I live to come to these
  meetings ten years hence, less will be said about the blacks and more
  about the Chinese. We need to understand this great work now opening
  before us. We ought to remove one source of prejudice against the
  Chinese. Men say the Chinese must go, because their coming reduces
  their wages. I happen to have a statement of wages in California
  for the past year, clipped only a few months since from a San
  Francisco paper: Carpenters, from $3 to $3.50; bricklayers, $4 to $5;
  painters, $3; plasterers, $3.50; hod-carriers, $3; stone-cutters, $4;
  machinists, $3 to $4; common laborers, $2; house work in families,
  per week, $6 to $7. Can we make a show equally in favor of the wages
  of the workingmen on this sun-rise side of the continent, where the
  Chinese are insignificant as a competing power? The truth is, all
  this cry about their taking the bread out of our children’s mouths is
  simply nonsense.

  But it is said there is another difficulty. The Irishman comes to this
  country, and is assimilated. The German, also, and is assimilated.
  The Chinaman comes, and he alone is not assimilated. Why not? First
  of all there is no provision for his naturalization, if he desires
  it. The sixth article of the Burlingame Treaty provides that “Chinese
  subjects visiting or residing in the United States, shall enjoy the
  same privileges, immunities and exemptions in respect to travel or
  residence as may be enjoyed by the citizen-subjects of the most
  favored nation; but nothing herein contained shall be held to confer
  naturalization upon the citizens of the United States in China, nor
  upon subjects of China in the United States.” More than this, there
  is a certain stress of public opinion, which is weightier than treaty
  provisions. The head of the Chinese Embassy in this country was
  confronted with this question; “Why is it that your countrymen come
  here alone, without any families?” He replied: “It is about as much
  as a Chinaman can do to keep his head on his shoulders alone, without
  bringing his family.” There is nothing in the nature of things to
  prevent the absorption of the Mongolian into American citizenship. It
  seems to be the peculiar office of this nation to assimilate every
  element. It makes no difference what our estimate of a man is; if he
  is a man he can, by the power of the gospel, be brought into oneness
  with us. Walk up and down the pavement of the mosque of St. Sophia,
  and here and there you brush with your steps bits of gilded and
  colored glass that, rude in shape and void of beauty, seem only fit to
  be swept into a corner; but lift your eyes to the seraphim that blaze
  in flaming mosaics on the ceiling, and you see how the artist’s skill
  has wrought just such rough fragments into forms of grandeur that awe
  the soul. Our American Christianity gathers the best and the worst of
  the race forces of the world, and is able, by God’s good help, out of
  them to compact a nationality with which to face the world.

  “The Chinese must go,” Mr. Kearney says. Yes, we accept that motto,
  but we put our own meaning to it. We say, “the Chinese must go” and
  come, whenever and wherever they please. This Association is called of
  God, I believe, to stand up and assert that, as it has opportunity, no
  effort shall be spared to give them place among the sanctified of the
  land.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS UPON THE AFRICAN MISSION.

REV. G. D. PIKE.

  MR. PRESIDENT:--In seconding the report respecting the Mendi Mission,
  I beg leave to say, that there are four points of interest we ought to
  consider.

  1. One is the Providential call of this Association to Tropical
  Africa. At the beginning of its existence, as Abraham heard the voice
  of the Lord, saying, “Get thee out of thy country, into a land I will
  shew thee,” so the fathers of this Association heard the call of God
  and entered the Dark Continent, anticipatory of those great events
  about to transpire. In 1842, when the Mendi Mission was established by
  the return of the Amistad captives, who had been freed from slavery in
  America, the most important parts of Central Africa were either left
  blank on our maps, or filled up with great deserts, mountains of the
  moon, and figures of lions and dragons. It was known, however, that
  the Mendi country was a great slave preserve, from which ten thousand
  black people were sent annually into bondage. The Amistad Committee
  at once pre-ëmpted a portion of that great and wonderful missionary
  field, which is now so signally attracting the attention of the
  civilized world.

  2. A second point of interest pertains to the land that has been shown
  us.

  By turning to your maps, you will discover that the back lot of the
  Mendi Mission extends eastwards 4,200 miles, on the parallel of about
  seven degrees north latitude, over a fertile zone of tropical country.
  Mr. Stanley tells us the object of his journey was, “To flash a torch
  of light across the western half” of this zone. Other explorers
  have contributed their light. Lieutenant Burton, in ’57, carried
  his torch as far as the Tanganyika. Captain Speke announced to the
  world about the same time that he had discovered a mighty inland sea,
  surrounded on every side by the “richest and pleasantest garden in
  the world;” and the Victoria Nyanza Lake, with Mtesa’s kingdom, were
  added to our knowledge and wealth--alluring alike to the statesman,
  merchant and missionary. Meanwhile David Livingstone moved up from
  the southeast, illumining the whole regions of the Zambezi River--the
  Nyassa, Bangweolo and Tanganyika Lakes--proceeding as far as Nyangwe
  on the unknown Lualaba--scattering through all his reports those
  seed thoughts respecting Christian missions, that have developed
  into desires to carry the light of life to the “real heathen” in
  those latitudes. Then, Sir Samuel Baker called the attention of the
  world afresh to ancient Ethiopia, with one hundred and forty millions
  of acres of the richest land in the world; covered with millions
  of people, herds of cattle, and a varied and luxurious vegetation.
  Discovering also the Albert Nyanza Lake, embosomed amidst mountain
  ranges--the abodes of frost and snow--and hardy, warlike tribes. Dr.
  Schweinfurth also penetrated far into the back lot of our mission;
  flashing his chemical and botanical light, revealing most beautiful
  flora--every variety of fauna and fish--to say nothing of pigmies and
  giants. Neither has Commander Cameron contributed the least by his
  journey across the Continent from East to West. The light given us by
  these seven explorers is woven into a rainbow of promise, which spans
  those unknown slave preserves of former generations--beautiful as
  “Canaan’s fair and happy land” to the Father of the faithful.

  If you start from our Mendi Mission and proceed a few hundred miles
  southeast, you enter the West African gold fields in Ashantee land,
  where the native rulers are covered with golden ornaments, carrying
  gold-hilted swords, and attended by hundreds of followers, wearing
  gold plates upon their breasts, with royal cooks serving their
  masters with golden spoons. If you journey still farther, to one
  degree of North latitude on the Livingstone, you reach a country
  where they build their temples of ivory, and construct their boats
  with accommodations for eighty oarsmen, and fight their battles with
  vast armies. If you keep straight on, you reach Munza’s kingdom,
  “enriched by such beauties as might be worthy of Paradise.” Still
  further, you see the arena of the missionary labors of Rev. Chas. New;
  where high mountains rise one above another until they are lost in
  clouds--mountains with beautiful slopes, covered with patches of
  cultivated land, and irrigated by brooks, streams and torrents, which
  tumble and splash on all sides. Meanwhile, you would have journeyed
  over countries six thousand feet above the level of the sea with an
  equable climate, and other favorable conditions, such as led Captain
  Speke to prophecy that in course of time “one of the greatest nations
  on earth” would be built up in the heart of Africa.

  3. But there is another point of quite as much interest to us. I refer
  to the inspirations that have been kindled in the hearts of Christians
  in Africa’s behalf; the efforts that have been put forth since our
  Mission was established for reclaiming Africa. Here let me refer
  briefly to parallel Providences. There are three of these which are
  very striking: (1) The revelations to us of the fertility, resources
  and people of the vast interior of Central Africa; (2) The abolition
  of American slavery; (3) The eagerness of people of African descent
  for education at the South, coupled with a great desire to emigrate to
  Africa (It is probable that not less than half a million black people
  in America have signified their desire to go to Africa within the
  last twelve months). To this must be added the desire manifested by
  Christians of our own race, everywhere to follow up these providences
  with missionary endeavors. These have been put forth by the English,
  Scotch, German and American; skirting the borders of Equatorial
  Africa, both on the East and West Coast; resulting in the conversion
  of thousands of heathen during the past twenty-five years. Since the
  close of our war, and more especially during the past five years,
  great enthusiasm has been manifested for what are termed Central
  African Missions--missions in the lake regions upon the highlands of
  the interior.

  The Scotch and English have planted their stations on the Nyassa
  Lake. The London Missionary Society had, at last reports, a corps of
  missions, heading towards the Tanganyika, while the Church Missionary
  Society has occupied Mtesa’s kingdom, in Uganda, on the shores of
  the Victoria Nyanza, and the Baptists of Great Britain are searching
  for a station on the Livingstone River. The fertile country thus
  being entered, extends for four thousand miles from east to west, in
  some latitudes, and three thousand from north to south, and probably
  contains a hundred million people.

  In the providence of God, the American Missionary Association is on
  that ground. It is the one missionary society of our denomination that
  sustains missions there. We believe we have an inheritance in that
  country, and a great destiny in connection with its redemption. We
  have been true to the negro from the beginning, seeking to do right
  in his behalf, without fear or favor. I think it is not too much to
  assert that heaven believes in this Association; that God created it,
  and will use it for great things in Africa. Good men have believed
  in it. Mr. Avery gave to it property valued at $100,000, for African
  Missions. Others, we trust, will follow his example; for we suspect
  the negro was right when his attentive ear caught the accents which he
  wove into his song:

                  “The Lord said to Gabriel:
                   Take down the silver trumpet,
                   Loud as the seven thunders!
                   Wake the sleeping nations--
                   You will see the Christian rising.”

  We are truly seeing the Christian rising--as “the trumpet sounds it in
  our souls”--that God has come to reclaim Africa.

  4. The fourth point of interest relates to what we have been trying to
  do about it. The story of the departure of our colored missionaries
  has been sufficiently told. The result of their first year’s efforts
  has been spread before you. Let me give you, in their own language,
  their convictions as to the best missions for Africa. Mr. A. E.
  White--a Hampton student, now at Avery Station--writes: “You would
  like to know what I think about colored missionaries. My firm belief
  is that they can do more than any other missionaries under the sun.
  The natives look upon a white person as unnatural, and think he is
  above them in every way, and that God made him so. They also think it
  is of no use for them to try to do the things they see the white man
  do. But, on the other hand, when they see a colored man do anything,
  they think if he can do it, they can do it themselves. Do not think
  I say this because I am a colored man. I say it because I know it is
  true.”

  Mr. Albert Miller, who went out from the Fisk University, writes:
  “If Africa is to be evangelized, as I believe it will be, it must be
  done through the children of the summer and sunny clime, educated
  and Christianized in the South. You in America can’t see this as
  plainly as one who mingles with this people, and has all chances to
  investigate in regard to this matter.”

  It gives us pleasure to state that the success of our colored band
  beyond the great waters, warrants as strong expressions as those I
  have quoted. A letter from Rev. Floyd Snelson, dated West Africa,
  September 13th, contains the following: “The 24th of this month
  will make one year since we left New York. Result of work, three
  stations are opened, nearly three hundred children have been enrolled
  in the day schools, and about the same number, old and young, in
  Sabbath-schools. From among these numbers, twenty-four have given
  their hearts to Christ and united with the Church, and are endeavoring
  to lead Christian lives. The object of the missionary is to go forward
  with the work into the interior. There are many places which might be
  opened to the saving of souls, if the money and men were furnished.”

  I repeat, brethren, we had an early call to our African field. God
  has spanned His bow of light and promise over it. He has kindled
  inspirations in our hearts concerning it. He has prospered the
  freedmen who have gone forth for its redemption.

  Surely we have a right to believe “the great Admiral, who knows the
  way,” has taken our ship in tow, and, as the Jubilees sing,

      “The old Ark is a movering, a movering, a movering;
       The old Ark is movering, a movering along.”

  Shall we remember our birthright, and enter more fully upon our
  inheritance? Shall we go up, with the other great missionary
  societies, to possess this land? Shall we return over the sea, with
  songs and rejoicing, those sable sons and daughters, whose fathers
  came with chains and groans to our American shore?

  Notwithstanding our great work at the South, I verily believe this to
  be our greatest, and that the mighty Ruler of all events will crown
  our efforts in this direction with magnificent success. Therefore, Mr.
  President, I most heartily second this Report.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ANNUAL MEETING.

We have given, as usual, in the MISSIONARY next following our Annual
Meeting, a large part of our increased space to the Report of the
Executive Committee, the minutes of the meeting, and the addresses made
on that occasion. Here we need only to add a few general observations
on the special features of the three days at Taunton.

First of all, the attendance was gratifying both as to numbers and
quality. The earlier sessions drew together more people than are
ordinarily present at the start; and, despite the two rainy days which
followed, the numbers increased to the end. The evening meetings
were crowded, and, had the weather been fine, would have doubtless
overflowed, so as to have made the opening of a second church
necessary. It was a representative gathering, too, of ministers, well
known for their active interest in all good works, and of substantial
laymen from Massachusetts and the coasts beyond. We should be glad if,
more and more, the men who contribute either largely or statedly to our
work, would come to these assemblies, and question the methods of our
work and of our administration of their gifts. The executive officers
of the Association desire to maintain relations of perfect frankness
with those whose trustees they are, are glad to answer all inquiries,
and to submit to all intelligent criticism, to meet with the special
committees when requested, and to give all possible information;--sure
that, as in this case, such detailed knowledge of their ways and works
will only furnish a better basis for the confidence, so largely given,
of the churches and the friends of the lowly.

We need not repeat here what is fully set forth in the preceding
pages--the reports of the year’s work and of its indorsement by the
constituency of the Association. Rather we will confine ourselves to
the things which do not there appear.

The sermon, on the first evening, by Rev. S. E. Herrick, D. D., was
full of grand thoughts, clothed in words of forceful grace, from the
text: “But ye _are_ a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of Him
who hath called you out of darkness into His marvellous light.”--1.
Peter, ii, 9.

Three thoughts were deduced from those words set forth, and with
ample illustration: (1) God has a people in the world, not marked by
geographical or race lines, and yet one people and one nation, who are
such through their relation to God by Jesus Christ; (2) This people has
undergone a marvellous transformation from darkness into His light; (3)
It is intrusted with a solemn priestly function, a sacrificial work,
for the redemption of men. The special priestly work of God’s people
in this land was set forth, and the historic fact that, having failed
to fulfill it, they were made to suffer on the altar of sacrifice, and
that unless they should meet the obligations of their office now, they
must again be called to an account.

Five papers of great value were read during the meetings. These have
been printed in full in the supplement to the Boston _Traveller_, and
largely circulated among our friends.

1. “The Present Time all-important in the salvation of our Country,” by
Rev. Stacy Fowler, D.D. The paper showed how this was a critical time
in our history as a nation; the great need, a revival of “the American
spirit,” especially in these three respects--the nation’s faith in God,
the purity of the family, and the elevation of the lowly. The Church
must do the work. Incidentally, a strong argument was made to show the
deteriorating tendency of the amalgamation of races, sustained by the
testimony of Prof. Lewis Agassiz.

2. “The Denominational Polity of the American Missionary Association,”
by Rev. G. L. Walker, D. D. The real question is, shall we only
seek to Christianize, or shall we also try to Congregationalize the
Freedmen? The paper discussed the nature of Congregationalism, and
the prevalent characteristics of the colored race; and, from the
comparison, drew conclusions not very favorable to the prospects of
denominational success, yet by no means discrediting what has already
been accomplished in that direction, or discouraging further efforts.

3. “America’s Opportunity the World’s Salvation,” by Rev. C. L.
Woodworth. The end of Christian work is to spread the saving knowledge
of the Lord Jesus Christ. This needs human activities, directed with
strategic wisdom and sanctified energy. Each nation has its peculiar
work: England to send forth Christian and civilizing agencies through
her widely scattered colonies; America to Christianize the peoples from
other lands who come to her shores; and to send back, through them, the
Gospel of Christian civilization to their benighted countrymen.

4. “A Revival of Righteousness toward the Despised Races of America,”
by Rev. Ebenezer Cutler, D. D. That they are despised is the main
indictment which the paper details at length. This unrighteousness
prejudices our Christian work, restrains the heartiness of many, even,
who are engaged in it, and hinders the blessing of God on our labors.
This revival must begin by reflection, leading to repentance; must
go on to the repeal of unjust and the execution of just laws, to a
righteous public sentiment, and such atonement as can be made for past
wrongs.

5. “The Work of Half a Generation among the Freedmen,” by Secretary
Strieby, in which the progress since emancipation was traced, supported
by much important testimony, in material, educational and religious
prosperity.

We have given these brief analyses only to serve as an index to the
contents of these papers, and not at all as a substitute for their
perusal. Still less would it be possible to make good to our readers
the misfortune of their absence from this inspiring gathering. We are
confident that we shall feel the impulse of it through the year.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are close upon the threshold of a new year. The churches, many
of them, at this time, are making up their schedules of benevolence
for 1879. Do not forget, we pray you, to give a good place to the
Association, whose work is among the least of these, the Master’s
brethren, in our own land. Do not forget, you who apportion your weekly
contributions among the various fields, to give its due share, as God
shall give you light, to this peculiar work which presses its claims by
so many sacred pleas, and on the timely cultivation of which depend so
largely the permanence and purity of the spring itself. We would not
have you neglect Judea, and Samaria, nor even the uttermost parts of
the earth, but only beseech you, earnestly and tearfully, _Don’t forget
Jerusalem_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several thousand dollars of the money pledged for the reduction of our
debt, is made conditional upon our paying up the full amount by the end
of this year. We beg our friends to bear this fact in mind, as a spur
to make their thoughts quicker, and their hands obey their generous
promptings without delay. We cannot afford to lose this offered help,
and you cannot afford to have us. The impetus given at the Annual
Meeting to this debt-destroying work is not abated; our friends are
reminding us of their interest daily; some of those who were present at
the meeting are pressing it, on their own account, in the States from
which they came. How soon will you enable us to make our proclamation
of emancipation from this bondage?

       *       *       *       *       *

Our readers will see that we have endeavored, in this number of the
MISSIONARY, to present them with the doings and the sayings of the
Annual Meeting not already put into print and circulation. The valuable
and stirring addresses by Rev. Messrs. Atwood, Heywood and Pike, we
have been able to get in form already. Other equally thoughtful and
forcible addresses, though reported, have not yet come to us in such
shape that we can use them immediately. What you find here is what you
did not find in the Supplement to the _Traveller_. We beg you, then, to
“read, mark, learn and inwardly digest.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A new cartridge, No. 5, of the series of pamphlets begun last year, is
ready for distribution, and contains Secretary Strieby’s review of half
a generation of work among the Freedmen. As a collation of facts and
testimony, we commend it as furnishing to thoughtful men the means of
forming their own opinions on the success of past labors, and on the
hopefulness and the duty of pressing on the good work already begun
patiently to the desired end.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three Communion Sets are needed for as many churches near Talladega,
Ala. Churches at the North can make good use of their old ones if they
are about to replace them with new.

We invite attention to the call of Mr. Connett, in another column, for
means to erect cheap cottages for the accommodation of students. The
small sum needed for each cottage will enable many of our readers to
accomplish a definite and useful object, who cannot undertake larger
enterprises. We indorse most heartily the appeal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Rebecca Tyler Bacon, daughter of Rev. Leonard Bacon, D.D., died
at New Haven, Ct., October 26th, 1878. She was a woman of rare gifts,
of great intelligence, and of extraordinary ability. She had the true
missionary spirit in a self-sacrificing devotion for the welfare of
others, especially of the unfortunate and the debased.

The Normal Institute, at Hampton, Va., was much indebted to her wise
management for its successful organization, and the impress of her mind
and spirit will remain while that institution stands. She was a power
for good in her native city, where her counsel and direction were given
to many public and private charities, with untiring devotion.

Her faithful and tender ministry as the eldest daughter and sister,
amid trials and sorrow, are best appreciated by those whom she cheered,
and comforted, and strengthened. Thousands in our churches will deeply
sympathize with her honored and venerable father in this bereavement.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM SCHOOLS AND CHURCHES.

WILMINGTON, N. C.--Religious interest is reported. Two young men have
been received into the church. Others seem very thoughtful. “Our little
flock is a working one.”

MCLEANSVILLE, N. C.--The Lord’s Supper was administered, October 13th,
to about 100 communicants. Eleven united with the church on profession,
ten of whom received baptism.

ATLANTA, GA.--The University is fuller than ever before at this time of
the year. The girls’ hall is crowded, and more are coming. The church,
under Mr. Ashley’s care, is flourishing in numbers and activity.
Several conversions have occurred during the summer. Fifteen persons
stand propounded for membership. Storrs School, which has been for
several years under the care of the city Board of Education, is opened
this fall again, under the care of the A. M. A., and is full to the
limit of its capacity.

SAVANNAH, GA.--Mr. Koons has been transferred from the Emerson
Institute, at Mobile, to the Beach Institute, at Savannah, which has
re-opened in its new building, with over 200 pupils.

MOBILE, ALA.--Rev. D. L. Hickok goes from Talladega to Mobile, to take
charge both of the church and of Emerson Institute.

ANNISTON, ALA.--A large number of conversions are reported at this
place. Thirty-four members were received into the church Sept. 22d.
Twenty-six were baptized.

MONTGOMERY, ALA.--Swayne School re-opened October 1st. It has enrolled
the first week, 334 pupils. The teachers from the North reached their
posts just in time, for the city was quarantined against Louisville the
day after their arrival.

TALLADEGA, ALA.--There have been four or five conversions in the last
few weeks in this church, and continued meetings in all the mission
churches about here with a marked degree of interest.

HELENA, TEXAS.--As the result of protracted meetings, following the
meeting of the Association, ten persons were received into the church.

TOUGALOO, MISS.--The University will re-open on Thanksgiving Day.

NEW ORLEANS, LA.--On account of the terrible plague of the Summer,
Straight University will not be opened until the first Monday in
December.

NASHVILLE, TENN.--At Fisk University the yellow fever deterred the
students from a prompt attendance at the beginning of the term. The
school is increasing weekly.

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.--The Central South Conference met here November 7th.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA, GA.

Students’ Reports of Summer Work.

MRS. T. N. CHASE.

School has opened with larger numbers than for several years. Our
graduates seem to be doing much toward recommending the school. The
first Sabbath afternoon of each new school-year is given up to reports
from our students, who have been teaching through our summer vacation
of three months. Nothing in all our school work interests me so much
as these reports. The only alloy in my enjoyment is that thousands of
Northern friends, whose hearts would be equally cheered by them, cannot
enjoy them too.

Those who attend meetings of the A. B. C. F. M., and are thrilled with
the reports of returned missionaries, know something of our pleasure.
Yet, I suspect ours is greater, for these missionaries are of our own
training, many of them led to Jesus in our own school, and the fields
reported are the benighted spots of our native land.

I will copy a few jottings, hastily taken at the time. The first one
says: “I have the same old story to report, except a few new things.
Have taught in Monroe Co. for four summers. The first year no white
people visited the school; the second two came; the third year four;
this year thirty or forty. All think highly of Atlanta University, and
the Commissioner begged me to supply the county with teachers from this
school. People are not willing to sell land. Colored people doing well
as they can; anxious to get up higher and want teachers to help them
up.”

Another says: “I had a half hour of Bible study each morning. Devoted
part of Friday afternoons to talks against tobacco and whiskey. All
the Sunday-school material the people had was a catechism and some
papers left locked up by the last Atlanta teacher and not used since.
Only four colored people own land. Landowners seem to ask such a price
as they know never can be paid. Some bargain for land, and then pay
enormous interest. One man pays one hundred and fifty dollars a year
interest--all he can save. I advised them to save their money till
they got enough to pay cash for their land. Met several white young
men, professing Christians, and had pleasant talks with them. Closed
school a little before it was time to return, and picked cotton in the
meantime.”

One of our girls, who graduates this year, says: “The people seem
poorer than last year; crops failed. The land is poor, and they pay
high rent for it. But the children are advancing in knowledge each
year. The school is well classified. Had an exhibition at close. Did
not spend much time on it, but had them learn their parts well. Several
white visitors attended it. One of the gentlemen talked well to the
people on morals. He went around and told the people I was very smart.
I was told another one said I could read and write better than any
white woman in the county.”

Another girl said: “The white people did not want teachers from
Atlanta, because they took the money out of the county. They kept me,
however, and wanted the people to watch me. When I closed they urged me
to stay till Christmas.”

One of our youngest teachers said: “I reached the place in which I
was to teach on ‘Big Meeting’ day, and the people were very angry to
see me, for a daughter of the most prominent colored man of the place
had been teaching there some years, and wished to continue. She was
very incompetent, and the Commissioner had sent for me. The father
electioneered for his daughter at the ‘big meeting,’ told them she
would wait on them for their pay; she would be there if there was
but one scholar; she’d always look after her chickens, etc.; but the
Commissioner said to them: ‘This young man can write the best hand in
the county, and you’d better take him.’ So, after offering to teach
for a very little from the patrons, I got the school. A white man had
given the people some land if they would build a church. They did so,
but used it during the week for school. This made the donor of the land
angry, as he did not wish them to have a school. The year before he
and his wife went to the building, drove off the teacher, and then he
nailed up the door on the inside, while his wife stood on guard with
his gun. This summer, when my school was nearly through, the building
was burned. It was very plain who did it. So, for the little while, we
all went to a cotton-gin house. We laid some shingles down for a floor,
and hauled some logs in for seats. A paper laid over the gin served for
my desk. We had our closing exercises under a bush arbor. One day I
asked the children, ‘How many drink whiskey?’ Twenty or thirty held up
their hands and said ‘pa and ma drink it, and give it to me.’”

Another says: “I see great improvement in old people and children. Good
many own land and are still buying. One man owns two hundred acres.
Another bought some land for eight hundred dollars, and paid half last
year, and is in a fair way to pay the rest this year. I did not ask a
boy or girl to quit whiskey or tobacco, but I preached temperance by
example and quiet conversation. There is harmony between the races.
They visit each other’s churches. The bell of a white church tolled for
a colored woman. This year I had my first exhibition, because I thought
they better learn to read and write first, then exhibit after they had
something to show. Prepared the children after school. All the white
people attended.”

Another said: “The morals of the people are fearful. They don’t expect
teachers to teach morality. Every example set before our people is one
that has been contaminated by slavery. If I see any one making for this
place I feel something will be done for him. Every Atlanta student I
see, I feel, ‘There goes one that will liberate our people from the
monster, Immorality.’ Asked the barkeeper if he sold much to ministers
and church members. He replied, ‘Most who buy are church members.’ Then
he said, ‘Do you see that man with a big locket on his watch chain?
He owes me six dollars for whiskey.’ He was the prominent minister
of the place. Still there is much progress in temperance. There is
an increasing kindly feeling between the rich and poor. I heard the
editor of the Macon _Telegraph_ talk to the colored people. He said the
Atlanta University was doing more for the State than the white State
University at Athens, and that the recitations were better.”

Another, whose health would not allow him to teach, and who stayed
here at the Home to work on the farm, said: “Above all, we want God
with us all the time, from this day on. Once, during the summer, I had
for a moment such a conception of God, that I felt if it continued
five minutes I could not live.” These words fell upon my ears like the
experiences of a Finney, because they were from one who has no patience
with “dream religion,” and whose godly life here for six years has been
a constant inspiration to us.

Another said: “People are roused to the subject of education. Children
complain if kept at home. The people can buy land easily. Treated well
by white men. Most of the whiskey drunk is by white people. Every man
in the county knows of Atlanta University. At the closing exercises,
a man begged all to save money enough to go up to the College
Commencement. He’d been once, and should go next year, if he had to
walk.”

All told of the Sunday-school work; some gave experiences in begging
money, hauling lumber, and putting up school and church buildings, and
most closed by saying, “I hope I did some good.” One sweet girl said it
in this way: “I left the results with the Great Reaper, hoping in due
time He will gather His sheaves.”

These reports help much in removing prejudices and narrow, one-sided
views of the South. While one sees the people retrograding and the
whites overbearing, another has a bright view on the other side.

This great number and variety of yearly reports impress us most,
however, with the magnitude of our work, and the great need we have
of your prayers, that this may be a pure fountain whom whence healing
streams only shall flow.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Woman’s Work Among Women.

MISS HATTIE MILTON, MEMPHIS.

Out of a population of 40,000, one-third are colored. Many of the
children attend school a few months during the year; but the parents
think if their son John Quincy Adams Anderson attends school two weeks
out of four, he will “learn a heap,” and be ready to graduate in a year
or two. However, some of the children do make good progress at school;
but the home influence is so degrading that the necessity of missionary
work among the mothers is felt more and more, as we see more of their
homes. Many are too poor to send their children to school at all;
consequently they have no opportunity of becoming better.

In my daily visits from house to house I found them in a wretched
condition, filth and vermin reigning supreme. Often, on entering these
abodes, my sensibilities were so shocked that I could not speak at
first--dogs, cats, chickens and children clamoring for the hoe cake in
the ashes or the unleavened dough baking on the stove-cover, which,
when done, is broken and handed around to each, sometimes with the
addition of a dripping bit of bacon. In many of these homes the table
is never set, the entire furniture consisting of a bed, two chairs, a
trunk, box, cupboard, bundle of rags and a poor stove, if there is no
fireplace. They sometimes own the board shanties in which they live,
and rent the ground they stand on; and when they wish to move, they
pull down the shanty, move it to the new place, and put it up again.

I was usually received kindly; by some enthusiastically. One old
ex-slave, learning the nature of my errand at her house, said, raising
her hands above her turbaned head, “Oh, bless the Lord! Thank the
Lord! for He has heard the prayer of His downtrodden people, and put
it into the hearts of His dear children in the North to send some one
to instruct us. My blessed baby, come as often as you can, and read to
Aunt Hettie, for she is an ole Etheopum, and don’t know nothing.” After
I left, she rushed around to her neighbors, saying, “Bless the Lord!
for He has heard our prayer, and sent an angel right down from heaven
to instruct us, and she has been to my house this evenin’.” They were
usually glad--many were anxious--to hear the Bible read, some insisting
on paying me, saying, “Do take it. We wants you to come often, for we
don’t hear anything like it anywhere else.” One woman, wishing, as she
said, to do something for the Lord, and having no money, sent me a
nice warm dinner. They are very liberal, giving as long as they have a
nickel, whether they rightly own it or not.

Some who were suspicious said, “Never heerd tell of white lady going
to humble colo’d cabin to read the Bible. Look like it’s mighty
queer.” These suspicions had to be overcome in various ways. Often,
by attending the sick ones, the good will of the neighbors would be
secured. One poor creature, who had not been washed in six months,
and was almost dead, after I had bathed her and put on her clean
clothes--furnished by the good Northern friends--thanked me and said,
“Thank the Lord! when we get home to heaven, we will all have on clean
clothes.” Her last days of suffering were thus made more comfortable.
I went in often, as she loved to hear the Bible read, and singing. But
a few weeks later, I went in one morning, and found her poor remains
stretched out on a rough board, resting on two chairs. Thus she lay in
state, in her winding-sheet. A plate, placed on her crossed hands, with
its mute appeal for money to bury her, told how poor they were.

One day a very black woman met me on the street and said, “How d’y’,
Miss. You don’t know me; but I knows you, for you is the one what
visits the sick; and I heard you read the Bible, and I wants ye to read
it to me. We all loves ye, and we all says, ‘If any one is gwine right
up to heaven, it is you.’” I often found the best way to reach the
mother was through her children. By giving them little presents, they
would become fond of me. Then the mother, who was proud of them, would
say, “I wants my children to be better than me, but don’t know how to
make them so. I whips them a heap, but they is bad all the time.” After
convincing one mother that she was teaching her children to lie by her
daily example, she said, “Sure enough! Never thought of that afore. I
alus wondered why my children would lie so, ’cause I alus tells ’em not
to. Now, Miss, you come often, and teach me; I needs it much as any
one. How can we be expected to do better? No one we go with does any
better; and in ole slave times, if master saw us with a book, he would
‘slap our jaws;’ so we cannot read to find out better.” Another said,
“This is the first work I have seen that looked like really making our
homes better.”

Finding the mothers and daughters knew but little about sewing, an
industrial school was started, where they met once a week, and were
taught how to cut, fit and make garments. The material for this school
was furnished by the good people of Romeo. A small sum was charged for
each garment, when finished, and used to purchase more material. Also
a small price was charged for a few of the more valuable garments sent
in boxes, the persons gladly paying the small sum, which was used to
procure medicine and other comforts for the sick ones.

I also added something to this fund by giving lessons to some who were
able and willing to pay for the instruction.

Sunday was my most busy day; besides attending church and
Sabbath-school, I went out to read the Bible to those who were not at
home during the week. I seemed to find no rest days; indeed, there
was so much for one pair of hands to do, that many times I could not
sleep as much as needed. Another meeting was held weekly. I gave
Bible readings on those subjects which were of the most interest and
importance to mothers, after which we had a prayer-meeting, which was
often very interesting.

Near the end of the year, a temperance movement was started in our
church and Sabbath-school; many signed the pledge, among whom were
about thirty from my class. The colored people are very intemperate,
and nearly all the women use snuff and tobacco. One, who was
complaining of her poverty, upon being told she could ill afford to
use snuff and tobacco, said she only paid ten cents a box, and was
astonished to find that in a year it amounted to half as much as her
rent. She seemed to try to live an honest Christian life, and before I
left had given up all her bad habits, and was very proud and happy.

Although these people are naturally religious, still their religion
consists in going to meeting, where they sing, pray, and relate
imaginary experiences, and get wrought up to such a pitch that they
scream, roll on the floor, and often remain until the small hours of
the night. They go home, thinking they are very holy, but have no idea
of showing it by a well-ordered life; on the contrary, they continue to
live with unlawful companions, steal and lie with impunity; in fact, in
many respects, they will compare with their heathen forefathers, from
whom they have inherited their superstitions and forms of worship. The
bonds of slavery have prevented them from becoming enlightened.

However, I am glad to say there are some grand exceptions to this dark
picture; some noble Christians, a few who have good homes. Among
these, the good accomplished by the mission-school and the little
Congregational church, sustained by the A. M. A., can be seen. The
pastor, Mr. Mallory, allows no wife whipping in his church, and he has
caused the large number of those who were living together unlawfully
to be married. Indeed, his church will compare favorably with white
churches of the North. These things show the dawning of day to these
benighted people, and give us great encouragement to proceed with our
work. But the mass are worse than tongue can tell or pen portray. I
feel that in my description the half of woe and degradation has not
been told. The Lord was with me in this work, and was a present help in
every time of need. Many mornings I would start out with a heavy heart,
for it would seem that my efforts to do good were almost in vain;
but trusting alone in Jesus, I would go forward. Just then the Lord
would show me that some one was becoming better, and I would return
at evening upbraiding myself for my want of faith, and reminded of
that Scripture which says, “He that goeth forth, and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing
his sheaves with him.” It was a precious privilege to comfort these
broken-hearted ones with His words, of whom it was said: “Never man
spake like this Man.”

The Bible is the only book the colored people have any confidence in.
A sick man, whom I visited, said he would like to hear the Bible read
through; he was not a Christian. For some time he seemed but little
interested; but one day he greeted me with a smile, saying: “I can
trust the Lord now, and it is all that Bible-reading. Many have talked
to me before, but I never thought of what they said; but I could not
forget these words from the Bible, and I studied about it all the time,
and last week, after you left me, I just did as the Bible said: gave up
all, and trusted Jesus. I am ready to go now, and am not afraid.”

When the time drew near for me to return North, the women said:
“What will we do without you? Who will visit us when sick, and read
comforting words from the Bible? And who will teach us how to train
up our children? Now that we have had some one to do these things for
us, we feel as if we could not get along without you.” And many were
the expressions of gratitude towards those dear ladies in the North,
who had sent them a missionary, and many the prayers offered in their
behalf. There were many signs of encouragement, though, no doubt, much
seed that was sown will not spring up at once, but in the future will
bear precious fruit, for the Lord will not permit His word to return
unto Him void. This has been the happiest year of my life, for this
work has its own reward, both to the missionary and those who send
her, which is more valuable than silver or gold. I sometimes think the
angels might almost envy us in this work.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

Students Want to “Batch”--Who Will Help?

REV. ALFRED CONNETT, McLEANSVILLE.

We hear almost daily of young men and young women who would come here
to school if they could only get a room where they could “batch.” I can
only hear of one vacant house within two miles of the school, and that
is engaged by two students who have not yet returned. Small buildings,
say 12×20, one story, two rooms, can be built for about $100 each, and
land bought at $6 to $10 per acre, possibly $20 for small tracts. By
making some provision of this kind to accommodate students, we should
at once draw in ten to twenty students, and these the very ones we
most need to reach: namely, those who are preparing to teach, and to
preach. Thus, the school would become more widely and more permanently
useful. These buildings are needed immediately, or part of them. It
is difficult, if not impossible, with their limited means, for the
students to obtain board, with suitable accommodations. The white
people do not wish to take in boarders, unless at high figures, and
the colored people have, usually, but one room in their log houses.

Cannot some church, individual, or individuals, do a work for Christ in
this way? If this, or something similar is not done, we shall let an
important and precious opportunity slip through our fingers.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA, ALABAMA.

The Story of Ambrose Headen,

AS TOLD BY HIMSELF.

I am fifty-six years old; was born in Chatham Co., N. C.; was a slave
forty-three years, sixteen years in North Carolina and twenty seven in
Alabama. I have lived in this county forty years. My young master in
North Carolina was four years older than myself; he had nine slaves,
and I was the only male. He died just before I was sixteen. When I was
thirteen I went to learn the carpenter’s trade. I was taken from my
mother and sent away to nurse children when I was six. I served three
years at the carpenter’s bench and at that time my master died, and I
had to be sold to pay his debts.

On the day appointed for the sale I went fourteen miles on foot, and
alone, to the place where I was to be sold. On my way I tried to lay
some plan to run away. A white woman said she would help me, and told
me to go into a certain swamp and she would feed me and help me away,
but I was afraid of the dogs and the men that would catch me. No one
can tell my feelings on my way to the sale, but I knew I had to go. At
the place of sale were 500 people come together to see me sold, and to
buy me. I was the only one to be sold. I was on the block three hours
while the men were bidding for me. Five of these men were speculators,
and the rest were mostly people that lived in that region. While they
were selling me there was a good deal of brandy drunk, and they offered
me some as I was very tired standing; and I said, “No, sir, I have
sorrow enough on me now without drinking that.” I was finally knocked
off to a very bad man for $1,780. This man lived about thirteen miles
from my old home, and when I knew that he was my master I burst into
tears, heart-broken. The overseer took me behind the store and tried to
stop me from crying, but I could not stop. At last, my new master said
if any one would give for me as much as he had, he might have me, and
a man from Alabama, who was out to North Carolina on a visit, said he
would, and so I sold again to this man from Alabama, and after three
months I was taken away from all my friends away down to Alabama. My
new master proved to be a good man, a member of the Baptist Church,
and I lived with him twenty-seven years until emancipation. One thing
I forgot to tell you, and it made a deep impression on my mind: at the
time I was being sold in North Carolina, a man in the crowd cried out
with a loud voice, “Hell will boil and overflow at such work as this.”
I never can forget that expression.

I was set free by two wills; the first one was burned, and so I was
kept in slavery. Once, after I had been absent from home some time, my
mistress, on my return, came rushing out to the gate and crying with a
loud voice, “Oh, Ambrose, Ambrose! I had rather live in the smokiest
cabin on the place, and had your master’s will done, than to be in the
king’s palace,” but the will was burned and so it could not be done.
The other will that set me free was made ten years before emancipation;
but emancipation came before my master died, and so his will did me no
good.

During all my slave life I never lost sight of freedom. It was
always on my heart; it came to me like a solemn thought, and often
circumstances much stimulated the desire to be free and raised great
expectation of it. We slaves all knew when an Abolitionist got into
Congress. We knew it when there was just one there, and we watched it
all the way until there was a majority there. I don’t know hardly how
we got the knowledge, but we always knew. We always called “freedom”
“possum,” so as to keep the white people from knowing what we were
talking about. We all understood it.

Some years before emancipation, my master signed $900 to be paid in
work towards building a Baptist College where we lived. He sent me to
work out his subscription. I had four children of my own, and I thought
that it was hard for me to work out this $900, when I could have no
privilege of educating my own children. I little thought then that my
children would ever graduate at this college, but God has turned things
about so that three of my children have graduated, and the fourth will
graduate next June; so that when I worked out this subscription of
my master, I was building a college for myself and my family. While
at work on this college, I fell into a conversation with the white
carpenters at work there, and they said “niggers” would do nothing “if
set free.” I told them if they would take me out into the woods and
strip every rag from me, and set me free, that in ten years I would
school my children.

Just after emancipation my master said: “Ambrose, I want you to let
Nannie stay with her mistress; she can’t do without her.” I said:
“Master, I always thought that if ever I was free I would educate
my children; if ’twas not for that, sir, I would accommodate you.”
“Ambrose,” said he, “I hardly thought you would deny me.” I said: “I
can’t do any better, sir.” With this we separated, and now all my
children are good scholars; one is a minister; one has charge of an
academy; I have a good house of seven rooms, and eleven acres of land
about it, besides a farm of 320 acres in the country.

Nothing can illustrate the great change that has come over us, unless
it is the change in passing from earth to heaven. You could see the
force of this illustration if you knew our history--if you only knew
the dark Egypt we have come through. I believe emancipation will work
out as great things for us as it did for Israel.

When the college and the Congregational Church were planted here
I joined the church, and have never been sorry for it. I love the
missionary cause, and would rather give all I have than to see it go
down.

I love to think of my son down in Selma preaching. There was quite a
scare there about the yellow fever, and my son wrote me to know what
he should do; I wrote him back, “to look to the Lord, and stand to his
post.”

       *       *       *       *       *


A GRATEFUL WARD.

A Letter from an Indian.

I thank you, gentlemen, you kind and good. By and by I see you and tell
you. You give money to Mrs. Caruthers to help me learn. I try to learn
fast. Indian no talk much English. May be very soon I understand. Long
ago I an Indian, now I don’t think so. I think gust the same white man.
Now I want be same as good white man. Here this country good Tarrytown
I like. Your a

                                          KIOWA FRENCH ZONE KE-UH.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MENDI MISSION.

REV. A. F. JACKSON, AVERY.

When one enters upon this kind of work, he enters upon a tedious and
arduous one--a work accompanied with many dark and gloomy days, as well
as some bright ones. I suppose that you are aware that my work has been
assigned me at Avery, or Mannah Bargroo Station, on the Little Sherbro
river, about fifty-eight miles from Good Hope. At this station all of
the agricultural work is carried on. We have here a mill, coffee-farm
and ginger farm. I employ in the mill seven native men all the while;
and on the farm two native men; besides a crew of boatmen, that row
our boat from British Sherbro to the neighboring villages to sell the
lumber that is sawed at our mill. We are enabled to keep one boat
running all the while, and it is manned by natives entirely. They make
first-rate crewmen, and have a decided advantage over a similar act
of Englishmen or Americans, from the fact that they are always naked,
and there is no impediment in case of an accident. All of them can
swim in almost any kind of water. They do not stop to question whether
there be alligators in the water or not, but go at the command. I can
say that I have tried them sufficiently in all ways, and I have as
yet found them all to be quite honest, with the exception of one man,
who very politely went into my lot of goods on the way from Good Hope
to my station, and took therefrom five or six yards of baft to trade
for rice. This is the only dishonest act that I have known any one to
commit since my arrival on the coast of Africa.

I have said a good deal about my boatmen, and will now give you a brief
sketch of the habits and customs of this people. In the first place,
the men go entirely naked, with the exception of a cloth they wear,
something like that of an American baby’s diaper. The women wear about
four yards of cloth thrown carelessly around them, covering the lower
extremities, and tied by the ends about the waist.

When one dies, they have what they call “the cry,” in which all join.
They go for miles to attend “the cry.” The body of the deceased is
wrapped in matting, and conveyed to its long resting-place--a hole
which is dug for that purpose. This has always been their mode of
burying, and in many instances they prefer it to our way.

As to the general build of this people it is quite good. They possess
very good features, as a general thing, having smooth skins and round
faces. Their noses are not so flat as the American negro’s; neither are
their eyes so red and blood-shot. Their mouths are not so disfigured.
The most of them have quite a neat lip, not so thick as that of the
American negro. Their hands and feet are generally small. Their bodies
are very straight and well developed. It is astonishing to see how they
carry burdens, either upon the head or back, with a loop so that it can
be fastened around their foreheads.

A good stout man will carry as much on his head and back as you can
pack on a young ass three years old, and they never murmur. They live
in mud houses covered with thatch, but a thatch inferior to anything we
know of in America. It is made of bamboo, and only lasts from nine to
twelve months.

They subsist on rice, cassada, cocoa, fufu, crencray, palaver-sauce
and fish. Any one of these vegetables mentioned will grow without any
attention at all, except the cocoa, and that is a very tender plant,
indeed, and the consequence is, that they have less of it than anything
else. The cocoa and cassada are the only vegetables that I have learned
to eat. The cocoa, after it is cooked, is much like an Irish potato,
and makes a very palatable dish, indeed. The cassada, when cooked,
resembles an American squash, and is a very nice dish for dinner or
breakfast. Should a person presume to eat these vegetables mentioned,
without having been a good while in the country, he at once had better
have a mill-stone hanged about his neck, and his body committed to the
briny deep. He would fare about as well. No foreigner, of whatever
nationality he may be, can come into Africa and subsist at first upon
the native productions.

We are all aware that Africa has long been called the burying-ground
of missionaries. The reasons are, in my judgment, these: In the first
place, missionaries in going to Africa generally exert themselves
too much on entering the field. The climate is such as rapidly to
reduce one’s physical strength. It is a custom among all persons, as
soon as they have been informed of their malady, at once to retire to
their beds, and demand that a physician be called. The calling of the
physician is all right; but it is far better to keep out of bed, and
to keep moving; for if you give up and go to bed, you are almost sure
to die. Another reason, as I before said, is trying to live on native
productions too early after arriving on the continent.

I must say, just here, that two-thirds of what you hear about Africa is
fabulous. At least it is so in the region in which our missions are
established. There is a great deal said about the native bread-tree.
There is such a thing as a bread-tree in this country, but it is
almost as scarce in the region in which the mission is established
as the orange-tree is in the States, and you are aware how plentiful
the orange-tree is there. The fabulous tree so called, might very
appropriately have been named a squash-tree, because it bears no
similarity to bread, and will not answer at all in the place of bread.
When green, or before it is plucked, it bears a close similarity to
what is known in the States as the hedge orange, and, when cooked, it
tastes something between a potato-pumpkin and squash.

There are some oranges here, but they are scarce. They do not seem to
be a native fruit, because they do not grow everywhere in the country,
but only where the ground is cleared up, and the undergrowth cut down.
They are not of a rich yellow color like an American orange, but
greenish and small. They have quite a delicious taste, somewhat devoid
of juice, when compared with our Florida orange, but equal to it in
sweetness. We have another fruit here, known as the lime. It bears a
close similarity to a lemon; in fact the only difference that I can
detect is, that the lemon as a general thing is larger, and not so
round. As to the pine-apple, it grows only where it is taken care of;
it may grow in the wilds, but never bears fruit. The rice that is grown
in Africa is not so good as that in the States. It is really the main
thing grown upon the continent in the way of eatables. If you buy two
bushels of rough rice, you will not get more than sixteen quarts that
can be used, and you must pay from 2s. 9d. to 3s. per bushel. This, I
am sorry to say, is about the way with all the country productions.

Knowing that you are always anxious concerning our health, I, perhaps,
ought to have spoken of it sooner. I am in quite good health, and have
been since my first attack of the African fever. My wife has had quite
a severe attack of the fever; so severe that I thought I should lose
her; but God in his goodness saw fit to spare her to me. She has never
regained her strength, but I trust that God in some way or other will
restore her to perfect health again.

The religious work at Avery is going on nicely. I found here a small
chapel, but no church members. Dr. James had kept up a prayer-meeting,
and there was some interest among the people, but there had been no
ingathering of souls to Christ. After looking around and seeing the
real condition of things, I came to the conclusion that whatever was
done must be done quickly; so I made it my aim to get at the people at
once with the truths of Jesus Christ, and they seemed to take right
hold of them as fast as given to them. I adopted this plan: to take
my Bible every evening and go out among the regular heathen; but I
soon found out that I was unable to reach them in that way, from the
fact that I could not speak their language. So I gave that plan up,
and adopted the one of going among them twice a week, and taking with
me my Bible and an interpretor. This I found to be the best plan; so
then and there I got hold of the people. Now, having found this to
work well, I began to preach to the people in their own villages and
“fackies,” as they call them. After I found out that I could gather
them together in their fackies, I then set to work to persuade them to
come to my church; which I did with great success, and from time to
time I gathered into the church the following persons and names. June
16th, I opened the doors of the church, and enrolled the following: H.
C. Hallock L., Isaac Vincent L., James Cole L., John Davis R., Samuel
Wise R., Richard Wilkerson R., Yamba R., One Pound R., Henry Peters R.,
Small Banna R., William Wilberforce L., Mrs. Lucker L., Mrs. Peters R.,
Mrs. Hannah Vincent L., and a Sherbro chief, A. P. Cardy R.

June 30th, I opened the doors of the church again, and enrolled the
following: James Picket L., Sarah Tucker R., Mrs. Elizabeth Beal R.,
Elizabeth Wilberforce R., Mrs. Mary Cole L., Mrs. Nancy Davis R.,
Madam Damba R., Madam Dambee R. July 28th, I opened the doors and took
the following names. The chief Karry Pherner L., chief, Lalula R.,
John Bull R., Cunda R., Kirby R., Matilda Leatum L., Mrs. Yamba R.,
Mrs. One Pound R., and Bye R. As I neglected to tell you in regard to
the conversion of these persons I will give you some idea of it by the
following letters. The letter “R” signifies recently converted, and the
letter “L” long converted. I must say that the especial blessing of
the Lord seemed very near all on the 4th of August. This was the first
Lord’s Supper celebrated at Avery Station. On this day I preached to
a very large number of native men and women. I baptized seven grown
persons and four children, making a total of eleven persons baptized.

This people, as a general thing, have very many troubles among
themselves that must be settled at once, in order to secure peace among
them. If you have gained their confidence, they will at all times
call upon you to settle any disturbance that may occur among them, it
matters not how difficult the case may be. Great caution is required in
rendering your decision, otherwise it may cause speedy bloodshed and
panic throughout the region. I am sorry to say that the prospects are
quite threatening just now for an outbreak at any time in the region
adjacent to Avery and the Little Boom. But I hope that it will not be
very serious. The Governor is expected to investigate the Boom trouble
this week, and it is thought that it can be settled without any serious
damage to either side. I have felt greatly the lack of reading matter
at my Station. There are many dreary hours out here that might be
whiled away with good reading matter. I rather think that some of the
good friends in New York would be glad to send a paper or two now and
then to a poor wayfarer on the distant shores of Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


SISSETON AGENCY.

Farming Tools Bought.

E. H. C. HOOPER, AGENT

For several years past, till last year, the crops on this reserve have
been nearly all destroyed by grasshoppers; but this season promises an
abundant harvest. The farming has been attended with unusual success,
and the Indians feel very much encouraged with the result of their farm
labor.

At present there are 2,191 acres of land broken on this reservation,
450 acres of which are new land broken during this season. Seventeen
hundred acres are under cultivation by the Indians. There was a much
larger acreage plowed last fall than ever before at the same season
of the year, and, under the supervision of our farmer, it was well
prepared for seeding in the spring. Nearly all our Indians, who were
without seed, were provided from the warehouse early in the season, and
manifested a good degree of interest in planting and cultivating.

Early in July, many of the Indian farmers, feeling confident of a large
yield of grain, were very earnest in their appeals for grain cradles
and other appliances with which to secure their crops. And, under
authority from the Department, a lot of grain cradles were bought and
issued to them. But the number purchased was insufficient to supply the
wants of all, and a considerable portion of the wheat in small fields
was cut with scythes.

Several of our Indians who have large wheat fields, have bought
harvesters for themselves, at a cost of from $165 to $200 each, and are
to pay for them from the proceeds of their sales of wheat; this is a
move in the right direction and cannot be too highly commended.

All our Indians are half-breeds (with but few exceptions, and these
generally confined to very old people) wear citizens’ dress, and a
large majority of them live in very comfortable houses, made of hewed
logs, and are furnished with cook-stoves, tables, seats, and other
housekeeping conveniences.

There are some forty frame buildings occupied by our Indians, several
of which are two stories high and painted, all having more or less land
under cultivation.


Schools.

During ten months of the year--(the Manual Labor School eleven
months)--three schools have been in successful operation: the Manual
Labor School, the Good-Will Boarding and Day-School, and the Ascension
School. The Manual Labor School building, situated one and a half miles
from the agency, was originally provided with seats for fifty-six
scholars, but the sleeping accommodations for this number of children
have never been sufficient, and during the past year our carpenter
has made an addition of several new sleeping rooms, and improved the
condition of the old ones, which has added very much to the comfort and
convenience of the pupils.

There are only four or five boys of sufficient age to be serviceable
about the farm or garden. When out of school they were kept at work
preparing the ground for seeding and cultivating, besides attending to
the stock and farm work generally, all being done under the immediate
supervision of the principal, who is, fortunately, a good farmer.

After the regular school hours, the girls are taught sewing of all
kinds; cutting, making and trimming dresses, repairing garments;
darning, knitting and use of sewing machine; also all kinds of
housework, cooking, and the work of the dairy. After service in the
evening, instructions are given in music, instrumental and vocal, in
which both boys and girls take an unusual interest and show a marked
improvement during the year. Mr. Tuckey, the present principal,
assumed the duties of his office May 1st, and has been untiring in his
exertions to advance the pupils in their studies, and, for the short
time which he has been with them, appears to have been very successful.
The two female assistants having had two years’ experience here, and
been deeply interested in their pupils, have proved very valuable and
successful teachers, and have the confidence and respect of the parents.

The time of the matron is fully occupied from six A. M. to nine P.
M., in looking after and providing for the numerous wants of the
pupils, and in this difficult and laborious work has proved to be very
efficient.

The Good Will Mission Boarding and Day-School is situated one and
three quarter miles from the agency; the children are rationed and
supplied in part with clothing from the warehouse, but the other
expenses--salaries, etc--are borne by the A. B. C. F. M. This school
has accommodated as many as thirty-two scholars, part of them boarding
at houses in the vicinity.

The day-school, situated at Ascension, about six miles from the agency,
had, some months, thirty scholars; they live in the vicinity of the
school-house, and are quite regular in attendance.

In addition to these three schools, two others were opened, and
reading, writing and arithmetic in Dakota were taught by Indian
teachers, during two months in the spring, with an average daily
attendance of eighteen scholars each. These schools were opened at the
earnest request of several of the leading men in their vicinity, in
the form of a petition to the agent. These parents seemed in earnest
in their efforts to have the schools opened, and showed a continued
interest in them by frequent visits during the time they were in
operation.

The estimated number of children of school-going age on this reserve
is three hundred, and we have two brick school-houses, built in 1873,
at an estimated cost of $600 each--one situated about one and a half
miles south of the agency, and the other at the Mayasan, twenty miles
distant; both are provided with improved seats, tables, etc., and will
accommodate forty scholars each; neither of them has been used, for
school purposes to any extent since they were built, but allowed to
remain unoccupied.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR OCTOBER, 1878.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $169.24.

    Alfred. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.00
    Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.60
    Augusta. Collected by Francis Littlefield, _for
      Printing Press, Talladega, Ala._                       35.00
    Augusta. Joel Spalding                                   10.00
    Bangor. First Cong. Ch.                                  23.92
    Bluehill. Mrs. S. E. D. P.                                1.00
    Eastport. Central Cong. Sab. Sch. $5; G. A. P. 50c        5.50
    Fryeburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.40
    Gardiner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.73
    Hallowell. Emma French, bbl. of C.
    Limerick. S. F. H. _for Raleigh, N. C._                   1.00
    North Waterford. S. E. H.                                 1.00
    Orland. A. L. D.                                          1.00
    Portland. J. B. Libby, _for Raleigh, N. C._               5.00
    West Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                21.00
    Woolwich. D. C. Farnham                                   5.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $236.90.

    Atkinson. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. JOB
      ATWOOD DOW, L. M.                                      22.00
    Claremont. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            34.38
    Dover. S. Foye, _for Raleigh, N. C._                      3.00
    Dover. Mrs. Dr. L.                                        1.00
    Keene. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Second Ch., bbl. of C.
      and $2.50 _for freight_                                 2.50
    Mason. L. J. G.                                           1.00
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.00
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         41.68
    Northwood Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     11.32
    Pelham. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $25.75; Mrs. Putnam $5        30.75
    Raymond. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $15.60; “S. E. P.” $5        20.60
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.67
    Temple. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  20.00
    Tilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               35.60


  VERMONT, $274.63.

    Barnet. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               19.00
    Charlotte. Nettie A. Parker                               5.00
    Coventry. M. C. Pearson                                   4.00
    East St. Johnsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   10.00
    Enosburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             24.00
    Jamaica. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.10
    McIndoes. Mrs. B.                                         0.50
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.15
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Friends                           18.00
    St. Johnsbury. South Ch. Ladies’ Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                            125.00
    St. Johnsbury. “A Memorial.”                             25.00
    Waterville. Cong. Ch.                                     2.21
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                           18.67
    West Charleston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      12.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,486.64.

    Agawam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.33
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch. and Soc.         22.51
    Amherst. North Cong. Ch. and Soc. $75; S. E. H.
      $1; College Ch. $37.25                                113.25
    Andover. South Cong. Sab. Sch.                           14.00
    Ashby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 9.50
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 100.00
    Barnstable Co. “A Traveller.”                            12.00
    Barre. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
      HARDING WOODS, L. M.                                   30.00
    Blackstone. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           19.05
    Boston. Second Dorchester Cong. Ch.                     395.80
    Boston. Dr. H. B. Hooker                                  5.00
    Boston Highlands. Immanuel Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           4.00
    Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $10.35, and Sab. Sch.
      $4.66                                                  15.01
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $74.63,
      and Sab. Sch. $15                                      89.63
    Brookfield. Evan Cong. Ch.                               50.00
    Brookline. Howard Ch. and Soc.                           63.97
    Campello. Ladies’ Sewing Circle, bbl. of C.
    Charlestown. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                          66.64
    Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $19, and Sab. Sch.
      $5.09                                                  24.09
    Chicopee. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      14.92
    Cummington. “Friends”                                    11.00
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  2.25
    Dracut. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.00
    Easthampton. C. S. W.                                     1.00
    Fitchburg. Rollstone Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which
      $25 _for Student, Atlanta U._)                         76.69
    Fitchburg. Rev. and Mrs. J. M. R. Eaton                  10.00
    Foxborough. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              20.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                       140.00
    Great Barrington. “A. C. T.”                              1.00
    Hanover. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       25.73
    Hanson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.15
    Haverhill. Mrs. Mary B. Jones $10; “A Friend”
      $2; Mrs. Stephen Chase $10; Mrs. L. P. F. 25c          22.25
    Holbrook. Bequest of E. N. Holbrook                     200.00
    Holbrook. E. Everett Holbrook $50; Mrs. C. S.
      Holbrook $25                                           75.00
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       33.22
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      25.35
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $26.55; Evan. Cong.
      Sab. Sch. $15                                          41.55
    Lenox. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    5.00
    Littleton. “A Friend” $25; Cong. Ch. and Soc. $14        39.00
    Lowell. Rev. Smith Baker $25 _for Bell, Atlanta,
      Ga._; Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc. $22.69                  47.69
    Lowell. Pawtucket Cong. Ch.                              21.74
    Lowell. Correction: N. C. Wiley $25 in November,
      should read Hon. Nathan Crosby $25.
    Lunenburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.75
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         47.92
    Marlborough. T. B. Patch                                  2.00
    Mattapoisett. Cong. Ch.                                  22.00
    Medfield. Lydia A. Dow $2,--Ladies, bbl. of C. and
      $2 _for freight_                                        4.00
    Methuen. Joseph F. Ingalls                               60.00
    Mitteneaque. Cong. Ch.                                   18.85
    Monson. Austin Newell                                     2.00
    North Adams. Cong. Ch., quar. coll.                      24.47
    North Leominster. Cong. Ch. of Christ                     4.87
    North Reading. Frank H. Foster                           10.00
    North Wilmington. L. F. M.                                1.00
    Newbaryport. Belleville Cong. Ch. $50; Foster W.
      Smith $5                                               55.00
    Newton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $33.17; North Evan.
      Ch. and Soc. $5                                        38.17
    Orange. Ladies of Cong. Ch. bbl. of C.
    Petersham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             4.13
    Pittsfield. Ladies’ Soc., by Mrs. H. M. Hurd, 2
      bbls of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        17.75
    Reading. Dea. Hiram Barnes                               10.00
    Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       5.35
    South Abington. “Friend.”                                14.00
    Southborough. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 17.00
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l) to
      const. REV. S. K. BONNELL, L. M.                     15.60
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. $60, to const.
      MRS. LUCY P. LEWIS and MRS. MARIA A. FEARING,
      L. M’s; Union Cong. Ch. $9.43                          69.43
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $17.66; South
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. $15.21                              32.87
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. $18.19; Mrs. A. P. G. $1        19.19
    Townsend. “A Friend.”                                     4.00
    Uxbridge. First Evan. Ch. and Soc.                       27.31
    Walpole. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     15.10
    Webster. First Cong. Ch.                                 18.00
    West Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.64
    Westfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     31.32
    West Medway. C. A. Adams                                  4.00
    Worcester. Rev. W. J. White $2; “A Friend” $1             3.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $26.

    Little Compton. Cong. Sab. Sch. $23; E. Wilbur $2;
      G. A. G. $1                                            26.00


  CONNECTICUT, $1,003.29.

    Ashford. Rev. C. P. Grosvenor                             7.50
    Bristol. Mrs. Phebe L. Alcott                             5.00
    East Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                  62.06
    East Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                29.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                    41.59
    Greens Farms. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
    Hartford. Mrs. C. T. Hillyer, to const. JAMES EDGAR
      GREGG, L. M.                                           30.00
    Middlefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. EDWIN P.
     ANGIER, L. M.                                           35.16
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        38.45
    New Hartford. North Cong. Ch. $37.50; South Cong.
      Ch. $10.60                                             48.10
    New Haven. “W. C. S.”                                     2.00
    Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                      13.43
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                  23.97
    Plainville. “A Friend,” to const. FRANK BARNES,
      SAMUEL BEARD and EDWARD W. HART L. M.’s             100.00
    Pomfret. “A Friend.”                                     27.00
    Pequonock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            21.13
    Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         24.00
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       7.84
    Southbury. C. B.                                          1.00
    South Britain. “Friends,” by N. P. Johnson                2.00
    Rockville. Cong. Ch.                                     52.72
    Talcottville. Cong. Ch.                                 112.60
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                     40.75
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          43.75
    Westbrook. Cong. Ch.                                     34.07
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
    Williamantic. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         40.27
    Wolcottville. L. Wetmore                                100.00
    Wolcottville. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Mrs. A. E.
      Perrin, $26, and bbl. of C.                            26.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                     12.90


  NEW YORK, $459.13.

    Sherburne. Cong. Ch.                                     60.06
    Spencerport. Cong. Ch.                                   14.00
    Whitney’s Point. Mrs. E. Rogers                           2.00
    Batavia. “A Friend.”                                     21.12
    Binghamton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                          32.20
    Brasher Falls. Elijah Wood $15; Mrs. Eliza A. Bell
      $2                                                     17.00
    Brier Hill. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Camden. “A Friend.”                                       1.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    31.25
    Eagle Mills. Mrs. Maria S. Hatch                         10.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Sab. Sch. $50, (James S.
      Hosmer, Supt.,) _for a Student, Fisk U._; Cong.
      Ch. (ad’l) $1                                          51.00
    Lima. Mrs. M. Sprague, _for Student Aid_                  5.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Marcellus. First Ch.                                     22.00
    Marcellus. E. L. $1; F. H. B. 50c.                        1.50
    Masonville. Miss S. P.                                    1.00
    Morrisville. Mrs. M. G. De Forest                         5.00
    Munnsville. ESTATE of Mandana Barber, by N. S. Hall
      and E.J. Barber, Ex’s.                                125.00
    New York. Gen. C. B. Fisk, to const. MISS HELEN C.
      MORGAN, L. M.                                          30.00


  NEW JERSEY, $11.68.

    Chester. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.68


  PENNSYLVANIA, $56.

    Blossburg. Welsh Cong. Ch. (of which $2 from John
      Hughes, Sen.)                                           8.00
    Norristown. Mrs. Mary W. Cook                            10.00
    Pittsburgh. B. Preston                                   25.00
    Sharpeburg. Joseph Turner                                10.00
    West Alexander. “J. S.”                                   3.00


  OHIO, $221.73.

    Andover. O. B. Case $3; Mrs. O. B. Case $12              15.00
    Chatham. Cong. Ch. $2.88; C. F. Thatcher $2, _for
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        4.88
    Cleveland. Plymouth Ch. Sab. Sch. $25, _for Le Moyne
      Library, Memphis, Tenn._--Euclid Ave. Cong. Ch.
      $18.60                                                 43.60
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the Poor in New Orleans_          36.38
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           6.58
    Fitchville. First Cong. Ch. $14; Second Cong. Ch.
      $6.40                                                  20.40
    Gambier. James S. Sawer                                   5.00
    Lodi. Cong. Ch. $6.25; “A Friend” 30c., _for
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        6.55
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Marysville. Cong. Ch.                                    10.29
    North Benton. Simon Hartzell                              5.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch. (of which $2.55 from
      Mrs. A. Morley, _for Straight U._)                     26.79
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.00
    Ruggles. A. F. Weston                                     5.00
    Springfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.26
    Tallmadge. Mrs. C. H. Sackett, _for Tougaloo, Miss._      5.00
    Wellington. Edwin Wadsworth $5; Nathaniel D.
      Billings $5                                            10.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,071.58.

    Chicago. New England Cong. Ch. (of which $100 _for
      Howard U._) $191.33.--First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.
      $50, _for a Student, Howard U._--Sab. Sch. of
      Leavitt St. Cong. Ch. $9.50, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._--New Eng. Ch., Ladies’ M. S. $5              255.83
    Downer’s Grove. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           9.20
    Dover. Cong. Ch., Theo. W. Nichols                       27.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                         11.88
    Farmington. S. B.                                         0.25
    Galesburg. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                  15.00
    Galva. Mrs. B. S. Eldridge, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                    10.00
    Griggsville. “Friends,” by Mrs. H. C.                    10.00
    Huntley. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    Joy Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                   18.00
    Lee Centre. Cong. Ch. $11.60, and Sab. Sch. $1.36        12.96
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                        13.20
    Naperville. A. A. Smith                                   2.00
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                     1.00
    Polo. Robert Smith                                      500.00
    Princeton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                               20.00
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.                               93.26
    Roscoe. Mrs. A. A. Tuttle                                 3.00
    Sandwich. Cong. Ch.                                      18.00
    San Jose. S. J. and S. T.                                 1.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. (ad’l).                     45.00
    Walnut Hill. Mrs. E. D. W.                                1.00
    Wheaton. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Mrs. H. W. Cobb,
      2 bbls. of C., _for Savannah, Ga._


  MICHIGAN, $158.27.

    Adrian. Plymouth Ch.                                      8.85
    Armada. Cong. Ch.                                        11.11
    Flint. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                          10.00
    Galesburg. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                               13.00
    Grand Rapids. B. Stocking                                 5.00
    Hopkins Station. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   5.00
    Kalamazoo. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. $25, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._--Mrs. Boughton $2                27.00
    Lansing. Plymouth Ch.                                    36.48
    Olivet. Cong. Ch. $30.33.--Dea. S. F. Drury $10,
      _for Straight U._                                      40.33
    Paw Paw. Cong. Ch.                                        1.50


  IOWA, $140.85.

    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                       26.50
    Council Bluffs. Cong. Ch.                                26.99
    Davenport. Edwards’ Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student,
      Fisk U._                                               50.00
    Dutch Creek. P. F. N.                                     1.00
    Franklin. Dea. J. B.                                      0.50
    Grinnell. A. C. H.                                        1.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                             17.31
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                 2.40
    Quasqueton. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
    Shenandoah. A. S. L.                                      0.50
    Strawberry Point. Cong. Ch.                              10.15
    Waterloo. Mrs. M. B. F.                                   0.50
    Winthrop. I. H. D.                                        1.00


  WISCONSIN, $100.13.

    Appleton. “Lena,” _for Chinese M._                        5.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            14.00
    Bristol and Paris. Cong. Ch.                             20.00
    Cooksville. Edward Gilley                                 5.00
    Dartford. Cong. Ch.                                       5.73
    Evansville. “Friends,” by Mrs. Pratt (ad’l)               1.00
    Geneva. Presb. Ch., quar. coll.                          15.00
    Hudson. Sophronia H. Childs                              10.00
    New Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                   6.40
    Royalton. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Shopiere. John H. Cooper                                  5.00
    Sparta. L. S. Bingham                                     5.00


  KANSAS, $28.50.

    Council Grove. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
    Lane. Mrs. N. D. C.                                        .50
    Olathe. “A Friend,” _for Chinese_                         5.00
    Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Valley Falls. J. Hillier $10; Mrs. L. B. Wilson $2       12.00
    White City. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               1.00


  MINNESOTA, $40.17.

    Afton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.50
    Lake City. First Cong. Ch.                               10.60
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                12.07
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch., quar. coll.                    12.00


  NEBRASKA, $36.50.

    Camp Creek. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                       4.00
    Crete. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    5.00
    Lincoln. Cong. Ch.                                       25.00
    Red Cloud. Cong. Ch.                                      2.50


  MISSOURI, $6.05.

    Warrensburg. Rent                                         2.75
    Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                 3.30


  NORTH CAROLINA, $59.87.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch. $15--Miss E. P. Hayes $10,
      _for desks_--Proceeds concert $27; “Friends”
      $6.15                                                  58.15
    Wilmington. First Cong. Ch.                               1.72


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $1.50.

    Orangeburg. Cong. Ch.                                     1.50


  GEORGIA, $238.60.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch.                                    238.60


  CANADA, $5.

    Montreal. Rev. Henry Wilkes, D. D.                        5.00


  TURKEY, $5.

    Constantinople. Rev. M. H. Hitchcock                      5.00


  JAPAN, $15.

    Osaka. Rev. W. W. Curtis                                 15.00
                                                         —————————
        Total                                            $6,851.66

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, _Ass’t Treas._


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Augusta, Me. “A Friend.”                                 23.25
    Bethel, Me. “A reader of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY.”        1.00
    Short Falls, N. H. J. W. C.                               1.00
    Andover, Mass. Mrs. W. W. Dove                           50.00
    Billerica, Mass. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          6.50
    Malden, Mass. Chas. Heath                                25.00
    Monson, Mass. E. F. Morris                               50.00
    Palmer, Mass. First Cong. Ch.                             9.67
    Scotland, Mass. Royal Keith                              50.00
    Scotland, Mass. “A Friend.”                               5.00
    Springfield, Mass. Ira Merrill                            5.00
    Taunton, Mass. H. H. Fish                               100.00
    Taunton, Mass. Andrew S. Briggs                          15.00
    Taunton, Mass. Joseph Dean                               10.00
    Taunton, Mass. Individuals, Annual Meeting               39.00
    Wellesley, Mass. “C. B. D.”                              25.00
    Providence, R. I. Joseph Carpenter                    1,000.00
    Providence, R. I. Geo. H. Corliss                       500.00
    East Hampton, Ct. Dea. Saml. Skinner                     10.00
    Hartford, Ct. Mrs. H. A. Perkins                      1,000.00
    New York, N. Y. Rev. G. D. Pike                         100.00
    Randolph, N. Y. Mrs. Diantha C. Bush                     20.00
    East Orange, N. J. Grove St. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)            33.86
    OHIO.--_Oberlin_: Jane C. Miller and others $5;
      _Charleston_: Thomas Hatfield $5; _Lafayette_: E.
      J. Phinney $5; _Brighton_: Cong. Ch. $6.65;
      _Berea_: C. W. D. Miller $3.36; _Bellevue_: Mrs.
      R. A. Severance $11; _North Benton_: Simon
      Hartzell $5; _Marysville_: Ruth McAdams $5;
      _Huntsburg_: A. E. Millard $10                         56.01
    Adams’ Mills, Ohio. Mrs. M. A. Smith                      5.00
    Burton, Ohio. “A few Friends,” by C. C. $12
      (incorrectly acknowledged in November number).
    Indianapolis, Ind. N. A. Hyde $5; Mrs. E. L.
      Runnells $4                                             9.00
    ILLINOIS.--_Atlanta_: Samuel J. Chapin $9;
      _Plainfield_: Mrs. S. E. Royce $6; _Rockford_:
      T. D. Robertson $50; _Canton_: John B. Allen $5;
      Mrs. Vittum and Miss McCutchan $5; _Peoria_:
      Moses Pettengill $50; _Providence_: Dea. George
      B. Cushing $5; _Paxton_: S. P. Bushnell $25;
      _Amboy_: Mrs. W. B. Adams and others $5;
      _Danville_: Mrs. A. M. Swan $5; Mrs. W. E.
      Chandler $5; _La Salle_: D. Lathrop $10;
     _Galesburg_: Col. by Eli Farnham $19; _Lyndon_:
     “Widow’s Mite” $1                                      200.00
    Geneseo, Ill. Mrs. E. L. Atkinson                        15.00
    Sandwich, Ill. J. P. Adams                               10.00
    MICHIGAN.--_Owosso_: A. Gould $10; _Union City_:
      Col. by Mrs. E. E. Bostwick, $10.50;
      _Greenville_: Col. by Mrs. J. L. Patton, $10;
      _Jackson_: Mrs. E. Page $10; _Adrian_: Mrs. Jane
      M. Geddes $5                                           45.50
    Romeo, Mich. ESTATE of Mrs. Mary Ann Dickinson,
      deceased, by H. O. Smith, Financial Agent           1,000.00
    WISCONSIN--_Oconomowoc_: “Additional” 25c; _Fond
      du Lac_: Ladies’ Miss. Soc. $5.50; _Sparta_: Rev.
      H. E. Keller, wife and son, $16; _Milwaukee_: Mr.
      and Mrs. E. D. Holton $50; Mrs. Arnold $2;
      _Janesville_: Mrs. D. A. Beal $2                       75.75
    IOWA--_Grinnell_: Col. by Mrs. Pres. Magoun, $30;
      E. L. Leavitt $5; _Charles City_: Mrs. C. E.
      Raymond $10; _Des Moines_: Woman’s Miss. Soc. of
      Plym. Cong. Ch. $10; _Lansing_: Mrs. A. H.
      Houghton $1.50; _Rockford_: Anna E. Gates $7           63.50
    Manhattan, Kans. Mrs. R. D. Parker                        5.00
    Northfield, Minn. Mrs. J. W. Strong                       5.00
    Lincoln, Neb. Mrs. Dr. Robbins                            5.00
    Sisseton Agency, Dakota. Col. by Martha Riggs
      Morris                                                 25.00
    Raleigh, N. C. Miss E. P. Hayes                          10.00
    Atlanta, Ga. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                   50.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $4,659.04


  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Bridgeport, Ct. Rev. B. B. Beardsley                     10.00
    Hartford, Ct. MRS. E. H. PERKINS, to const. herself
      L. M.                                                  30.00
    Hartford, Ct. Mrs. H. A. Perkins                         20.00
    Waterbury, Ct. “A Friend.”                               10.00
    West Hartford, Ct. Charles Boswell $10; Miss Eliza
      Butler $10                                             20.00
    Wolcottville, Ct. L. Wetmore                            100.00
                                                           ———————
        Total                                              $190.00


  FOR YELLOW FEVER SUFFERERS.

    West Falmouth, Me. Second Cong. Ch.                      10.00
    Fitzwilliam, N. H. Cong. Sab. Sch.                        4.23
    Concord, Mass. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  29.50
    Harvard, Mass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        29.28
    Webster, Mass. First Cong. Ch.                           30.90
    Bethel, N. Y. Welsh Cong. Ch.                             8.45
    Remsen, N. Y. Welsh Cong. Ch.                             6.55
    South Haven, Mich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    13.76
    Clinton, Iowa. Sab. Sch., by S. Hosford, Supt.            6.50
    Lincoln, Neb. Cong. Ch.                                  15.00
                                                           ———————
        Total                                              $154.17


  ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Deerfield, N. H. ESTATE of Mrs. Miriam T. Brown,
      by Joseph T. Brown, Ex.                               500.00

                 *       *       *       *       *




                   “The Leading American Newspaper.”

                    THE NEW YORK TRIBUNE FOR 1879.


                         _UNEXAMPLED PREMIUM._

               Webster’s $12 Unabridged Dictionary Free!

We will send Webster’s Unabridged Pictorial Quarto Dictionary (edition
of 1879), bound in sheep, the latest and best edition, as a gift to any
one remitting us

$10 for a single five-years’ subscription, in}
               advance, _or_,                }   THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE.
   $16 for eight one-year subscriptions to   }

$15 for a single five-years’ subscription, in}     THE SEMI-WEEKLY
               advance, _or_,                }         TRIBUNE.
   $30 for ten one-year subscriptions to     }

$30 for a single three-years’ subscription,  }     THE DAILY TRIBUNE
               in advance, to                }

We believe this to be the most valuable and liberal newspaper premium
ever offered. We cannot make it any more liberal, and to avoid useless
correspondence we give notice that the Dictionary will only be sent on
exact compliance with the above terms. It is not offered, under any
circumstances, to persons remitting for Clubs at regular club rates. We
do, however, make the following liberal offer of

              PREMIUMS TO FRIENDS GETTING UP LOCAL CLUBS.

For a Club Of 5 Weeklies--Any five TRIBUNE NOVELS.

                          } An extra copy of THE WEEKLY, _or_ a copy
For a Club of 10 Weeklies,}  of the Greeley Memorial Volume, in cloth,
                          }  _or_ } any eight of THE TRIBUNE Novels.

                          } THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE, _or_ one extra
For a Club of 20 Weeklies,}  WEEKLY, _and_ either Mr. Greeley’s
                          }  “Political Economy,” _or_ “What I know of
                          }  Farming.” ($1.50 each at retail).

                          } THE SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE, _and_ any eight
For a Club of 30 Weeklies,}  of THE TRIBUNE Novels; _or_ Mr. Greeley’s
                          }  “Recollections of a Busy Life,” in sheep
                          }  ($2.50 at retail), _and_ the same Novels.

                          } THE DAILY TRIBUNE one year, _and_ either
For a Club of 50 Weeklies,}  of the above-mentioned books, _or_ the
                          }  series of TRIBUNE NOVELS.

[One Semi-Weekly will count as two Weeklies in the above. Double
numbers of THE TRIBUNE Novels count as two.]

Instead of any five TRIBUNE Novels, we will send, if preferred,
pamphlet copies, in good type, of THE TRIBUNE verbatim report of the
_Prophetic Conference_, and THE TRIBUNE’S full exposure of the _Cipher
Telegrams_.

                 Tribune Almanac for 1879 - 25 Cents.

Further information, posters and specimen copies, sent on application.


            Address,                           _THE TRIBUNE, New York_.


       *       *       *       *       *


                        A. S. BARNES & CO.

                      Educational Publishers.

TEACHERS are requested to send for our Descriptive Catalogue of 400
Text Books and Professional Manuals.


                   A. S. B. & Co., also publish

Dale’s Lectures on Preaching:

As delivered at Yale College, 1877. Contents: Perils of Young
Preachers; The Intellect in Relation to Preaching; Reading;
Preparation of Sermons; Extemporaneous Preaching and Style;
Evangelistic Preaching; Pastoral Preaching; The Conduct of Public
Worship. Price, postpaid, $1.50.

Chas. G. Finney’s Memoirs:

Written by Himself. 477 pp., 12mo, $2.00.

 “A wonderful volume it truly is.”--_Rev. T. L. Cuyler, D. D._ “What
a fiery John the Baptist he was.”--_Rev. R. S. Storrs, D. D._

Ray Palmer’s Poetical Works:

Complete. With Portrait. 8vo, full gilt, rich, $4.00.

Memoirs of P. P. Bliss:

By Whittle, Moody and Sankey. With portraits of the Bliss Family,
on steel. Price $2.

Lyman Abbott’s Commentary

ON THE NEW TESTAMENT (Illustrated). Matthew and Mark (1 vol.),
$2.50; Luke, $1.50: others nearly ready.

“Destined to be _the_ Commentary for thoughtful Bible readers....
Simple, attractive, correct and judicious in the use of
learning.--_Rev. Howard Crosby, D. D._”


                   PUBLISHERS’ PRINCIPAL OFFICE,

                111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      Established A. D. 1850.

                                THE

                             MANHATTAN
                        Life Insurance Co.,

                      156 Broadway, New York,

                             HAS PAID

                     $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                             HAS PAID

          =$4,900,000= Return Premiums to Policy-Holders,

                         HAS A SURPLUS OF

                  =$1,700,000= OVER LIABILITIES,

               _By New York Standard of Valuation._

    _It gives the Best Insurance on the Best Lives at the most
                         Favorable Rates._

           EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY.

                     HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT,

    C. Y. WEMPLE,
            _Vice-President_.

    J. L. HALSEY,
            _Secretary_.

    S. N. STEBBINS,
            _Actuary_.

    H. Y. WEMPLE,
    H. B. STOKES,
            _Assistant-Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     _Demorest’s Monthly_,

                   AN EXTRAORDINARY MAGAZINE

                     =FOR THE HOLIDAYS!!=

See the DECEMBER and JANUARY Numbers. Beautiful and artistic Oil
Pictures, Steel Engravings, and a grand combination of literary
features.

Price 25 Cents, post free; Yearly $3.00; with two large and
splendid Oil Pictures. 15×21 inches--“LION’S BRIDE” and “ROCK OF
AGES”--as a Premium: transportation, 50 Cents extra.

                _Great Inducements for Agents._

Send for terms. Address,

                     W. JENNINGS DEMOREST,
               17 East Fourteenth St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   Theological and S. S. Books.

Immense stock. Good and cheap. Special attention given to Books for
Students. Books for Agents. =The Old and New Bible Looking-Glass=,
(with =280= Beautiful Emblem Engravings,) written by Drs. CROSBY,
GILLET, CHEEVER, PUNSHON. It has received the best indorsements. Now
ready, on the “Clark” plan, the Nichol Edition of the Expository
Lectures of the Puritan Divines--the English price, $3.75; our price,
postpaid, $1.50. Send for particulars. N. TIBBALS & SONS, 37 Park Row,
N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       The Book of Psalms.

                ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN
            SABBATH SCHOOL, OR SOCIAL OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

The current version is strictly followed, the only peculiarity
being the arrangement according to the _Original Parallelisms_, for
convenience in responsive reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32 mo. Limp
Cloth, 30 cts. per copy, $25 per 100; 16 mo. Cloth, 70 cts. per copy,
$56 per 100. Sent postpaid on receipt of price.

  TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers,
                                            758 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         BROWN BROS. & CO.

                             BANKERS,

             59 Wall St., New York,
                  211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                  66 State St., Boston.

Issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory guarantee of
repayment.

                  Circular Credits for Travelers,

In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent countries, and
in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of the world.

These Credits, bearing the signature of the holder, afford a ready
means of identification, and the amounts for which they are issued
can be availed of from time to time, wherever he may be, in sums to
meet the requirements of the Traveler.

Application for Credits may be made to either of the above houses
direct, or through any respectable bank or banker in the country.


They also issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money
between this Country and England, and draw Bills of Exchange on
Great Britain and Ireland.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        THE WILSON PATENT

                        ADJUSTABLE CHAIR,

                  =With 80 Changes of Positions=.

Parlor, Library, Invalid Chair, Child’s Crib, Bed or Lounge, combining
Beauty, Lightness, Strength, Simplicity, and Comfort. Everything to an
exact science. Orders by mail promptly attended to. Goods shipped to
any address C.O.D. Quote the MISSIONARY.

[Illustration: READING POSITION.]

Send for Ill. Circular

WILSON ADJUS. CHAIR MFG. CO. 661 Broadway, N. Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              ORGANS

Splendid =_$340_= ORGANS for =_$100_=. =_$300_= for =_$90_=,
=_$275_= for =_$80_=. =_$200_= for =_$70_=. =_$190_= for =_$65_=;
and =_$160_= for =_$55_=. PIANOS--=_$900_= Piano Forte for =_$225_=.
=_$800_= for =_$200_=. =_$750_= for =_$185_=. =_$700_= for =_$165_=.
=_$600_= for =_$135_=, =_cash_=, not used a year, in perfect order.
Great Bargains, Unrivaled Instruments, Unequaled Prices. Send for
Catalogues. =HORACE WATERS & SONS, _40 East 14th Street, New York._=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           E. & O. WARD

                      Give personal attention
                   to the sale of all kinds of

                     PRODUCE ON COMMISSION.

                   No. 279 Washington St., N. Y.

      (Est’d 1845.) Ref., _Irving National Bank_, N. Y. City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                               LESTER

Scroll Saw, Circular Saw, Turning Lathe, Lathe Tools, Emery
Wheel and Drilling Attachment. All for $8. _A Beautiful and Perfect
Machine._

                           _Warranted._

MILLERS FALLS CO., 74 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           THE CELEBRATED

                               GERMAN

                            STUDENT LAMP.

                      _Complete, only $5.00._

                          ALSO THE FAMOUS

                              VIENNA
                               COFFEE
                                  POT.

                            ALL SIZES.


                        Imported only by

                         E. D. BASSFORD,

                        HOUSE-FURNISHING,
                     HARDWARE, CHINA, GLASS,
                       CUTLERY, SILVERWARE,
                       And COOKING UTENSILS.

                         [Illustration]

1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16 & 17 Cooper Institute, N. Y. City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

   HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES IRON
            CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.,

                          [Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.


                         Founded in 1832.


                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.

                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,

                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         [Illustration]

                                THE

                        MIDDLETOWN PLATE CO’S

                                FINE

                         Electro-Plated Ware

                 Excels in BEAUTY OF DESIGN, HARDNESS
                     OF METAL, QUANTITY OF SILVER
                           DEPOSITED UPON IT.

                       Factory: Middletown, Conn.

                             SALESROOM:
                      13 JOHN STREET, NEW YORK.

                         FOR SALE EVERYWHERE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

                          THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.

           THE MOST POPULAR SCIENTIFIC PAPER IN THE WORLD.

Only $3.20 a Year, including Postage. Weekly. 52 Numbers a Year. 4,000
Book pages.


=The Scientific American= is a large first-class Weekly Newspaper,
of sixteen pages, printed in the most beautiful style, _profusely
Illustrated with Splendid Engravings_, representing the newest
Inventions and the most recent Advances in the Arts and Sciences;
including MECHANICS and ENGINEERING, STEAM ENGINEERING, RAILWAY,
MINING, CIVIL, GAS and HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING; MILL-WORK, IRON, STEEL
and METAL-WORK; CHEMISTRY and CHEMICAL PROCESSES; ELECTRICITY, LIGHT,
HEAT, SOUND; TECHNOLOGY, PHOTOGRAPHY, PRINTING, NEW MACHINERY,
NEW PROCESSES, NEW RECIPES; Improvements pertaining to Textile
Industry--WEAVING, DYEING, COLORING; New Industrial Products--ANIMAL,
VEGETABLE and MINERAL; New and Interesting Facts in AGRICULTURE,
HORTICULTURE, THE HOME, HEALTH, MEDICAL PROGRESS, SOCIAL SCIENCE,
NATURAL HISTORY, GEOLOGY, ASTRONOMY, etc.

The most valuable practical papers, by eminent writers in all
departments of Science, will be found in the =Scientific American=;
the whole presented in popular language, free from technical terms,
illustrated with engravings, and so arranged as to interest and inform
all classes of readers, old and young. The =Scientific American=
is promotive of knowledge and progress in every community where it
circulates. It should have a place in every Family, Reading-Room,
Library, College, or School. Terms, =$3.20= per year, =$1.60= half
year, which includes prepayment of Postage. Discount to Clubs and
Agents. Single copies ten cents. Sold by all Newsdealers. Remit by
postal order to MUNN & CO., Publishers, 37 Park Row, New York.

_PATENTS._ In connection with the =Scientific American=, Messrs. MUNN
& CO. are Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, and have the
largest establishment in the world. Patents are obtained on the best
terms. Models of New Inventions and Sketches examined, and advice
free. A special notice is made in the =Scientific American= of all
Inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence
of the Patentee. Public attention is thus directed to the merits of
the new patent, and sales or introduction often effected. Any person
who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free of
charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to the
undersigned. Address for the Paper, or concerning Patents,

                           =BRANCH OFFICE:
                 Cor. F & 7th Sts, Washington, D. C.=

                   MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          FRANK LESLIE’S

                         SUNDAY MAGAZINE.

                     Rev. DR. DEEMS, Editor.


              Each Number has 128 Pages.
                          It is profusely illustrated.

               The Cheapest Religious Reading.
                       Non-Sectional--Non Sectarian.

               The Best Writers Employed.
                        The Best Household Magazine.

       Short Stories, Serials, Sketches of Travel, Exegesis,
                  Sermons, Editorials, Music, Poems.

“It certainly excels in value the Sunday magazines of the Old
Country.”--_New Covenant, Chicago._

“This splendid magazine is crowded with good things.”--_Presbyterian
Weekly._

“One of the marvels of periodic literature.”--_Methodist Protestant._

“This magazine, which began well, is gaining ground with each
successive number.”--_Christian Union._

“As a whole, it is a kind of Pandora’s box with the mischief left
out. It cannot but gladden and improve every family into which it
goes.”--_The Advance._

“A splendid number. This magazine has sprung at once to an
acknowledged place of influence among the religious monthlies and
quarterlies.”--_Central Presbyterian._

“It is probable that no American monthly has ever taken a more rapid
hold upon the affections of the people.”--_Record and Evangelist._

“The fact is, this magazine has from the start distanced all
competitors, and is now trying to outdo its own self.”--_Central
Protestant._


$3 a year; $1.50 for 6 Months; Clergymen $2.25 a Year.

                     SPECIMEN COPY =20= CENTS.


                 =FRANK LESLIE’S PUBLISHING HOUSE,
                         53 Park Place, New York City.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE NEW YORK

                            DAILY WITNESS

                   The Christian Daily Newspaper,

             =Issued Every Morning (Sabbath Excepted),=

Has all the latest news, original articles, communications, editorials
and prices current of produce, with complete reports and quotations
of stocks and gold. It gives a daily report of Fulton Street
Prayer-Meeting. It gives copious extracts from the editorials of the
other New York papers on the most important topics of the day. It gives
a large amount of valuable reading matter for the family. Try it.

=$5= a year, postpaid, or ten weeks for =$1=.


                            JOHN DOUGALL.
                         7 FRANKFORT STREET,
                                     NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration:
                     PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT
                            SUI GENERIS]


                           MASON & HAMLIN

                           CABINET ORGANS,

                            WINNERS OF THE

                            ONLY GOLD MEDAL

              AWARDED TO AMERICAN MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AT

                       Paris Exposition, 1878;

  _the highest distinction in the power of the Judges to confer._

                             PARIS, 1878

                         Two Highest Medals.

                           =SWEDEN=, 1878
                           =PHILADA=, 1876
                           =SANTIAGO=, ’75
                            =VIENNA=, 1873
                            =PARIS=, 1867.

                              AT EVERY

                               WORLD’S

                             EXPOSITION

                            FOR 12 YEARS

                     They have been awarded the

                           HIGHEST HONORS

At the =Paris Exposition, 1878=, they are awarded the GOLD MEDAL, the
highest recompense at the disposal of the jury; also the BRONZE MEDAL,
the highest distinction for excellent workmanship. They have also
received the GRAND GOLD MEDAL OF SWEDEN AND NORWAY, 1878. =No other
American Organs ever attained highest award at ANY World’s Exposition.=
Sold for Cash, or payments by installments. _Latest_ CATALOGUES, with
newest styles, prices, etc., free.

                    MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO.,
                   BOSTON, NEW YORK, or CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   1832 MERIDEN CUTLERY CO. 1878

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                          Table Cutlery

                    _Of every Description, with_

         Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory, Celluloid,
                 Pearl and Silver-plated Handles.

                      The Celluloid Handle,

(of which we are the exclusive makers), is the equal of Ivory in
beauty, when new, and surpasses it in durability and appearance
in use.

              POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS.

          All goods bearing our NAME are fully guaranteed.

                        MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.

                               49 Chambers St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  MARVIN’S
  FIRE & BURGLAR
  SAFES
  COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK
  SCALES
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.
  265 BROADWAY. N.Y.
  627 CHESTNUT ST. PHILA._
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           Seven Medals

                             AT PARIS.

                  A cable dispatch announces that

                           FAIRBANKS & CO.

                        _Scale Manufacturers_,

Have received Seven Medals at the Paris Exhibition, more than were ever
awarded any other exhibitors at any World’s Fair.

Three of the Medals were gold, two silver, and two bronze; a gold and a
bronze being awarded for their exhibits of the

                      IMPROVED TYPE WRITER,

                      AND OSCILLATING PUMP,

for which they are sole agents for

the world.--_N. Y. Evening Post, Oct. 29th._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N.Y.

Manufacture a superior quality of Bells.
Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.
☞ Illustrated Catalogues sent free.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              AQUARIA.

[Illustration]

=Automatic Fountains, Ferneries, Flower Stands, Flower-Pot Brackets,
Window Boxes=

&c. &c. Send 10 cents for postage on Large Illustrated
Catalogue. Send 6 cents for Scroll-Saw Catalogue.

                        G. WEBSTER PECK,

                              110 Chambers St., N.Y.

                    [_Mention this Magazine._]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CRAMPTON’S

                             PALM SOAP

                          IS THE BEST FOR

                       The Laundry,

                               The Kitchen,

                              AND FOR

                    General Household Purposes.

                          MANUFACTURED BY

                        CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

               _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts. N.Y._

                 Send for Circular and Price List.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                     THE THIRTY-THIRD VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY,

                               1879.


We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the increasing
appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the year now nearly past; and
purpose to spare no effort to make its pages of still greater value to
those interested in the work which it records.

Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for 1879?

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs, will
easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our Magazine,
and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under the editorial supervision of Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, aided by the
steady contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from careful
observers and thinkers elsewhere, the “AMERICAN MISSIONARY” furnishes a
vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward among the Indians,
the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in the
South and as missionaries in Africa.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and Christianizing
of these despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its
circulation. Begin with the next number and the new year. The price is
only Fifty Cents per annum.


                     SUBSCRIPTION DEPARTMENT.

Besides giving news from the Institutions and Churches aided by the
Association among the Freedmen in the South, the Indian tribes, the
Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Negroes in Western Africa, it
will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting the
races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of current
events relating to their welfare and progress.

We publish =25,000= copies per month, and shall be glad to increase the
number indefinitely, knowing from experience that to be informed of our
work is to sympathize with, and desire to aid it.

The Subscription Price will be, as formerly, =Fifty Cents a Year, in
Advance=. We also offer to send =One Hundred copies to one address=,
for distribution in Churches or to clubs of subscribers, for $30., with
the added privilege of a Life Membership to such person as shall be
designated. The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to
the persons indicated on Page 318. Donations and subscriptions should
be sent to

                   H. W. HUBBARD, Ass’t Treas.,
                                      56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

A limited space in our Magazine is devoted to Advertisements, for which
our low rates and large circulation make its pages specially valuable.
Our readers are among the best in the country, having an established
character for integrity and thrift that constitute them valued
customers in all departments of business.

To Advertisers using display type and Cuts, who are accustomed to the
“RULES” of the best Newspapers, requiring “DOUBLE RATES” for these
“LUXURIES,” our wide pages, fine paper, and superior printing, with
=no extra charge for these cuts=, are advantages readily appreciated,
and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of business
announcements.

We are, thus far, gratified with the success of this department, and
solicit orders from all who have unexceptionable wares to advertise.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

                    J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                      56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.


☞ =Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.=


                 *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Punctuation and spelling were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. Inconsistent hyphenation was retained
as there are numerous authors. The punctuation changes are too
numerous to list; the others are as follows:

“Atlanla” changed to “Atlanta” on page front01 (Atlanta,
Ga.--Students’ Reports)

“Benjamim” changed to “Benjamin” on page 353 (Mrs. Benjamin James,
of the Mendi Mission)

“he” changed to “the” on page 353 (The institutions of the
Association are excellently located.)

“ou rchildren” changed to “our children” on page 373 (but will
bring in our children)

“contrymen” changed to “countrymen” on page 376 (Why is it that
your countrymen come)

“Riudge” changed to “Rindge” on page 394 (Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.)

“Fon du Lac” changed to “Fond du Lac” on page 396 (Fond du Lac:
Ladies’ Miss. Soc.)

Ditto marks in tables were replaced with the text they represent,
in order to help the text line up properly in all media.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 32, NO. 12, DECEMBER, 1878 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.