VOL. XXXIII.                                                    No. 3.

                          THE

                   AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

          “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                       MARCH, 1879.




                       _CONTENTS:_

  EDITORIAL.

    GENEROUS GIFT                                                   65
    CALL TO GO FORWARD                                              65
    MR. ARTHINGTON’S OFFER                                          66
    NEW RECRUIT FOR MENDI MISSION                                   69
    SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONCERT: Gen. C. B. Fisk                          70
    WILDERNESS AND SOUTH COUNTRY: Rev. E. Corwin, D.D.              70
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                            74
    GENERAL NOTES                                                   75
    OUR QUERY COLUMN                                                76


  THE FREEDMEN.

    SOME FIRST IMPRESSIONS: Rev. Jos. E. Roy, D.D.                  78
    CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE: Rev. S. S. Ashley                     80
    GEORGIA—Atlanta University—Revival among the Students           81
    ALABAMA, FLORENCE—Christmas Festival, &c.                       82
    LOUISIANA, NEW ORLEANS—Straight University and Central
      Church—Week of Prayer and Work of Grace                       82
    TENNESSEE, NASHVILLE—Fisk University—Day of Prayer              84
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS—Woman’s Work—Cottage Meetings, &c.           84


  THE CHINESE.

    SUMMARY OF MISSION WORK: Rev. W. C. Pond.                       86


  AFRICA.

    CHRISTMAS AT AVERY STATION                                      87


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    LITTLE SALLIE                                                   88


  RECEIPTS.                                                          90


                                NEW YORK:
               Published by the American Missionary Association,
                         ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                   =Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.=




                    American Missionary Association,

                         56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. GEORGE THACHER, LL. D., Iowa.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Rev. WM. PATTON, D. D., Ct.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ct.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    EDGAR KETCHUM, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Assistant Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    EDWARD BEECHER,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    E. A. GRAVES,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAM’L HOLMES,
    S. S. JOCELYN,
    ANDREW LESTER,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the business of the Association may be addressed to either
of the Secretaries as above; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

Should be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Ass’t Treasurer, No. 56 Reade Street,
New York, or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices,
21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill.

A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

Correspondents are specially requested to place at the head of each
letter the name of their Post Office, and the County and State in which
it is located.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *
             VOL. XXXIII.     MARCH, 1879.     No. 3.
                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have told our friends that for the last three months our receipts,
in common with those of our sister societies, have been less than for
the corresponding months of the preceding year. January did better,
but we would still have had some anxieties if there had not come to
us from an aged friend, who had given us no reason to expect so large
an offering, a check for _ten thousand dollars_. The letter which
accompanied the gift, referred to his observance of our efforts to
reduce the debt and our success in that direction, but asking us to
expend this money, the savings of a lifetime, in carrying on our work.
It was a gift from the Lord by the hand of His servant, and again, as
often before, we are called to make record of His faithfulness who has
promised to help those who are in His work. Should not this generous
gift strengthen our confidence that God has yet other treasures with
which He will enable us to commend His love to the despised, and to
preach His gospel to the poor?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CALL TO GO FORWARD.

We thank our friends for their noble efforts to conquer the Debt. As
we feared, however, the help thus given has diminished the supplies
for our regular and pressing work. We have wrought with only one hand
on the work and with the other held a weapon. But now that the debt is
well nigh vanquished, we must gird ourselves not merely to repair the
neglected gaps, but to push forward along the whole length of the wall.


THE DEBT PROVIDED FOR.

Relying upon the payment of the money pledged, our actual indebtedness
is reduced to only $6,440. Against this amount our Executive Committee
has set apart our remaining Iowa lands, which at a low valuation fully
balance it, as a sinking fund, to be held for this purpose only. _The
debt is thus provided for_, and we have no more pleas to urge for its
extinction,—save as we suggest for this last time, there is a noble
opportunity just now for some generous friend to step in and claim the
honor of giving the finishing stroke to this Goliath, so setting free
those lands again to aid our current work. We praise the Lord that we
can now turn from this accomplished effort to other


DEFERRED AND URGENT WORK.

The debt effort has enforced an economy in field work that has been
rigid—nay, hindering. For example, one of our higher institutions
has become so full that while it has accommodations for only 40 girls
it has 60 in attendance, and one of the recitations must be held in a
bed-room. Another instance is found in one of the brightest towns in
Georgia, where we have planted a church and opened a school. The place
is so near our Atlanta University that its pupils can readily supply
it with both teaching and preaching force; but for the lack of a few
hundred dollars to erect a cheap, and yet adequate building for school
and church, both are hindered in growth and usefulness, and if the
means be not soon furnished, might as well be abandoned.

Our industrial schools suffer for want of funds. The colored students
are so poor that unless aid can in small amounts be furnished them,
either by facilities for work or by help in money, many of them must
abandon the effort for an education. These items as to school and
church work are but samples of what come to us from all parts of the
field. But there are other calls of special importance. No State in
the South is growing more rapidly than Texas. A generous friend of the
colored race has purchased an eligible lot of eight acres in Austin,
Texas, and given it to us as the site of a colored institution. He and
other friends have added gifts amounting to nearly $10,000, towards
the erection of a substantial building. We shall begin the structure
this spring, but will only enclose it, unless the means are furnished
to complete it. We will make no debt. We hope—nay, we plead—that the
money may be speedily forthcoming to finish this building and prepare
it for immediate use.

The noble offer of Mr. Arthington, of Leeds, England, to which we call
attention below, opens another avenue for the efforts of the Freedmen
in the Evangelization of the land of their fathers. The proposed
mission lies in tropical Africa, and is desolated by the slave trade.
It thus appeals to our deepest sympathies as the life-long opponents of
slavery, and to the millions from whom we shall select the missionaries
who were themselves its victims.

In view of these facts, we press our appeal on the hearts of our
friends. Let us go forward in the work so well begun, and let us enter
the new fields opened to us in the providence of God. We ask not merely
for special gifts for special objects, but also for the regular work so
well in hand, and needing so greatly the means of enlargement.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. ARTHINGTON’S OFFER TO THE A. M. A.

The name of Robert Arthington, Esq., of Leeds, England, has already
become familiar to all good people who are interested in the
evangelization of “The Dark Continent.” His gift of £5,000 each to the
Church Missionary Society and the London Missionary Society, of £1,000
to the (English) Baptist Missionary Society, and his offer last year
of a similar amount to our own American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions, all for the founding of new evangelizing agencies in
Equatorial Africa, have been among the most marked events in the recent
history of Christian giving. These various gifts and offers have all
been parts in the prosecution of a wisely comprehensive plan, which his
subjoined letter clearly sets forth, and in furthering which he has
now come to our Association with an offer of _three thousand pounds_
($15,000), and a plan for our occupation of an important territory with
an efficient mission.

The region which he carefully describes and commends to our care lies
north and east of the Victoria Nyanza Mission of the Church Missionary
Society; west and south of which lies the Tanganika Mission of the
London Society; west of this the region which he has asked the American
Board to occupy, and the Baptist Mission still further toward the
western coast. These five divisions nearly cross the continent between
10 degrees north and 10 degrees south latitude. Of course they are
large tracts, and only five starting points for evangelizing effort.

We have felt that there was a special claim on our Association, which
has from its beginning been so intimately associated with the African
race, and which has so long kept up its mission on the West Coast, to
consider prayerfully and intelligently the proposal to enter into the
far-reaching plans of this steward of the Lord. It is not a matter
for hasty decision. The conditions which he imposes in regard to the
liquidation of our debt we believe will be fully met before we can do
more than consider and plan. The Executive Committee have appointed
a sub-committee consisting of four of its members, with three of its
officers, who will study into the matter with all care and report. The
result of their investigations, with a map of the region, may be looked
for in the April number of the MISSIONARY, to which, in connection
with the valuable letter of Mr. Arthington in this, we ask the careful
attention of all who are interested in the evangelization of Equatorial
Africa.

We print herewith a large portion of

=Mr. Arthington’s Letter.=

In your thirtieth Annual Report, page 15, you indicate a desire, on the
part of your Society, to enter on some suitable field for missionary
enterprise in Eastern or Central Africa; and again, in the thirty-first
Report, I find in the first pages of the volume a similar desire
expressed for extension, so as to bring the African Continent within
the range of the mighty power of the Gospel—Christ risen again, in all
his reality set forth as the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believeth.

If your Society can so enter into the scheme I am about to propose as
to assure me that the debt of your treasury—see the 31st Report—is
extinguished, and that your members adopt the proposal of it
prayerfully in all faith, I am impressed that I should be glad in the
Lord to offer to your Society towards the carrying it into execution
the sum of _three thousand pounds_.

The unevangelized region of Africa to which I would call your earnest
attention, and invite you to accept as a field for missionary labors
(to be conducted with all energy in the Spirit—very judiciously fixing
your positions for holding forth the word of Life so as to command the
whole area, and diffuse throughout it the light of the Gospel—you
and a great multitude of true believers continually standing on the
watch-tower of the church and fervently praying, “Thy kingdom come!”)
is situated and extends from the 10th parallel of north latitude to the
point southwards where the 40th meridian crosses or cuts the river Jub
(or Godschob), west to east from the right (east) bank of the White
Nile to the said 40th meridian, and from the parallel of longitude of
that point on the Jub southwards west and east from the White Nile to
the right (west) bank of the Jub, down to the 3rd parallel of north
latitude, and from the 3rd parallel of north latitude down to the 1st
parallel of north latitude, west and east from the 35th meridian to
the Jub. We thus avoid Somali Land, which is not at present eligible
as a mission field. The territory south of the parallel 1 degree north
latitude, it is hoped, some other society will evangelize. West of the
35th meridian, from 3 degrees north latitude and southwards, appears
suitable for the Church Missionary Society of England, in connection
with the Victoria Nyanza district.

The general object of this method of arrangement is to assign the whole
of Africa, so far as not Mohammedanized, to different sections of
the Christian church, that they may see that their several areas are
evangelized. You would thus have a great and highly promising field
for missionary labor, the most important and interesting people of
which are: 1. The decayed Christian Remnants (remnants of the ancient
Abyssinian church), Wolawo and Cambay, Muger and Gurague, and the
places Euarea, Kaffa, Susa, Tuffti, Kullu and Doko. 2. The great and
wide-spread Gallas tribes. 3. Dinkas. 4. The inhabitants of the Berri
country. 5. The Latookas. 6. Fatiko and the Madi country.

The great interest and importance of the Christian Remnants and of
the Gallas tribes is well known. The Berri people it is especially
desirable should be early instructed in Christian truth. They are
situated not very far to the east of Gondokoro, outside of the traders’
route. They have never been reported, I believe, but as a fine people
comparatively, and are mentioned in Werne’s work, published many years
ago.

The Latookas will appear interesting when we peruse Sir Samuel Baker’s
account of them, and see “The Albert Nyanza,” 1866, vol. 1, pages
204-6, in which he writes: “One of the principal channels, if not the
main stream of the river Sobat, is only 4 days’ march, or fifty miles,
east of Latooka, and is known to the natives as _the Chol_.” See also,
for accuracy of the places, Sir Samuel Baker’s “Ismailia,” the map.
The east bank of that stream (the Chol) is occupied by the Gallas. The
Gallas (in their attack on the Latookas) were invariably mounted on
mules, &c., “the cavalry of the Akkara,” &c. In a note to me, dated
August, 1878, Sir Samuel Baker says: “The Berri country has never been
visited by Europeans; although it is not far from Gondokoro, it lies
out of the way of traders’ routes. It would be comprised between north
latitude 5 degrees 20 minutes and 6 degrees 50 minutes, and commences
in east longitude about one degree east of Gondokoro, which is
absolutely correct on the maps.” “Fatiko is a small district situated
in 8 degrees north latitude, in the Madi country. You will find all
places laid down with extreme accuracy in the maps in my last work,
‘Ismailia.’”

The linguistic aids for the evangelization of some of the tribes or
populations—say Gallas, Dinkas, Christian Remnants, People of Euarea,
Kaffa, Susa, &c.—already exist, I believe, in considerable degree.

The proffered gift, then, if accepted by you, should be regarded as
a nucleus to which the Church of Christ around you shall pour its
offerings, and I think that two thousand pounds of the amount should
be specially applied towards the purchase and perpetual maintenance of
two river steamers, _one_ to navigate the Sobat and command the mission
to the Dinkas—to such of the Gallas tribes as are their neighbors on
the east, between them and Euarea—to the Gallas tribes on the Chol
branch of the Sobat (east or right bank), and to the Latookas west
or south-west (of the Chol), if accessible from that river; and the
_other_ steamer to navigate the Godschob (called the Jub at its mouth)
and command the missions to the Christian Remnants, Wolawo, &c., and
to the Gallas, who are to be found in large numbers in the country
west of, and up to, the right or west bank of the Godschob. And it is
understood that the people of the Berri country shall claim a place
amongst your earliest evangelistic efforts. Fatiko, with the Madi
country and Lake Samburu and population, are included in the area, but
need not claim a first place in your labors. Possibly the Gallas on
the upper course or waters of the Ozi—if geographers are right as
to the position of the source of this river—may be reached from the
Jub (Godschob) or from the Sobat. Your staff of missionaries for this
work, so full of promise of great results, should be a well-chosen
band, some of them men skilled in some of the arts, say two in the use
of scientific instruments, and they should be most thoughtfully and
prayerfully selected.

I ask that two or three of your very best and ablest men—men of large
hearts, of enterprise and great faith, with several of the best maps
before you—will study the description of the area I have delineated,
and if it is not in any point perfectly clear, that you will at once
ask for the missing details.

I really desire a thorough and permanent occupation of the field.

Yours most truly, in the Lord Jesus Christ,

  (Signed)
  ROBERT ARTHINGTON,
  Leeds, England.
  January 10th, 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW RECRUIT FOR THE MENDI MISSION.

It will be remembered that Rev. Floyd Snelson was compelled to return
to this country, after a sojourn of about a year in our African
mission, on account of the rapidly failing health of his wife. He has
resumed the care of the Midway Church in Georgia, from the pastorate of
which he was taken, against the wishes of his people, for the foreign
work.

It was deemed necessary to make good the vacated place as soon as
possible. In accordance with the expressed judgment of the missionaries
on the field, the first want was of a man specially adapted to take
charge of the saw-mill and other industrial interests at Avery Station,
of which Mr. Jackson has had charge as well as of the church and
school. Inquiries were instituted at once among our higher institutions
for the right man, and we think we have found him.

Elmore L. Anthony was born a slave in Allen County, Kentucky, June
8th, 1848. Early in the progress of the war he ran away to join the
Union army, but being rejected as a soldier on account of his youth,
he returned to his old master, who was a stock trader, preferring, if
he must be a servant to anybody, to serve him. In 1863 he left again,
and soon after entered the regular army, where he served three years.
He was promoted to be a sergeant, and while at Fort Duncan, in Texas,
was detailed to be superintendent of laborers, having the oversight of
over two hundred men. He says that he got on well in the army, simply
because he was perfectly temperate and sober. He bears testimonials
from his officers as to his moral character and faithfulness.

In 1870 he made his way to Berea, Ky., and entered the primary class.
He has been there ever since, teaching during the last six years in
his vacations; and was a member of the senior class when he came, at
our call and by the advice and hearty commendation of the president
and faculty of the college, to give himself to work in Africa. That
he held, nearly from the beginning quite to the close of these years,
the trusted position of janitor of the Ladies’ Hall, is no small
evidence of the confidence which has been reposed in him. He is a man
of stalwart frame, has been medically examined and pronounced perfect
in health. He seems to us admirably adapted to the place as our “man of
affairs,” competent at the same time to fill a gap in school as teacher
when needed, and while not a preacher in any sense of the word, yet of
such honest purpose to do good that he will be no less a missionary for
that. He sailed the 13th of February _via_ Liberia.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL CONCERT.

GENERAL CLINTON B. FISK.

It was a happy thought on the part of somebody to prepare a
Sunday-school Concert exercise, which should embody so much valuable
information and afford so great pleasure and holy joy, as does that
of the Jubilee Concert exercise, prepared by the Rev. G. D. Pike on
substantially the same basis as that first introduced by Rev. A. E.
Winship, of Massachusetts.

It was my good fortune on Sunday, January 12th, to participate in the
exercises of a concert, conducted in accordance with this exceedingly
well arranged programme, in the Sunday-school of the Congregational
church at Stamford, Conn., Rev. G. B. Willcox, D. D., pastor. It was
a glad day in that, to me, the most attractive of all New England
villages. If any other town in the East can furnish a roll of better
men, women and children than those who adorn the beautiful Christian
homes of Stamford, then I want to go there and attend a Jubilee Concert
exercise.

The preparation at Stamford was complete. ALL, from the excellent
pastor up to the oldest deacon, and down to the youngest child, took
part. The able and enthusiastic superintendent, Mr. Junius Smith, is
a born missionary, and he led his Sunday-school host into the work
with great earnestness. The church was filled at an early hour of the
evening, and when the great throng sung that sweetest of all Jubilee
Songs, and one which has stirred the hearts of the best people on two
continents, “Steal away to Jesus,” that wonderful, weird, plaintive
melody fell upon my ears with _almost_ the effect with which the
Jubilee Singers have a thousand times rendered it with their matchless
voices and marvellous power. Hon. Oliver Hoyt, one of Connecticut’s
wisest and best senators, impressively invoked the Divine blessing. The
facts in relation to the organization, successful progress and grand
achievements for the Master of the American Missionary Association
were admirably brought out by the tersely-prepared exercises. The
pastor, superintendent, teachers and scholars all had their part and
_did well._ Rev. G. D. Pike, whose head and heart are crammed full of
well-devised plans for the up-lifting of the Freedmen, and through the
uplifted Freedmen of America the redemption of Africa, made one of his
most forcible pleas in behalf of the Association. The writer of this
imperfect sketch followed with an exhortation in his Methodist way. The
collection was taken and a happy day closed.

The Sunday-school Jubilee Concert exercise, if generally used, will
be instrumental in _fixing facts_ in the minds of young and old. I
bespeak for it the examination of Sunday-school superintendents, and I
most heartily bespeak the generous consideration of all good people in
behalf of the American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WILDERNESS AND THE SOUTH COUNTRY.

A Discourse on the Duty of the American Churches to the Despised and
Outcast Races.

PREACHED IN THE INTEREST OF THE A. M. A. TO THE 1ST CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH, JACKSONVILLE, ILL., BY THE PASTOR, REV. E. CORWIN, D. D., DEC.
22, 1878.

 Joshua xii. 8: “In the mountains and in the valleys, and in the plains
 and in the springs, and in the wilderness and in the south country.”

We owe nobody an apology for following the example of the Great Teacher
in the latitude and longitude he allowed to himself in the use of Old
Testament texts. I honor by following a Divine example when I use
this passage from Hebrew history as marvellously suggestive of our
broader heritage and of our responsibilities as a people coming into
fuller possession of a goodly land; in the mountains and valleys of
the Atlantic and Pacific seaboard; in the vast plains of the interior;
in the springs and great river sources of the lake region; in the
wide reaches of wilderness, comparatively worthless but for their
exhaustless resources of mineral wealth; and last, but not least, in
the sunny south country.

If, with emotions of patriotic pride, Joshua, the great captain, could
speak of the wide extent and the varied resources of that goodly land,
into the possession of which he was leading the descendants of a
whole nation of fugitive slaves, how much more, with devout gratitude
and patriotic pride, may we dwell upon _the wonderful resources and
the wide reaches_ of a free empire in which there are forty million
sovereigns, and on whose territory you might place, in patch-work,
three hundred and twenty-eight states as large as Palestine, and
have scraps enough left over to cover the two dwarf sisters of the
Union—Delaware and Rhode Island! Corresponding most nearly in area
with Maryland, five Palestines might find comfortable quarters in
the single State of Illinois; yet so wonderful was the fertility of
that land, now comparatively barren and desolate, that it at one time
sustained a population so dense that if the vast territory of the
United States were thus thickly settled, it should have not merely
forty millions of inhabitants, but one thousand one hundred and forty
millions. Who doubts that such a population might be sustained on the
fat valleys of the interior and the plantations of the south country,
even though the waste places of the wilderness were left out of the
account as utterly unfit for the dwelling-places of men? And, as though
this vast heritage of ours were not enough for a free and industrious
people, God has over many portions of the land practically doubled its
area; piling its resources of wealth layer upon layer; rivaling and
redoubling the riches of the surface soil by the exhaustless stores of
coal, iron and copper, lead, silver and gold, treasured up for the use
of many generations; for there is the hiding of His power who is the
bountiful God of Providence.

But my purpose is only so far to hint at the resources of this most
favored of lands, as to make the marvellous facts a basis for the
proposition that ability is one measure of our responsibility for the
hearty and liberal doing of what we can for the highest development of
this whole land. And let us never forget that a great, civilized and
Christian State is made and measured, not by its physical resources
merely, not by its accumulated material wealth, but chiefly by the
mental and moral stature of its inhabitants. _The best products and the
richest resources of any State are in its crop of men._ If these, even
on a sterile soil and under frowning skies, are liberal, large-hearted,
industrious, patriotic and pious, they make of the desert a paradise,
and amid the clefts of the rocks there may be rootage for great ideas.
If everywhere, for a single generation, such a populace could have
and hold possession of this planet, the old alien orb would shine so
that the shortest-sighted angel could see it without a telescope,
and the inhabitants of other worlds might intelligently covet it as
a dwelling-place for the society which it would afford. But wealth
without good society is worthless. That city might be a hell upon
earth in which there were no churches and schools, though every man
had a gold mine in one corner of his cellar and a diamond mine in
another. Mexico, with its mountains streaked with silver, has but few
attractions as the family residence of a man who cares to live out
more than half his days, or who esteems it no luxury to live among
an ignorant, bigoted and revengeful people. California to-day, with
all its discovered treasures, could not be so safe or so attractive
a place of residence as it was before those discoveries, but for
the better class of enterprising, intelligent, honest, law-abiding
citizens, who have come into possession of that land. Nor are political
institutions, however desirable, of much practical worth, except
as they are worked by men of moral principle, not for the selfish
advantage of the few, but for the protection and enriching of all.

In considering _the claims of the American Missionary Association_ to
our prayerful interest and our liberal benefactions, these preliminary
thoughts have practical force as applied to moral science; for it is
distinctively the aim of this Association to lift society as a whole
by lifting at the lower stratum. Its work is confessedly not with the
most promising material, out of which the most may be made in the
shortest time, but with the most degraded, unpromising and despised of
the outcast races. _This is the great alchemist among our charities;
seeking to transmute the baser metals into gold._ For the transmuting
of character the mission of Christ was a witness to the universe
that the last might be first, and that the lowest might be lifted to
the highest position of honor and glory, as the result of the Divine
condescension, the deep down-reaching love of the Son of God. He
came not to honor the lordly, but to lift up the lowly. For gaining
influence and establishing his kingdom he sought out not the ruling
classes; but, himself despised and rejected of men, he knew how to
condescend to men of low estate. He dispensed his largest blessings to
the despised and the outcasts, who, conscious of their vileness, felt
their need of salvation. Not unfaithful to the self-satisfied Scribes
and Pharisees, he came especially to seek and to save those who felt
themselves to be lost sheep of the house of Israel. Read the record
anew, with this thought in mind, and see if his special aim was not to
seek and save the lost, in the sense of the despised and abandoned, who
were, perhaps, without hope for themselves, and whose case might have
been regarded as desperate by others.

We are not the true followers of Christ if we are wanting in the
Christ-like spirit, and seek not to save the despised and outcast races
who dwelt in the wilderness and in the south country. Do you tell me,
_as an excuse for neglecting_ them, that the Indians, instead of being
the noble red men, such as the sickly sentimental fancy of the poet and
the moralist too often paint them, are, for the most part, ignorant and
vile, dirty and degraded, lazy, mean, treacherous and revengeful? My
familiarity with the better class of frontiersmen prepares me candidly
to admit it all as a statement of fact. But I draw from those facts a
very different conclusion than that they are not worth saving. All the
more do they need to be saved. I might, without encroaching upon the
regions of romance, tell, by the hour, tales of horror, as they have
been related to me by reliable witnesses, that would make the blood
fairly curdle in your veins. And if I had the gift of eloquence I might
so vividly depict those horrors that you would find yourselves, right
here in the house of God, clenching your fist and threatening vengeance
upon wretches so base, upon savages so merciless, upon mockeries of
manhood so gross and beastly.

But let me remind you that an intelligent Indian might with more
eloquent tongue inveigh against the crimes of those who profess to
be better than savages. He might truthfully speak of the perfidy of
those who break the faith of treaties almost before the ink is dry in
which the plausible yet one-sided contract is written. He might with
indignant sneer point to the great army of vagrants claiming better
blood, as filthy and vile, as dangerous and degraded as the worst
savages were ever charged with being. But in saying all this he has not
made out his case. No criminal can make even a plausible defence in any
court by the plea that he is no worse than the worst men he can find
in society; though, somehow, quite respectable sinners do seem to gain
some comfort from this sort of scavenger’s logic.

It is absurd to suppose that ignorant and brutal savages should be so
much better than civilized men that there should not be found in every
tribe, as there are with us in every community, a dangerous class,
selfish enough to plunder and murder those who have never wronged them,
and desperate enough to take any risk and to commit any crime. It were
most surprising if it were not so. All the more, then, I insist upon
their need of saving. With all the stronger emphasis I urge that this
nation cannot afford, on its undefended borders, any more than it
can afford in its strong centres of population and of well organized
police, to be indifferent to the needless multiplying of such a class.
Has our civilization much to boast of if it admits that there is no
better way for forty millions of people to deal with four hundred
thousand Indians than to exterminate them? If it were not true, as it
is, that it costs more to kill them than to civilize, convert and by
moral forces control them, what less than savages are we if we adopt
the creed of the worst class of frontiersmen as the creed of the
churches; that the best thing we can do with the savage is to kill him;
and that there are no good Indians but dead ones?

Let us be intelligent enough to know, and candid enough to confess,
that in estimating their possibilities of social, industrial and moral
development, we have taken too much account of the exceptional cases
in which they have made trouble, and not enough of the many tribes
that, for long years, have lived in peace, grown thrifty, maintained
self-control, cared for the education of their children, and honored
their profession of religion. What this and kindred associations have
successfully achieved among the Indians alone, entitles them to the
gratitude of the nation, and the liberal support of all who have faith
in the Christ-like work of saving the lost.

I have not time to speak at length of the work of the Association
among the Asiatic immigrants upon the Pacific coast. Many of you know
how honestly and earnestly I contend that in many respects this serf
population that is sweeping in upon our Western border is a most
undesirable element, morally, socially and politically. But by as much
as they are, in the mass, vile and degraded, the worst sort of stuff
out of which to make American citizens, by so much the more are we
bound not to outdo them in violence that would dishonor a savage, and
in intolerance and prejudice that is worse than heathenish. Here, too,
the argument of this discourse finds its fullest illustration. It is
the strongest proof of the bounty of our religion that its brightest
trophies are secured and its grandest victories achieved upon the most
hopeless fields, and in saving the very chief of sinners.

But the work of the Association among the Aborigines of the wilderness
is as nothing to their more important mission, and their more signal
success among _the colored people of the south country_. Here is
a population vastly more numerous and more dangerous if left in
ignorance; for, wisely or unwisely, they have been invested with the
right, and in some places they freely exercise the power to vote.
Admit, now, all that may be said of the utter unfitness of the great
majority of them to exercise this privilege of freemen. Yet since,
beyond recall, they have the right, and in some way must be counted as
a very important factor in the forces that are to shape our destiny, we
can no more afford to let them remain in ignorance, than we can afford
to let the same class grow up in ignorance and vice among us, with so
little sense of their responsibilities, and with so little self-respect
as citizens, that they can be bought like cattle by the highest
bidder. The more debased, indolent and ignorant they are, the greater
the danger to our free institutions, and the stronger the motive
for seeking to elevate, educate and save them. They constitute more
than one-tenth of our population. If directly or indirectly we were
accessory to the placing of so dangerous a weapon in their hands—a
weapon, as respects their own interests, liable to kick back—we are
bound to help fit them so to exercise the right that they shall not
be the ignorant tools of corrupt and crafty men in either party as
ignorant and unprincipled as themselves. This the A. M. A. is striving
wisely to do in accord with the sentiments and sympathies of many of
the former slave-owners, who in good faith accept the situation, and
sincerely desire the temporal and spiritual well-being of the colored
people.

But its highest aim and ours is such a spiritual elevation of the
colored people as shall carry all the most salutary influences into
their social, political and domestic life. Our honest and intelligent
aim is to lift them out of their degradation by bringing them to
Christ. Our work among them is with no sectarian, as it is with no
partisan political purpose. We propose to help make them intelligent
and worthy Christian people. There our responsibility ceases. As to
parties and sects, they must learn wisely to choose for themselves.

Whatever the shading of their creed, we do care that they should be
sincere in their love to God, close in their following of Christ, and
honest in all their dealings with their fellow-men. We do care that
their moral training shall be such that their religion shall mean not
emotion merely, but character; not noise and bodily exercise, which
profiteth little, but practical godliness, which leads one to earn an
honest living for himself and his household, and suffers the neighbor’s
chickens unmolested to roost low; not a religion of the lips and the
tongue alone, but of the head and the heart controlling the life.

Nowhere is a mere profession of godliness of much account, if virtues
tried and true are not the proofs of an intelligent love and a sincere
devotion. No creed can be accepted as a substitute for character.
Christ must be wrought into the life or we are not true Christians,
and the more completely self-deceived we are, the greater will be our
surprise, when, by and by, he who is infallible in his judgment shall
say, “I never knew you.” The cross worn upon the neck, or perched upon
the steeple-tops, or set up at every crossing, is at best a mocking
reminder of our impiety; if ever so loudly we profess to be saints,
and yet live as though our religion were a polite theory with which to
compliment our Maker, and to befool our fellow men, and not a thing of
practical worth, to help one stand fire in the conflicts of temptation
and in the furnace of affliction. Such a genuine religion, warranted
to keep in any climate, is wanted everywhere alike; in the East and
the West, the North and the South country. The lofty and the lowly,
the honored and the despised, the respectable and the degraded, we and
everybody, need it. It is the only kind worth propagating. For it, and
it alone, of all the world’s religions, has vital force and saving
power enfolded in every root-fibre of doctrine, and in every seed-germ
of truth.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

GREENWOOD, S. C.—School fuller than ever before; boarding-school
overcrowded. Mr. Backenstose is compelled to make arrangements in
neighboring families for students.

ORANGEBURG, S. C.—“Our school has 196 pupils enrolled. We have a large
normal class. Six are teachers now. We have some who have begun in
music, and this week we have resolved to form a choir. Can you help us
with a musical instrument? _We greatly need_ one for the church. Our
organ has been injured by taking it back and forth to church.”

MACON, GA.—Pastor Lathrop has printed on his “Gospel Press,” (given
him while a Home Missionary in Wisconsin by a lady at the East), a
stirring pastoral address. It includes a warm greeting, notice of
services and invitations thereto; also of the Lewis High School and
the Sunday-school, enforced by appropriate Scripture. We quote one
paragraph:

“No sectarian gospel will be taught from this pulpit. The pastor
heartily believes, and endeavors to preach, the broad, liberal, helpful
Gospel of ‘peace on earth, good-will toward men,’ through our Lord
Jesus Christ. This gospel of the ‘Prince of Peace’ does not agree
with quarreling among Christians, or strifes between churches. ‘If My
kingdom were of this world, then would My servants fight,’ said the
Master. Our great aim will be to show how this glorious gospel and this
blessed Jesus will help _every_ needy heart to bear _all_ its burdens;
how every soul may be freed from the bondage of sin, and filled with
love, meekness, temperance, patience, purity, righteousness, and joy,
‘which the world knows not, neither can give nor take away.’”

TALLADEGA, ALA.—Some recent conversions and cases of special interest
in religious things are reported in the college. One student, at least,
has declared his desire to go to Africa some day, if the Lord shall
open the way.

SELMA, ALA.—A happy work of grace is reported from the Burrell school,
resulting in a considerable number of conversions.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.

The Freedmen.

—Senator Windom has introduced a bill providing for the colonization
and distribution of the colored people of the Southern States in new
States and Territories as they may select. Some interest and sympathy
with the project has been expressed by prominent colored men, though we
think the great majority of the most intelligent of them are persuaded
that by patience and industry they can conquer peace and a place for
themselves anywhere.

—Henry M. Stanley, the explorer, was present at the recent meeting of
the Conference on the Civilization of Africa, and said that he would
lead the Belgian Exploring Expedition, which is soon to start for
Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—The Board of Indian Commissioners held its regular yearly meeting for
the preparation of its annual report in Washington last week. Besides
the members of the Board there were representatives of the religious
bodies interested in the management of Indian affairs through their
missionary operations among the different tribes, and also because many
of the Indian agents are appointed on their recommendation. From the
tenth annual report of the Board to the President, it appears that more
than one-half of the Indians have discarded the blanket and donned a
civilized garb; that about one-half have moved out of their lodges and
wigwams into houses, the number of which has increased nearly threefold
in ten years; that the number of pupils in Indian schools has more
than doubled; that nearly one-sixth of the Indian population can read;
that the number of acres of land cultivated by the Indians is about
five times as great as ten years ago; that the production of wheat has
increased nearly fivefold, of oats and barley nearly fourfold, and of
hay nearly ninefold; and that the Indians own about three times as
many horses and mules, six times at many cattle, seven times as many
swine and about seventy-five times as many sheep as they did ten
years ago. The Board remarks: “This exhibit of results is certainly
encouraging, and presents a strong argument against any radical change
of policy.” The Conference urge three measures upon the President and
Congress: 1. That courts of law be established on Indian reservations,
with jurisdiction in all cases where both parties are Indians. 2. That
common schools be provided for Indians the same as for white children,
under some regular system. 3. That the homestead law be so modified
that an Indian may select his homestead within the limits of the
reservation to which he belongs.

—The joint committee, consisting of three Senators and five
Representatives, to whom the question of the transfer of the Indians to
the War Department was submitted, being equally divided, have made two
reports. Congressional experts have been trying to decide which of the
two should have precedence as a _quasi_ majority report.

Senator McCreery and Representatives Scales, Hooker and Boone favor
the transfer. Their report claims that the present system actually
prevailed even before (in 1848) the Indians were given in care of
the Interior Department, as the War Department neither appointed nor
supervised the agents, but only received their reports. All past evils
are therefore traceable to this system. The peace policy in 1868 was a
confession of its failure. The army control will be better, because of
the high character of army officers, and the system of accountability
to which they are subject, because it will cost less money and avoid
wars.

Senators Sanders and Oglesby, and Representatives Stewart and Van
Voorhes report against the transfer, because of the abuses when the
management was in the hands of the War Department down to 1849; because
the Indians and the army officers agree in personally disliking the
proposed transfer; because of the progress in civilization already
made; on the ground of economy and appropriateness; and because not
one-third of the Indians need military supervision in any form. They
ascribe the failures of the past to the unwise recognition of the
tribal relation, exclusion from the protection of civil law, and of
landed rights. They recommend that the Indian Bureau be made a distinct
department, with a Cabinet officer at its head, and that the President
be authorized to transfer temporarily the control of hostile tribes.

The proposal to transfer was rejected by a vote of 101 to 88.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—The Committee on Education and Labor has introduced a bill, which
has been passed in the House, forbidding the master of any vessel to
bring more than fifteen Chinamen at any one time to the United States,
under a penalty of $100 fine for each passenger, and imprisonment for
six months. We hope the Senate will have the good sense to refuse its
consent to such action, which is a slight upon the Chinese Embassy
here, and may easily lead to a withdrawal of the privileges to American
citizens in the Flowery Land, which it was thought worth a good deal of
effort to obtain.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR QUERY COLUMN.

We print with great satisfaction the two following answers to the
question about the training of nurses. The first tells what is being
done in Le Moyne Institute; the second lays down foundation principles.


Training for Nurses.

I note with interest the “query” in the January MISSIONARY relative to
the training of nurses. It is but one of many indications of a rapidly
growing dissatisfaction with the present system of education in this
country. More and more it is coming to be the feeling that education,
in its true sense, is not designed, as has been thought in the past, to
fit people for “higher positions,” but rather to fit them to make the
most of life in the positions they do occupy, and which must, in any
event, be filled by some one. To satisfy this most reasonable feeling,
more of the things that pertain to practical life must be thought and
talked and taught in our schools. It is no doubt a serious question as
to how a safe transition can be made from the present highly artificial
system to one that will have a more practical bearing on the every-day
life of the masses. In this case advice of a similar nature to that
which Horace Greeley gave about resumption will prove, at least,
the most reasonable. The best and only way to make the change is to
_change_.

But for the query. At Le Moyne School, where we have one almost
continuous daily session from 9 A. M. to 3 P. M., at least an hour
of this time each day must be given by the pupils to some branch of
practical or industrial knowledge. We cannot wait for all the desired
appliances in this work, or to have a beaten track pointed out to us.
We are beginning with such appliances as are at hand, and we expect to
learn from our own experience as well as from other sources; but at any
rate in time to _earn success._

In the direct line of training nurses, each girl in the school, sixteen
years old or over, will devote the industrial hour, for two days in
each week, to studies under this head, including special lessons
in anatomy, physiology and hygiene. For the present, at least, no
text-book is to be placed in the hands of the students. They are to
gain their knowledge from lectures, which are to be followed by general
and familiar conversation between instructor and pupils on the same
subject. Each girl will be required to take notes of the lecture, and
to write out what she can of the knowledge imparted. After a subject is
completed, each member of the class is required to prepare an essay,
putting in the best possible form her knowledge of the entire subject
in all its bearings.

This is, in a general way, to effect the _theoretical_ training. We
hope to find opportunity to give members of the class at least a little
practice: First, in their own homes or circle of friends; second,
possibly in the woman’s ward of the city hospital, located near us;
third, in private families desirous of forwarding our work; or fourth,
among the destitute poor really in need of such services. Our work is
to commence with the simpler and more commonly occurring complaints of
this section, as colds, accidents that happen often, chills and fever,
etc.

I should like to write more fully of our plans as they relate to other
industrial matters, but space forbids. We are thoroughly convinced,
however, that in this matter of practical teaching, something more
effective than “tracts” is required to make sure of accomplishing any
great amount of good. We must come to closer quarters in this struggle;
it must be made a hand-to-hand conflict. Along our part of the line we
should have no fears of success if we could have placed at our disposal
the appliances really needed for the work. In the training of nurses,
we need and must have a good manikin, a human skeleton, some forms or
models of different organs of the human body, etc., etc. Who will come
forward and help us to them?

A. J. STEELE, _Le Moyne Normal Institute, Memphis, Tenn._

       *       *       *       *       *

The treatment which preserves health is the best treatment for its
recovery. We should lead our pupils to see that wholesome diet eaten
at proper hours, and sufficient sleep taken at the time which God
appointed for sleep, will impart more physical vigor than any other two
agencies; and that a disregard for them is a fruitful source of much
sickness, especially among colored people.

Sunlight and pure air are important factors in making the sick well,
and keeping the well from being sick. The _temperance pledge_ is also
a cheap and safe medicine. A knowledge of the chemistry of food, of
digestion, circulation and respiration is important, and may be taught
to comparatively young pupils. Nature, like a sensible dame, resents
an insult; and sickness is the punishment she imposes to avenge her
injuries. Nor will punishment cease until reparation is made.

AMOS W. FARNHAM, _Avery Institute, Charleston, S. C._

       *       *       *       *       *

We are happy to make mention, which is all it would be proper for us to
do in this place, of the book for boys written by Gen. O. O. Howard.
Our friends are so largely his friends, that many of them will want to
read “Donald’s School Days,” published by Lee & Shepard, of Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOME FIRST IMPRESSIONS.

1. I find this school and church work in more forward condition
than I had expected. I had known of the slow process of building up
educational and church institutions at the West. I knew of the greater
difficulties in this line at the South. I am gratified to find the
schools in such substantial buildings, and almost all the churches in
houses of their own, some of them attractive, and some very rough.

2. I find that these people handle the Congregational system better
than I had expected. They even excel in parliamentary tactics; and
what is the course of Congregational usage but the wise procedure of a
deliberative assembly? In their reaction from the experience of bondage
they rejoice in the full liberty of Christ’s house. If this system was
good enough to be given by the Apostles to the early churches round
about the Mediterranean, which had not, as I believe, been trained
in New England, and whose members had to take from them some severe
rebukes in the line of morals, surely it is good enough for these lowly
people.

3. I find an improvement of feeling among Southern people, both towards
the Freedmen and our work among them. As the students come back from
vacation service to our several institutions, they report this advance
in good-will. The people are learning that ours is a philanthropic and
missionary, and not a political process, and so their prejudice is
abating. It is natural that some worthy people should feel a little
chagrin at the slipping of this work out of their hands; but not a few
of them are glad to see it carried on by anybody. They say, now that
these people have been made citizens, they must be made the best of
citizens.

4. I find that the school work is the almost indispensable prerequisite
to the church work. It fixes the place. It draws out the material.
It qualifies for church activity. It is no gain to the Kingdom for
us simply to transfer the old-time church members to our system.
Our work is to train up the youth, to develop intelligence, and to
organize a fellowship of congenial material. A judicious man of
another denomination, speaking upon this subject, said that the
Congregationalists could afford to wait for the young; that his church
could not wait. It is surprising to see how rapidly the young people
come forward, for the mass of our congregations are of that class.

5. I find a philosophical reason for our call to the church work. This
people have been taught to seek dreams and visions at conversion; to
think that there can be no regeneration without a dreadful physical
process of “coming through.” Now, there are not a few persons of strong
minds and strong wills who say that they never can come through in that
way. Some such have been delighted to find the quiet way of submission
and faith. Some of the noblest natures now in our churches were of that
sort. Happy have been the preachers and teachers who have led them in
this way of peace.

6. I see a wise Providence in the opening of “Homes” for our workers.
It was impossible to get board among the white people. The Freedmen
had not the accommodations. It became necessary to provide “Homes”
which should be the property of the A. M. A. They become castles of
safety and abodes of comfort. They also bring to bear the example and
influence of home, which is a valuable adjunct to the missionary scheme.

7. As the soldiers once took this country, so now the women seem to
be taking it over again. In all our chartered institutions, men are
at work, affording the masculine quality to the workmanship. But in
all these, ladies are employed as teachers in the higher as well as in
the primary departments. Many of the normal and high schools are under
the exclusive control of ladies. In the earlier conflict their sex
was their protection. In all the movement their patience and tact and
heroism, and their loving devotement to the good of the people, have
secured a crown of success. Our country will never know its debt to
these patriotic women.

8. That whatever in politic or personal estate may betide the Freedmen,
our business is to keep pegging away at the up-lifting process. Whether
for the time their vote is allowed them or not; whether they be
ku-kluxed or bush-whacked or bulldozed; whether the South favor this
work or not, this one thing we have to do—to go forward patiently,
kindly, and strongly in this rudimental work of Christian civilization.

9. That we are not to repress the emotional nature of this people,
but to give it a basis of intelligence. This element, which is a
beauty and a power in the endowment of man, abounds in the African
mind; enriched by culture it may yet add a glory to our civilization.
Barnabas Root and Prof. Blyden both argued that we should develop their
race according to their idiosyncrasies; and yet the tendency seems to
be that as they advance in cultivation they re-act to the more severe
and logical style, and so lose somewhat of their power. We ought not to
contribute to this result by our training process. Let them sing some
of their rich “spirituals.” Give them our hymns and tunes that have an
enlivening glow. Be not afraid to appeal to their hearts as well as to
their heads. Let them be allowed the Pauline privilege of saying “Amen”
to the “giving of thanks.” It is a robbery of this people to bring them
down to the intellectual severity of the Puritans. It has been argued
that we of the Caucasian blood have weakened ourselves by this ruling
down of our emotional sentiments. It was a friend who said at Taunton,
that what the Congregationalists needed was consecrated emotion. At the
same place it was incorrectly argued that our system was not adapted to
the freed people because of their tropical nature. Was it so with the
Oriental nature 1,800 years ago?

10. That those who, in this work, during the years past, have gone on
in the face of prejudice and ostracism and persecution, have made the
way comparatively easy for those of us who join them now.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE.

The Annual Meeting at Chattanooga, Tenn.

REV. S. S. ASHLEY, ATLANTA.

This body held its annual meeting at Chattanooga, Tenn., on the 15th,
16th and 17th of January, the prevalence of the yellow fever having
prevented its session at the regular time in November. Owing to the
withdrawal of most of the Alabama and of all the Georgia churches,
to form conferences in their respective States, the Conference now
consists of the Congregational churches in Mississippi, Tennessee and
Northern Alabama, twelve in number. The churches in Mississippi were
not represented. Rev. Horace J. Taylor, of Athens, Ga., was chosen
Moderator. Each evening of the session was occupied with preaching;
Rev. S. S. Ashley, Dr. J. E. Roy and Prof. H. S. Bennett officiating.
Papers were read as follows: “On the Diaconate,” by Dr. Roy; on the
“Congregational Polity,” the Scriptural authority therefor, and its
advantages, by Rev. Temple Cutler of Chattanooga; and interesting
discussions were awakened by them. This Conference evidently believes
that the time has come to push Congregational church extension in the
South. The experience of those who have been long in this field is,
that Congregationalism is eminently adapted to the South.

The narratives of the state of religion in the Conference developed
several interesting facts concerning Chattanooga. That city was
severely smitten by the yellow fever. Through all the autumn, business
and meetings were suspended. The citizens had largely fled away,
and the place was left to the sick, the dying and the doctors. The
Chattanooga church consists of about eighty members; several of them
were smitten, but not one died. “The Band of Hope,” a society pledged
to abstinence from intoxicating drinks, tobacco and profanity, having
between two hundred and three hundred members, lost only two members
by the fever. This “Band” was organized by Rev. E. O. Tade some ten
years since. Its object is to gather in and hold under strict New
Testament temperance principles the youth of both sexes. Some twelve
hundred names have been enrolled upon its records. Its power has been
felt far and wide. A branch of the mother band has been organized in
the city. It may be safely said that through its agency Chattanooga is
more free from intemperance than any other Southern city hereabouts.
Its elections are less noted for rioting and drunkenness than those
of the cities of Georgia. Here is one result of A. M. A. work. Every
church should have connected closely with it a kindred organization.
The steadiness of this church in Chattanooga is largely owing to the
temperance principles of its members, adopted while they were young.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bro. Taylor gave the Conference an interesting description of his
former mission field on the Gilbert Islands, pointing out their
peculiar coral formation, the customs and character of the inhabitants,
and the success of Christian missions among them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prof. Bennett gave encouraging statements concerning Fisk University.
Prof. Spence is in Scotland; Prof. Cravath at his post, and the
machinery is running smoothly. The number of students is about as large
as usual; the religious interest not quite so decided as in former
years.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was voted to invite the Congregational churches of the South to meet
in convention at Atlanta in November, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

=Atlanta University, Alumni and Students.=

PROF. J. F. FULLER, ATLANTA.

This is the _tenth_ year since the organization of this school. The
first class graduated from the higher normal course in 1873, and the
first from the college in 1876. Classes have graduated regularly from
both departments each year since. The _alumni_ number 52, of whom,
at graduation, 50 were professing Christians. With the exception of
three who are now pursuing a higher course of study, and one who has
died since graduation, these are all doing active work for the Master
among their own people, and, with others who have left school before
completing the regular course of study, are selecting and sending to
the University the more promising of their pupils.

The present year shows a larger number of students in attendance and of
a better class. Besides those already established in different parts of
the State, over a hundred of the students teach during the long summer
vacation in the public schools, and also engage in Sabbath school
work. It is estimated that during the year 1878 over _ten thousand_
pupils in the State of Georgia were taught by those educated at this
University. The influence of the school is commensurate with the number
of its workers, and that influence, now very marked, is constantly
increasing. The last catalogue shows 30 in the college classes, 37
in the preparatory, 72 in the higher normal, and 104 in the normal.
The buildings are of brick, plain, substantial and convenient, but
_inadequate_ to the present and prospective needs. The grounds are
ample—nearly sixty acres—and beautifully located in the outskirts of
the city.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Revival among the Students.=

REV. C. W. FRANCIS, ATLANTA.

You will be glad to know that at this school we are in the midst of a
deep and effective work of grace, which has already brought into the
kingdom a goodly number of precious souls. There has been a good degree
of religious interest since the school came together in October, and
during the week of prayer, which we faithfully observed, that interest
was deepened; and since that time some have been committing themselves
to Christ’s service. The day of prayer for colleges, just observed,
was an occasion of deep and solemn interest, and a considerable number
took a step forward. A few extra meetings have been held; but, for
the most part, affairs have gone on as usual, with no interruption
of school work; and but for the greater quiet and improved order and
discipline of the school, and increasing fidelity to duty, an observer
would not know how thorough a work was going forward. Our reliance has
been mainly upon the truth, earnestly and plainly presented, rather
than upon any unusual measures, and our aim to reach the conscience,
and thus secure an intelligent and thorough submission to the claims of
God. All the members of the classes to graduate this year now profess
to be Christians, and we hope will be well prepared to do effective
work for the Master in the wide and needy field open before them. Some
who have long withstood every good influence are already affected, and
we hope will soon yield to Christ’s claims; indeed, there are hardly
any in the family who are not ready to acknowledge a deep interest in
the subject. We do not like to give numbers, but we may reasonably
hope that as many as twelve have already begun the new life, and more
than as many more are deeply serious. We hope for a greater work and a
deeper consecration, and that the Lord may baptize afresh for the great
and growing work pressing upon us. There are constantly, even at this
season, calls for teachers in all parts of this State which cannot be
answered, and in almost all cases Christian character is one of the
first qualifications sought.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

=Christmas Festival—Bearing One Another’s Burdens.=

REV. WILLIAM H. ASH, FLORENCE.

From the depletion made in September by many of our members going to
Kansas, a dark cloud for a time gathered over the work here; but I
believe the crisis is past, and some that were active in opposition
are now working in harmony with us, and endeavoring to take part in
every good work. The faithful few are ever encouraged by these cheering
words: “But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be
found even to fight against God.”

Up to the Sabbath previous to Christmas we were undecided as to whether
it was best to have a Christmas tree; but I found so many willing
hearts and ready hands eager to help, and particularly some not members
of the church, but friendly to it, that I threw all my influence in
this direction to make it a success. At first we planned to have it in
the church; but finding that the building used for our Sunday services
was too small, it was removed to the court-house, where we had ample
room. The church would only accommodate about one-fifth of the people
who came with their children to receive the gifts, for we had something
for nearly every Methodist and Baptist boy and girl, as well as every
Congregationalist in town.

On Friday night, the ladies of our church gave an entertainment to aid
in defraying the expenses incurred by the burial of a member of the
church who had died very suddenly. He would have been buried by the
town but for a few loyal and faithful brethren who revolted at any such
idea, and at once assumed the responsibility, though there was not one
cent in the treasury. At the supper they cleared enough to pay the
debt, and quite a little sum in addition. Our polity is guarded with
the same _sacredness_ as in New England.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

=Straight University and the Central Church—A Week of Prayer and Work

of Grace—Revival Incidents.=

REV. WALTER S. ALEXANDER, NEW ORLEANS.

New Orleans, La., Feb. 1st, 1879.

The terrible epidemic which held this city in its relentless grasp
for five months and created general gloom and depression, delayed
the opening of the University till December 1st. When we closed the
last term and planned for another year—our first year in the new
University building—our hopes were strong and enthusiastic, and we
said, “With the attraction and novelty of a fresh, beautiful building
in a central position, and the tide of public sentiment strongly in
our favor, the new year will be a marked period in the educational
interests of our State.” These brilliant expectations were changed
to grave uncertainty and anxiety. But God is with us, and our fears
are already dissipated. In the first place, the colored people were
wonderfully exempt from the ravages of the fever. There were instances
of the fever, but the mortality was slight. The only disadvantage was
the uncertainty regarding the time of opening the term, which induced a
large number to enter into other school arrangements. At this writing
we have in the Academic Department 175, and in the Law Department 25.
New students are enrolled every week, and we have great occasion for
satisfaction and gratitude. Our friends will be glad to know that the
new University building suits our needs to perfection. We could hardly
suggest a change in the arrangement of rooms. In many respects it is a
model house. If our friends could understand how earnestly we desire
to furnish our beautiful chapel and two additional recitation rooms,
into which we are almost ready to “_swarm_,” and how we long to see a
neat fence surrounding the lot, isolating and protecting us, situated
as we are on the grand boulevard of the city, I am sure that some good
heart would suggest the means of accomplishing these things. But this
is God’s work, and He will send relief if we can only wait.

We shall graduate a class of six, of whom five are young men. They all
have bright minds and are first-class scholars. It is a real pleasure
to teach them. I hear them every morning in Upham’s Mental Philosophy,
and the most exacting teacher would ask no better recitations than are
uniformly given. The inducements for young men and women to qualify
themselves for teachers of the highest grade are all that could be
desired. It is impossible now to answer the demands for competent
teachers for the colored schools of Louisiana. I have received an
application for a principal of a large parish school, with a salary of
$1,200, and two are now in hand for lady teachers, with salaries of $30
per month, in a town where good board can be obtained for $7 per month.
This demand will constantly increase both in Louisiana and Texas. Two
of our last senior class are teaching in Texas, and receiving $50 per
month.

When I returned to the church, after an absence of more than five
months, the people greeted me with enthusiasm, and said to me, “You
find us a united people. God has kept us together during this sad
summer. We are ready for work. When will the revival begin?” I told
them we should begin special meetings with the “Week of Prayer;” but
the time for earnest labor was already at hand to prepare the people
for the work of grace, which I felt sure God had in store for us. Our
prayer meetings were largely attended, and I could see that the Church
were longing and praying for a glorious revival. What a joyful duty it
is to preach to such a people! The “Week of Prayer” came, and with a
deep feeling of dependence upon God we gathered for our first special
meeting. Night after night the attendance increased. Christians yielded
themselves to the spirit of the meetings; the flame of religious fervor
burned more brightly; and when, in sympathy with the Christian world,
we had considered the topics assigned by the Evangelical Alliance,
we felt ready to enter upon the holy work of winning souls, and of
directing all our thoughts and energies to this object. For four
weeks we gathered every night, with an attendance ranging from 80
to 150, seldom falling below 100. Members of other churches flocked
in; unconverted men and women heard the good news and joined the
waiting throng. The result has been joyful—blessed—glorious. In
some respects I have never witnessed a revival of greater spiritual
power. The work has been quiet as the under-current of a river, but
deep, heart-searching and vital. The number of converts has been less
than in some previous revivals; but when the position and influence of
those who have been reached, one-half of them heads of families, is
considered, the general result is highly important. A few instances
will illustrate the nature of the good work. During a previous revival
a fair young girl was one of the joyful converts. She has been a
steadfast Christian, honoring by a consistent, holy life her vows as
a church member. One year ago she was married to a young man of many
attractive qualities, and the centre of influence in a wide circle
of friends. During this revival not only the husband, but the mother
have found Christ, and to-day there is great joy in that household.
On the night when the mother uttered the exultant cry, “Christ has
set me free; I am redeemed!” the child, who had prayed for her
husband’s and her mother’s conversion, fainted from excess of joy and
emotion. Another mother is made happy by the conversion of her son,
and expresses her joy with fast-falling tears. Now a student from one
of the country parishes yields to conviction and takes his stand as
a Christian. Another, a painter by trade, who says he knew nothing
of Christianity before, seeks earnestly till he finds the Saviour. We
shall never forget his impassioned eloquence when he announced his
conversion. It was the utterance of a deep, overwhelming joy. A young
man, whose home teaching has been all wrong, walks for days beneath the
dark shadow of doubt and fear. On one night he rose in meeting, and
weeping freely said, “Why do I not find peace? Why will not God have
mercy? Oh, pray for me and help me!” Such agony of soul cannot continue
long. It was the profound darkness before the dawn. To-day his faith is
strong and joyful.

There came into our meeting a wife, in whose conversion peculiar
interest was manifested. Listening with eager interest from the first,
she soon became intensely engaged in her own salvation. Near the
close of one of our services she exclaimed, so soon as her emotion
would permit her to speak, “God, have mercy! Everybody pray for me!”
Earnestly she inquired the way of life, and after a brief but bitter
struggle the light came beaming in upon her soul, and she goes from
house to house, spreading the glad tidings and telling what great
things the Lord has done for her. Last year a married woman—a public
school-teacher—experienced this blessed change of heart, and the
religion of Christ has been the absorbing theme of her life since. Now
her daughter, an interesting girl of sixteen, shares the faith of the
mother, who says, “Have I not reason for loving God as I do?” One who
became a Christian years ago, but who, through indifference, had lapsed
from the enjoyment of the Christian life, has been recovered. When she
sought my counsel, I said, “Don’t expect to be converted over again.
Take your place as a Christian woman, and live as a Christian should
live.” The change with her has been like a new conversion. The cloud
has been dispelled, and she rejoices in the restored favor of God.

On the last night of our special services fully 150 people were
present. I think we shall begin another special campaign the 1st of
March. Pray for us that a great light may be kindled here, which God
will never suffer to go out. Oh, the progress of this dear church these
last three years! Their self-respect, their pure lives, their faith in.
God, give cause for Christian confidence, affection and recognition.
The true church of God will not withhold them.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

=Fisk University—The Day of Prayer, etc.=

PRES. E. M. CRAVATH, NASHVILLE.

The meeting for prayer for the Association and its work was held on
Monday afternoon, January 6, at three o’clock, in the chapel. The
number in attendance was very large, and there was an unusual freedom
in prayer and a deep and tender interest in all the exercises. Prof.
Bennett spoke of the falling off in receipts, of which you had made
mention in a recent letter to him, and this called forth very earnest
supplication that God would move men’s hearts to liberal giving, so
that the good work among their people might not suffer. The occasion
was one of unusual interest.

There have been two very clear and interesting cases of conversion
since Christmas, and some among us are anxious. There has not yet been
so large an increase in the number of students since New Years as we
had expected. The weather has been intensely cold and money seems to be
very scarce.

The health of teachers and pupils is good. At the Baptist Institute
they were compelled to suspend school on Monday because of sickness
resulting from the unusual cold and exposure.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Woman’s Work—Relief Fund—Health Matters—Cottage Meetings—Northern
Helpers.=

MISS HATTIE A. MILTON, MEMPHIS.

The outlook seems much more encouraging this year than last, for
several reasons, one of the most important of which is, that the
relief fund gives us access to many more families. Last Sabbath five
new scholars came to Sunday-school, all from families which had been
benefited by the relief. One of the boys, eleven years old, who belongs
to a very poor family, but who is quite a hero among his neighbors,
because of his honesty and industry, I often met last year with others
on the commons, but he could not come to Sunday-school because he was
so ragged. As he was very anxious to attend, a suit of clothes was
given him last week, and Sabbath morning he came to the church before
his teacher was dressed for breakfast, and waited patiently during the
three hours until the exercises began, enjoying his improved appearance.

The past few weeks have been very cold for this climate, and many a
widow with her little children has been made to rejoice as she gathered
her family around the bright fire and partook of the wholesome food
provided by the A. M. A. relief. The yellow fever made terrible havoc
in many families—indeed in some none are left to tell the tale of woe!
For a few days, now, the weather has been very warm and there is much
sickness, and the death rate is very high among the colored people—in
many cases, no doubt, resulting from want of proper attention. A few
days since I visited a man suffering with indigestion and cold; he had
called a doctor, but was not relieved; his wife was anxious to help
him, but knew not what to do; so she was told to let the light in from
behind, instead of in front of the patient, as it was very painful to
his eyes, then to apply cloths wet in hot water to the aching head and
chest, and hot bricks, steaming with vinegar, to his feet. In half an
hour he was relieved and the next day was almost well, only needing
directions about food and ventilation. This is but an instance among
many of those who suffer for the want of such simple remedies, of the
use of which they have no knowledge. As the demand for nurses has been
very great during the past year, we propose giving some attention to
this branch in our school, which has filled up since Christmas and is
doing well.

The industrial department is getting in good working order. I have
about forty women and girls under my general supervision, the more
experienced assisting me in teaching the others to cut and make
garments. They seem much interested in the work. This department is
looked upon with approval by most of the people, as but few mothers are
capable of teaching their daughters these accomplishments, though they
are very anxious that they should learn them.

My field of work is already twice as large as last year. Members of
the different churches welcome me into their houses, and invite their
neighbors to our cottage meetings, of which we have five every week in
different neighborhoods. The pastor of the leading Methodist church
here gave me the names of several members of his church who would be
glad to have me hold mothers’ meetings in their houses, which was a
great help in my work, as it did much to remove the suspicion with
which they have regarded me. Some who are not professed Christians have
invited me to their houses, saying they hope by so doing they may see
the way more clearly. Many colored people look upon the epidemic of the
past season as a judgment from God on account of their sins, and try to
be more religious lest a worse evil befall them.

The Ladies’ Missionary Society, of Roseville, Ill., have become
interested in this work, and have forwarded a box, for which we are
thankful.

The “Little Girls,” of Crete, Ill., who last year sent a box, have this
year formed a society, which they have named “_The Milton Busy Bees_,”
have met every two weeks, and with their friends have prepared a box
of very valuable clothing, which has been received, and has made many a
heart beat warmer. May God bless all our kind friends at the North who
aid us so much by these substantial signs of their sympathy.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Summary of Mission Work among the Chinese.=

REV. WM. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

At the annual meeting of the California Chinese Mission I was requested
to append to the report then presented an account of the work of other
missions. I venture to hope that that account will be of interest to
the readers of the MISSIONARY, and offer it as my contribution for this
month. The facts were obtained not from printed reports, but by special
inquiries.

=The Presbyterian Mission= reports four evening mission schools, one in
each of the cities of San Francisco, Oakland, Sacramento and San José,
with an average attendance of 70, 60, 35 and 24 respectively. Four
American missionaries, speaking the Chinese language, are employed,
four Chinese preachers, and six other teachers. There is also, in San
Francisco, a day school for boys and girls, with two teachers, one
English and one Chinese, and an average attendance of twelve pupils.
There are six preaching places, three in San Francisco, three in
Oakland, two in Sacramento, and two in San José. Twenty religious
services are held each week, with an attendance which varies from a
very few to one hundred. Two Chinese churches have been organized, one
in San Francisco and the other in Oakland. The former has 40 members,
of whom two were received the past year. The latter has 29 members,
of whom six were added the last year. The San Francisco church has
been in existence many years, and has received to membership from its
organization 103 persons. In connection with the Sacramento Mission,
21 Christian Chinese have been received to the Presbyterian Church of
that city; fifteen are still members of the church, and of these, eight
were received last year. In connection with the San José school there
are seven Christian Chinese, members of the Presbyterian church of that
city.

=The Ladies’ Foreign Missionary Society= of the Presbyterian church
sustains in San Francisco a Home for Chinese women, which has now
eleven inmates, who must, of course, be not only taught, but sheltered
and boarded, and, often, protected from the brutes in human form who
claim to be their owners.

The total number of laborers connected with the Presbyterian Mission is
thus seen to be fifteen. The total average attendance at the schools,
212. The total number of church members, from the first, is 160, of
whom 69 have been removed by dismissal to churches in China, by death,
or by the dropping of their names from the roll. The total number who
hear the gospel from the lips of the missionaries or native preachers
cannot be estimated, but must run far up into the hundreds, if not into
the thousands.

Of the =Methodist Chinese Mission=, Rev. Dr. Gibson, Superintendent,
makes the following succinct and clear report:

“Five evening and day schools, with a total average attendance of
149; five Sunday-schools, with a total average attendance of 246;
four preaching places, with a total average attendance of 170; public
preaching, daily prayer meetings, praise meetings, class meeting and
Bible class, weekly, 78 Chinese members and 10 probationers; baptisms
last year—adults, 19; children, 3; cost of girls’ boarding-school,
$1,900; cost of all other work, $7,600.

“One of our schools is a boarding school for Chinese girls and women.
We call it the ‘Asylum.’ As to churches, our plan is a little different
from yours. We have classes at different places, but all are members of
the one church at San Francisco.”

At Los Angeles, from a Chinese Mission School, which was sustained for
many years by the California Chinese Mission, twenty in all have united
with the Presbyterian church in that city.

=The United Presbyterian Church.=—This church, also, sustains a
mission school in Oakland, which has an average attendance of about
forty pupils.

=The Woman’s Union Mission= to Chinese Women and Children has been in
operation nearly nine years. As its name indicates, it is a union work,
and is sustained for the most part by ladies in the different churches
of San Francisco and Oakland. The Society has been aided materially
this last year by the Chinese themselves, having received a gift in
money from the “Six Companies,” and also from the Chinese merchants.

The special work of this Mission is among Chinese children, and for
them a day school is sustained in the second story of the old “Globe
Hotel,” at the corner of Dupont and Jackson streets. With this special
work is also combined visitation among Chinese families. The number of
scholars on the roll the past year is fifty-two. Thirty-two of these
are boys and twenty girls. There are two teachers employed, an English
teacher and a teacher of Chinese. The running expenses of this Society
are about eighty-five dollars a month.

If, now, I add to this statement the following statistics touching _our
own_ =Congregational Mission=, the exhibit of missionary work among the
Chinese in California will be complete.

We maintain 11 schools: at Oakland, Petaluma, Sacramento; in San
Francisco, the Central, Barnes and Bethany; San Leandro, Santa Barbara,
Stockton, Visalia and Woodland; in which 16 teachers are employed.
1,492 pupils have been enrolled during the year. The average attendance
for the 12 months’ has been 244–647 being the largest number reported
in any single month. 93 profess to have ceased from idol worship, and
75 give evidence of conversion.

There is, outside these organized missions, considerable work done
by the churches in Chinese Sunday-schools, no complete or reliable
statistics of which could be easily obtained. At those sustained by
Congregational churches the total average attendance is, of pupils
about 250, and of teachers about 100.

There is furthermore, we may trust, in Christian households scattered
throughout the State, a work done for Chinese employed in them, which
cannot be reported here, but whose record is on high. There, too, its
fruit will appear, gathered into everlasting life.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CHRISTMAS IN AFRICA.

MRS. H. L. JACKSON, AVERY STATION.

To-day we have celebrated the birth of our dear Saviour. The first
thing was the giving of presents to the laborers, which Mr. Jackson did
from his own earnings. It was the custom of the former missionaries to
give the laborers each a Christmas present, and they are not a people
who forget very soon any favor shown them by the former missionaries.
This present consisted of two goats and two bushels of rice, which was
divided among them. I watched with pleasure their happy faces as each
one received his portion.

At ten o’clock the first bell rang for services, and at the ringing of
the second bell the chapel was filled to its utmost capacity with the
heathen, who came from miles around to hear and learn of Jesus, and
why we celebrate this eventful day. There were so many present that
we were obliged to bring in extra seats. They gave very good attention
and seemed to drink in the truths of Jesus Christ as they were given
them. It would have been encouraging to you could you have seen them
when they were told that this dear Saviour whom we celebrate is a God
who hears in Mendi, Sherbro, Timony and all other languages, and if
they come to Him with pure and contrite hearts He will wash away their
sins and make them white in the blood of the Lamb. From their cheerful
countenances one could read that their happy hearts sung forth praises
to God. I am, as you may know, a lover of singing, so we selected
some of the most beautiful and appropriate hymns for the occasion. As
we sung, I, like the heathen, could but exclaim praise to God in the
highest. Surely Africa will be redeemed from the curse of ignorance and
sin, and her sons and daughters learn to bow in reverence to the true
and living God.

After service, Mr. Jackson and I prepared a dinner, to which we invited
the chiefs of the Bargroo river. They seemed to enjoy themselves very
much indeed. The dinner consisted, as nearly as possible, of their
country dishes and a plenty of pure cold water. Having a country cook,
the dishes were all served up in regular country style. We had our
interpreter to dine with them, so that we might be able to converse
with them on the meaning of Christmas day and how they should celebrate
it.

We are greatly encouraged to go forward in the work. It is true that it
is a hard and tedious one, but when we lean on Jesus it is made light.
You would, perhaps, be pleased to know of some of our encouragements.
There is an unusual amount of interest manifested on the part of the
natives in religion. They take hold of the truths imparted to them as
if their souls were thirsty for the living bread of heaven. They are
also gradually laying aside their country fashions, such as gregrees,
charms and fetiches. All of these are features of interest to one who
labors among them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although we are thus encouraged, the habit of drinking rum is spreading
among them. This is a great curse to Africa. No evil could be
perpetrated among these people more injurious to them than the selling
of rum. Really, many of them seem to think that rum is the staff of
life, and in order to exist they must have it. This idea has been
brought to them through the medium of a civilized people, whose highest
aim should be to wipe this evil practice out of existence. Mr. Jackson
endeavored to impress upon their minds as clearly as possible the great
sin of drinking rum, and I am sure that many were convinced of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The church is progressing both in interest and in strength. The first
Sunday in this month was communion day. The presence of the Lord seemed
near each one. Five persons joined the church and were baptized. Among
the number was one chief. We have now three chiefs belonging to our
church, and we believe that they are really converted men.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


LITTLE SALLIE.

PROFESSOR A. K. SPENCE, OF FISK UNIVERSITY.

(Written from Dundee, Scotland.)

Little Sallie was born a slave, but became free through the
Emancipation Proclamation of Abraham Lincoln. She had learned to read
elsewhere, but came to the school connected with Fisk University to
pursue her studies still further. There she soon saw she was a sinner,
and needed a Saviour. She sought long, but did not find peace to
her soul. She was very sorrowful, and her trouble appeared in her
down-cast face. She often sighed and sometimes wept. She prayed much
and read her Bible. Her teachers felt sad for poor little Sallie.

At last light came. The Bible says, “Sorrow continueth for a night,
but joy cometh in the morning.” Her joy was great. Any one could see
that she had met a change. Her countenance was all aglow. A sweet smile
played on her lips. Her voice was full of music as she told what God
had done for her. Her eye kindled as she spoke of her dear Saviour.
All the affection of her young heart was given to him. It was sweet to
listen to her prayers, in which she often said, _dear Jesus_.

But Sallie wished to do something for Him who had done so much for her.
All young converts feel in that way. Old Christians feel so, too. Paul
says, “The love of Christ constraineth us.” But what could she do? She
was so young, and only a girl. Even if she were a woman, she could not
go into the pulpit and preach. Only men do that. What could she do!
This perplexed little Sallie.

One of her teachers, knowing her trouble, said to her, “Well, Sallie,
you can read, can you not?” “Oh, yes!” she replied, for she was a good
reader. “There are many colored people who were long slaves, and cannot
read, are there not? Would not you like to read the Bible to some of
them?”

This thought pleased little Sallie. Soon after she put on her hat, took
her Bible, and went out, Christ’s little missionary. She stood erect,
she stepped light, she looked happy; she was going out to do good for
Jesus. No doubt His love was warm in her heart just then. We always
feel love to God when for His sake we try to do good to men.

She did not know it, but the teacher who suggested her mission followed
to see what she would do. When she turned a street corner, he turned it
soon after her. At last she entered a little house, such as many of the
colored people live in. It was made of boards, one story high, and had
only one room. The day was warm. The door was open. He went to it and
looked in. I will try to tell you what he saw.

Sallie sat in a chair with her Bible in her lap, reading. One colored
woman was, seemingly, busy at a table, ironing clothes. But her
iron went back and forth nearly in the same place, while she looked
away, eyes and mouth open, to little Sallie, to whom she listened
attentively. Another had ceased from her work, and, leaning against
the wall, looked down upon our little missionary in a most loving,
motherly way. A third was sitting at her feet and gazing with her
great, dark face into the face of Sallie, who, in a low, sweet voice,
was reading: “He was wounded for our transgressions; He was bruised for
our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with
His stripes we are healed.” Was it not beautiful? You know this is a
prophesy of Christ, written many hundred years, before the sufferings
it describes, which Jesus bore for us. Find the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah and read it for yourselves, my young friends, and think that
Sallie read it to those poor colored women; and as you go over these
verses, may the same love and joy fill your hearts as filled hers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Remember, also, that you, too, may be workers for Christ in some way.
It may not be in Sallie’s way. She used to sing “There’ll be something
in Heaven for children to do.” There is something for them to do on
earth, too. Seek God’s guidance and He will show you what. Christ says
that if we give even a cup of water to any one, for His sake, we shall
not lose our reward. Sallie did not work for pay, but she had her
reward in the consciousness that she was pleasing Jesus and doing good
to those women.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many years have passed since the time of this narrative. Little Sallie
is now a young woman. Through the aid of kind friends she completed
the course of studies in the Normal department of Fisk University, and
is now teaching colored children in the far-off State of Texas. The
freed people of the South need such teachers; they need also ministers
of their own race; and many missionaries are needed for Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *

One way, my dear young friends, in which you can serve the Lord, is
this: Help us to educate these young people. When you put a little
piece of money into the box for this cause and for Jesus’ sake, He sees
it and will say to you in the last day: “Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JANUARY, 1879.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $749.02.

    Bangor. Hammond St. Ch. (bal.) $34.41; Hammond St.
      Sab. Sch. $15                                            $49.41
    Brownville. Hon. A. H. Merrill, $100; Cong. Ch.
      and Soc. $15                                             115.00
    Buxton. Rev. Joseph Kyte                                     3.00
    Gorham. First Cong. Ch. to const. SAMUEL T. DOLE,
      MOSES FOGG and JOHN S. LEAVIT L. M.’s                     83.21
    Hallowell. Emma French, half bbl. of C
    Machins. “A Friend.”                                         3.00
    Monson. Rev. R. W. Emerson                                  20.50
    North Dixmont. Mrs. M. E. K.                                 1.00
    Norway. Mrs. Mary K. Frost                                   5.00
    Portland. State St. Ch., $344.90;
      High St. Cong. Ch., $100                                 444.00
    Searsport. J. Y. B.                                          1.00
    Skowhegan. Mrs. L. W. Weston, $5; Miss S. A. T., $1          6.00
    South Bridgton. Mrs. R. Hale;                                3.00
    Wells. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                      0.50
    Winthrop. Mrs. E. H. N.                                      1.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          12.50


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $10,653.97.

    Amherst. Ladies’ Benev. Ass’n $2 and box of C.,
      _for Wilmington, N. C._                                    2.00
    Antrim. “Friends,” by Imla Wright                          110.00
    Alstead. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           14.00
    Boscawen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                17.08
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  4.15
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 10.00
    Concord. Miss F. A. G. and Mrs. A. F., $1;
      Mrs. C. L. G. 60c.                                         1.60
    Derry. Mrs. H. T.                                            0.50
    Dover. M. A. L.                                              1.00
    Exeter. “A Friend,” $30; Mrs. A. C. Perkins bbl. of
      C.                                                        30.00
    Fitzwilliam. Dea. Rufus B. Phillips                          5.00
    Franceston. Joseph Kingsbury, $10; A. F. $1.                11.00
    Gilmanton Iron Works. Moses P. Page, _for future
      work of the Association_                              10,000.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               7.00
    Harrisville. Mrs. Lucy B. Richardson                        10.00
    Hebron. Rev. J. B. Cook                                      2.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $12.33; Mrs. Samuel
      Towne, $5; G. C., $1.                                     18.33
    Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 32.75
    Londonderry. C. S. P.                                        1.00
    Manchester. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                       70.41
    Meredith Village. Mrs. C. S.                                 0.50
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                          33.70
    Monroe. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   1.50
    Nashua. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  10.24
    New Ipswich. “Hillside Gleaners,” _for Wilmington,
      N.C._                                                      4.00
    New London. ESTATE of Eliza S. Trussell                    150.00
    New London. Miss M. K. T.                                    0.50
    Peterborough. Cong. Ch.                                     25.46
    Pittsfield. John L. Thorndike                               10.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Salem. Individuals in Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     6.00
    Shelburne. Mrs. M. C. Ingalls                                3.00
    Temple. Mrs. W. K.                                           1.00
    Warner. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                            9.25
    West Campton. T. J. Sanborn                                  5.00
    Wilton. Mistletoe Band, _for Wilmington, N. C._,
      $10; J. T. H., $1.                                        11.00


  VERMONT, $779.62.

    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 24.00
    Brookfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       16.00
    Cambridge. Dea. S. Montague                                  5.00
    Castleton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  11.90
    Chelsea. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                           4.00
    Chester. G. H. C.                                            0.50
    Dorset. I. N. Sykes                                          5.00
    Essex Junction. Elizabeth T. Macomber                        5.00
    Granby and Victory Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        3.00
    Marshfield. Lyman Clark                                     10.00
    McIndoe’s Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         12.00
    Morrisville. “A Friend.”                                     5.00
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        16.00
    Pittsford. Henry Sherman                                    30.50
    Randolph. Mrs. I. Nichols                                    2.00
    Royalton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $15; —— First Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._, $13.51.               28.51
    Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.89
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      50.77
    Saint Johnsbury. North Ch., $464.83;
      North Ch. Sab. Sch., $50.                                514.83
    Waitsfield. G. I. B. and A. M. B., $1;
      S. H. Robinson, bbl. of C.                                 1.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch.                              10.22
    Williston. C. A. Seymour.                                    5.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                          13.50


  MASSACHUSETTS, $4,308.38.

    Acton. Mrs. M. F., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._             1.00
    Amherst. First Cong Ch. and Soc., $79.43; North
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $24.86; Prayer Meeting, Ag.
      College, by E. D. Howe, $1.50.                           105.79
    Andover. Peter Smith                                       500.00
    Andover. Ladies’ Aux. Miss. Soc. of Free Ch., $25;
      John Smith, $10; Francis H. Johnson, $5; M. C.
      Andrews, $2; Mrs. David Gray, $2; D. C., $1;
      J. W. P., $1; G. F., $1, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                              47.00
    Andover. ESTATE of Mrs. Caroline P. Taylor, by
      James C. Taylor, Ex.                                     200.00
    Arlington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Ashby. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., $25, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._ —— G. S. S., 50c.                        25.50
    Ashfield. Cong. Ladies                                      10.26
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)               8.00
    Auburndale. Miss Emma Warren, _for Tougaloo U._              2.00
    Ballardvale. W. C. C., _for Student Aid, S. U._              0.50
    Boston. Mrs E. C. Parkhurst of Mt. Vernon Ch.,
      $20; Mrs. Livermore, $2; Mrs. A. C. S. $1;
      —— “Friends” Christmas Box, _for Wilmington,
      N. C._                                                    23.00
    Boston. Mrs. Samuel A. Bradbury, $25; incorrectly
      ack. in Feb. number.
    Boxford. Rev. W. S. Coggin, $5; Mrs. J. K. Coles’
      Sab. Sch. class, $2, _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._; —— F. C., 50c.                                        7.50
    Boylston. Ladies, for Freight                                1.00
    Bradford. S. W. Carleton, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                               5.00
    Brocton. Joseph Hewitt, $10; —— Mrs. Barzilla Corey.
      $5; Miss Lizzie Kingman and Sch., $1.96, _for
      Tougaloo U._                                              16.96
    Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                                67.75
    Cambridge. Mrs. C. A. W.                                     0.50
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch. and Soc., $195.75;
      Pilgrim Cong. Ch., $62.39; Mrs. E. K., 60c.;
      N. H. H., 50c.; A. A. P., 50c.                           259.74
    Centerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.67
    Charlestown. First Ch. and Parish                           50.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.50
    Clinton. Mrs. C. R. Sawyer                                  10.00
    Coleraine. Miss E. McG.                                      1.00
    Cotuit. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             9.30
    Dalton. Hon. Z. M. Crane                                   100.00
    Danvers. C. W. L.                                            0.50
    Douglass. A. M. H.                                           0.70
    East Douglass. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. THOMAS
      H. MEEKS and CLARA B. SIMMONS, L. M’s.                    65.91
    Easthampton. First Cong. Sab. Sch                           25.00
    East Longmeadow. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $30; E. M.,
      $1.                                                       31.00
    East Medway. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    East Woburn. Wm. Temple                                      3.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                110.41
    Fall River. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $83.34; M. E.
      $1.                                                       84.34
    Fitchburg. Miss C. S. D.                                     1.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Cong. Ch. and Soc. $26.27;
      Young Peoples Mission of Plymouth Ch. $11.35 and
      bbl. of C.; Mrs. Maria Fay, $5; Mrs. S. N.
      Brewer, $2; “A Friend,” $1.                               45.62
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        28.40
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.50
    Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              50.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   8.45
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $70;
      James Bird $12.50                                         82.50
    Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           33.14
    Greenwich. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  18.00
    Groton. Union Cong. Ch.                                     18.09
    Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $6.10; Sab. Sch.
      $8.67                                                     14.77
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                46.00
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($100 _of which
      from Mrs. Theodore Noyes_), $203.39;
      C. C. and D. E. $1.00                                    204.39
    Harwichport. Leonard Robbins                                10.00
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           23.10
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. box of books
    Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               24.80
    Hubbardston. A. G. D.                                        0.51
    Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. Ch.                                 6.30
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch. and Soc. $62.07;
       —— Coll. Union Meeting, $21.70, _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                         83.77
    Lee. M. A. H.                                                1.00
    Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     13.18
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                             13.54
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.50
    Lowell. High St. Ch. and Soc. $83.73; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc. $78.90; MRS. E. M. BUSS. $30. to
      const herself L. M.; Mrs. E. J. Donnell, $5              197.63
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch.                                           27.00
    Malden. Mrs. M. L. B.                                        1.00
    Manchester. Bbl. of C.
    Mansfield. P. M. E.                                          1.00
    Mattapoisett. A. C.                                          1.00
    Medfield. F. D. E.                                           0.50
    Merrimac. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. I. B.
      BATTLES, L.M.                                             50.00
    Middleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch. bbl. of C. and $2.26
      _for freight_; Cong. Ch. and Soc. $14                     16.26
    Millbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $58.50; —— Cong. Ch.
      and Soc. $21.50, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._            80.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $26.49; —— Sunbeam
      Mission Circle, _for Chinese M._ $20                      46.49
    Newburyport. J. D.                                           1.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch. $137.41; Mrs. E. R. M. 50c.              137.91
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. $29.96; J. W. 50c.;
      S. A. E. 50c.                                             30.96
    Newtonville. Central Cong. Soc.                             20.89
    Newton Falls. Ladies, bbl. of C.
    North Amherst. H. S.                                         1.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                           12.66
    North Chelmsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        22.51
    North Hadley. Ch. and Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._ $10; —— Cong. Sab. Sch. $4.55                14.55
    Norwood. Mrs. H. N. Fuller, bal. to const. B. W.
      FULLER, L. M.                                              4.75
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $20.28; L. W. 50c.         20.78
    Peabody. T. S.                                               1.00
    Phillipston. A. and T. Ward                                  5.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. to const. REV. SAMUEL
      HARRISON and THEO. BARTLETT, L. M’s                      100.00
    Plymouth. Ch. of Pilgrimage                                 43.99
    Reading. Mrs. Mark M. Temple                                 2.00
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch. S. S. box of Books.
    Rochester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.00
    Rockland. Miss S. M. Bailey, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                               18.00
    Salem. Joseph H. Towne, $10 _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._; —— South Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.,
      $5.80; M. W., 50c.                                        16.30
    Sandwich. H. H. Nye                                          2.00
    South Attleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       3.33
    Southborough. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., $8.93; M. A. E.,
      50c.                                                       9.43
    South Hadley. Teachers and Students of Mt. Holyoke
      Fem. Sem., _for Tougaloo U._                              16.80
    South Royalston. Cong. Ch. Soc., $10; Mrs. S. N.,
      50c.                                                      10.50
    Springfield. South Cong. Ch., $27.22; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $20.61; Mrs. A. C. H., $1.10; A. A.
      H., $1                                                    49.93
    Sterling. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                23.73
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                21.56
    Stow. Mrs. M. W. _for Tougaloo U._                           0.25
    Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           40.80
    Tewksbury. George Lee, $10; Rev. S. F. French, $5;
      Wm. H. Lee, $5, _for Student Aid, Straight U._            20.00
    Warren. Mrs. Joseph Ramsdell ($5 _of which for
      Chinese M._)                                               6.00
    Watertown. Miss L. P. Auld, $15, _for Books for
      Mrs. Mather_; —— Mrs. J. A., 50c.                         15.50
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                        7.54
    West Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $12.47;
      D. S. Stebbins, bbl. of C.                                12.47
    Westfield. Second Ch. and Soc.                              19.57
    West Springfield. Park St. Ch. $46.15; First Ch.,
      $15                                                       61.15
    Whitinsville. Rev. J. R. Thurston                           30.00
    Williamstown. Miss Emily Beckwith                           10.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Sab. Sch., $30. _for Student Aid,
      Talladega_ C. —— J Skilton, $10                           40.00
    Winchester. “A Friend,”                                      2.00
    Woburn. First Cong. Sab. Sch. $150; Cong. Ch.
      and Soc. (in part), $40.94; Mrs. G. A. B., 50c.          191.44
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch., $149.48; Salem St.
      Ch. and Soc., $64.08; Old South Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $51.25; A. M. C., 50c.; Rev. W. J. W., 50c.        265.81


  RHODE ISLAND, $431.33.

    Bristol. Mrs. R.                                             1.00
    Little Compton. United Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   62.00
    Pawtucket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               30.00
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch. $235.33; —— Young
      Ladies’ Soc. of Beneficent Ch., $100, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._ —— Miss E. A. Linsley $3           338.33


  CONNECTICUT, $2,863.41.

    Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                                        7.80
    Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                        7.34
    Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch., $49.35; J. B. $1              50.35
    Broad Brook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.00
    Bristol. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    20.00
    Cheshire. Rev. I. H. I.                                      1.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                          15.00
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                          8.00
    Durham. Miss A. P. C.                                        1.00
    Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                      14.12
    Farmington. Cong. Ch., quar. coll. ($100 of which
      from Henry D. Hawley.)                                   167.95
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch., $156.16; G. M. J. 60c.       156.76
    Griswold. Mrs. E. B.                                         1.00
    Guilford. Mrs. Lucy E. Tuttle, $103.50;
      First Cong. Ch., $24                                     127.50
    Haddam. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., $152.55; South
      Cong. Ch., $100; Mrs. M. C. Bemis, $20.50; Mrs. W.
      T., 50c.; “A Friend,” 50c.; Mrs. A. E. C., 25c.          274.30
    Kensington. Cong. Ch and Soc., to const. LEANDER A.
      BUNCE, L. M.                                              31.57
    Jewett City. Cong Ch. and Soc.                              13.60
    Manchester. E. S. and E. A. B.                               1.00
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                   6.50
    Moose Meadow. Mrs. H. L. E.                                  0.50
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch. (_of which $5 “special
      from a member,”_) $76.94; “South Ch. A Friend,”
      $20; Mrs. S. 50c.                                         97.44
    New Haven. O. A. Dorman, $100; F. C. Sherman, $100;
      Amos Townsend. $50; Henry Johnson, $5;  —— Delia
      C. Davis, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ $5;
      —— P. P. $1; W. A. L. $1; Mrs. S. P. C. 50c.             262.50
    New London. Second Cong. Ch. (of which $300 from
      TRUST ESTATE of the late H. P. Haven)                    819.62
    New London. “A Friend”                                       1.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch. to const. MISS SARAH CURTISS,
      L. M.                                                     30.00
    North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett, $15.50; “A Friend,”
      $5; M. L. C. 50c.                                         21.00
    Norwalk. Mrs. Wm. B. St. John                                3.00
    Norwich. Miss. Ass’n of Second Cong. Sab. Sch. $50,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._ —— Miss S. M. Lee,
      $5                                                        55.00
    Old Lyme. Miss Mary Sill, bdl. of C. _for Talladega
      C._
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                           10.80
    Plymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Ag’l Dept._
      Talladega, Ala.                                          100.00
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch.                                          17.75
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                        65.25
    Stamford. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                         50.00
    Stratford. “A. S. C.”                                        5.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll’s.                        15.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                        23.51
    Warren. First Ecclesiastical Ch. and Soc.                   28.20
    Washington. “A few Friends,” by Henry S. Nettleton           6.00
    Waterbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 125.61
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch. to const. ANNA H. SCOTT
      and GEORGE N. GRISWOLD, L. M.’s                           69.00
    West Chester. Cong. Ch.                                     11.00
    West Meriden. E. K. Breckenridge                             5.00
    West Safford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             2.75
    Willimantic. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                              25.00
    Winsted. Mrs. M. A. Mitchell, $10; Elias E. Gilman,
      $10; First Cong. Ch. (ad’l) $6.19                         26.19
    Woodbridge. Cong. Ch. $9.69; Cong. Sab. Sch. $6.31,
     (of which $6 _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._)                16.60
    Woodstock. Cong. Sab. Sch. to const. DORA A.
      LINDEMAN, L. M.                                           30.00
    —— “A Friend”                                               17.50


  NEW YORK, $991.03.

    Antwerp. Two S. S. Classes and a few Ladies, by Mrs.
      Kate C. Abell, pkg. of C. and $1 _for Talladega C._        1.00
    Aquebogue, L. I. Sab. Sch. and Friends _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                         38.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs Lewis Tappan                                  10.00
    Brooklyn. E D. ESTATE of Mary Withington, by J. N.
      Stearns, Ex.                                             315.45
    Evans. Mrs. R. P. B. Camp                                    5.00
    Camden. S. Sperry                                            2.00
    Champlain. H. H.                                             1.00
    Chestertown. R. C. C.                                        1.00
    Churchville. Caroline Town, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                                5.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                        5.00
    Coxsackie. Mrs. E. F. Spoor, $5; and Miss A. G.
      Fairchild, $5; Rev. M. Lusk, $3                           13.00
    East Avon. Mrs. F. D.                                        1.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                        31.40
    Fredonia. Mrs. E. S Kellogg, box of C.
    Fulton. J. C. Galispe, $7; Almon Bristol, $5; T.
      W. Chesebro, $5; Dea. F. S. 50c.; Mrs. I. C. $1           18.50
    Greigsville. Mrs. S. J. Child, Mrs. F. A. Gray and
      Miss L. A. Gray                                            3.00
    Hudson. Mrs. D. A. Jones, $10; A. S. P. 50c.                10.50
    Kiantone. Mrs. E. C. Hall’s S. S. Class                      7.00
    Lebanon. M. Day, $5; Thomas H. Hitchcock. $5; A.
      Seymour, $5; S. H., $1; J. H. W., $1                      17.00
    Le Roy. Mrs. Sarah Covert, $6; Mrs. Dea. McEwein, $5        11.00
    Lima. Mrs. Mary Sprague, _for Student Aid, Hampton
      Inst._                                                     5.00
    Locust Valley. Mrs. Sarah Palmer                             5.00
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                   63.92
    McGrawville. H. D. Corey                                     2.00
    Middleport. G. J. H.                                         1.00
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                    16.23
    Newfield. Rev. Chas. Willey                                 10.00
    New York. Mrs. Parker, $100; Mrs. C. Tappan Lewis,
      $5; “A Friend,” $5; —— S. S. Class (“Pilgrim
      Band,”) Broadway Tab. Ch., $15.60 _for Student
      Aid, Hampton Inst._                                      125.60
    North Walton. Union Miss. Soc., $14.87; Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch., $8.21; “A Friend,” $1                          24.08
    Orwell. “Friends” by Rev. F. N. Greeley, box of C
    Oswego. J. G.                                                0.50
    Paris Hill. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         26.00
    Pekin. Miss Abigail Peck                                    10.00
    Penn Yan. W. W. Taylor                                       2.10
    Riverhead. Mrs. Eliza Miller, $20; Miss Knowles, $5         25.00
    Rochester. A. Hubregtse                                      2.50
    Smyrna. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. Miss. Soc.            20.00
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                       60.00
    Tompkinsville. Mrs. Maria Snyder                             2.00
    Troy. Mary and Margaret J. Cushman                           1.00
    Walton. First Cong. Ch.                                     79.75
    West Chazy. Daniel Bassett                                   5.00
    West Farms. J. A.                                            0.50


  NEW JERSEY, $209.50.

    Belleville. Mrs. J. B.                                       0.50
    Bricksburgh. Mrs. G. L.                                      1.00
    Jersey City. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                     50.00
    Jersey City. “D. D. A.”                                      5.00
    Morristown. Mrs. R. R. Graves, $100; W. B., $1             101.00
    Newark. J. H. Denison                                       30.00
    Paterson. Benj. Crane, $20; P. Van Houten, $2               22.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $42.00.

    Philadelphia. W. P. F., $1; Rev. C. E. B., 50c.;
      Mrs. J. R. McC., 50c.                                      2.00
    Pittsburgh. Third Presb. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Talladega, Ala._                                          25.00
    Washington. Mrs. M. H. McFarland                            10.00
    West Alexander. John McCoy and Wife                          5.00


  OHIO, $350.42.

    Alliance. J. S. Thomas                                       2.00
    Ashland. J. Thompson                                         2.28
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                            5.20
    Chardon. Sab. Sch. Class, (“Cheerful Workers”)              10.00
    Claridon. Cong. Ch.                                         45.01
    Cincinnati. Rent, _for the poor in New Orleans, La._        18.15
    Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Ch. $21.10; Franklin Av.
      Cong. Ch., $8.82                                          29.92
    Geneva. MRS. S. KINGSBURY, bal. to const. herself,
      L. M.                                                     10.00
    Hudson. Ladies’ Union Miss. Soc., bbl. of C. _for
      Colored poor of N. O._
    Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                   10.00
    Madison. M. B. H.                                            1.00
    Marietta. Mrs. E. W. B.                                      1.00
    Marysville. R. S. Wilcox, _for Student Aid, Selma,
      Ala._                                                     20.00
    Medina. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl. _for Tougaloo U._           5.00
    Moss Run. M. B. F.                                           0.50
    Newark. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                      9.30
    North Bloomfield. Friend, _for Ind. Dept. Talladega
      C._                                                       36.63
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.30
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., $20; Harris Lewis, $5;
      J. S. McClelland, $2; H.R. $1; Ladies’ Soc. of
      2d Cong. Ch. 2 bbls. of C., _for Colored poor of
      N. O._                                                    28.00
    Orrville. Chas. S. Strong                                    5.00
    Painsville. First Cong. Ch., (_of which $2.50 from
      Mrs. Morley for Straight U._,) $26.07; First Cong.
      S. S., $25; C. R. Stone, $5                               56.07
    Ruggles. Mrs. J. T.                                          0.50
    Sharonville. J. H.                                           1.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        7.56
    Tallmadge. Mrs. Harriet Seward, $5; —— Mrs. A. F.,
      50c., _for Tougaloo U._                                    5.50
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed                                  10.00
    Twinsburgh. J. R. Parmalee                                   3.00
    Unionville. M. W.                                            1.00
    Wellington. E. W.                                            0.50
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                    19.00


  INDIANA, $17.

    Elkhart. First Cong. Ch.                                     6.00
    Madison. G. W. Southworth                                   10.00
    Newville. A. D.                                              1.00


  ILLINOIS, $2,277.53.

    Aurora. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                  25.00
    Chicago. New Eng. Ch., $16.39;
      New Eng. Ch. Sab. Sch., $65.16                            81.55
    Delavan. Mrs. R. Houghton                                    2.00
    Downer’s Grove. J. W. Bushnell                               5.00
    Elgin. Mrs. C. C. B.                                         1.00
    Galena. Mrs. Anne Bean                                       2.00
    Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ                              34.60
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch. (in part)                                15.00
    Glencoe. Cong. Ch.                                          54.42
    Greenview. H. W. W.                                          0.50
    Hutsonville. C. V. N.                                        0.50
    Kings. Cong. Ch.                                             3.00
    Lamoille. Cong. Ch.                                          3.95
    La Salle. W. E. T.                                           1.00
    Lewistown. ESTATE of Myron Phelps, by Mary P.
      Phelps, Henry Phelps, and Stephen Phelps, Ex’s.        1,000.00
    Lombard. First Cong. Ch.                                     7.75
    Macomb. G. H. S.                                             1.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. W. J.                                    0.50
    Owosso. Mrs. E. H. A.                                        1.50
    Payson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     20.00
    Polo. Robert Smith                                         500.00
    Port Byron. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., $4.25; —— Mrs.
      E. L. H., 55c. _for Tougaloo U._                           4.80
    Princeton. Benj. Ferris                                     10.00
    Rockford. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., $13; —— Mrs.
      Penfield, $10, _for Student Aid, Talladega, Ala._         23.00
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  22.74
    Tilden. Mrs. A. E. A.                                        1.00
    Waukegan. Miss E. D., _for Tougaloo U._                      0.33
    Wyoming. Cong. Ch.                                           4.39
    York Neck. A. R.                                             1.00
    —— “Friends”                                               450.00


  MICHIGAN, $139.38.

    Alpena. Julia F. Farwell, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                       10.00
    Armada. Miss Lydia A. Jackman                                5.00
    Birmingham. Mrs. A. D. S.                                    1.00
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                     10.00
    Clinton. Mrs. S. R.                                          0.50
    Detroit. “A Friend”                                          1.50
    Edwardsburg. U. E.                                           1.00
    Galesburg. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid.
      Fisk U._                                                  17.40
    Grand Rapids. E. M. B.                                       0.50
    Grass Lake. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $25 _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._; —— Cong. Ch. and Soc. $10.23       35.23
    Homer. Mrs. C. C. Evarts                                     1.25
    Jackson. Mrs. Eliza Page, $15; B. T. $1                     16.00
    Romeo. Mrs. A. B. Maynard, $10; Mrs. S. L. Andrews,
      $10; Miss T. S. Clark, $5, _for Lady Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._; —— M. A. J. $1; Miss T. S. C.
      50c.                                                      26.50
    Saint Johns. Mrs. D. B.                                      1.00
    Stanton. Mrs. J. M. W.                                       0.50
    Stockbridge. Mrs. B. and Mrs. C.                             1.00
    Traverse City. S. A.                                         1.00
    Union City. Andrew Lucas                                     4.00
    Warren. Rev. J. L. Beebe                                     5.00
    —— “Ex Teacher”                                              1.00


  WISCONSIN, $144.85.

    Appleton. “G. W. P.” $26; Cong. Ch. $11.90                  37.90
    Beloit. Prof. W. P.                                          0.50
    Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                          11.50
    Fort Atkinson. Mrs. Caroline Snell                           5.00
    Geneva. Presb. Ch.                                          22.04
    Green Bay. A. Kimball and Others, $5, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._; —— R. M. 20c.                            5.20
    La Crosse. Mrs. W. W.                                        0.50
    Mazomanie. R. L.                                             1.00
    Oshkosh. Col. C. R. H.                                       0.50
    Racine. Rev. C. N.                                           1.00
    Sheboygan. Mrs. L. H. Chase, $10.50; D. B. 50c.;
      A. D. 50c.                                                11.50
    Whitewater. First Cong. Ch.                                 48.21


  IOWA, $146.06.

    Algona. Cong. Ch.                                            9.00
    Anita. Cong. Ch.                                             1.00
    Burlington. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                38.90
    Clay. Cong. Ch.                                              5.00
    Davenport. Capt. E. A. Adams, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega, Ala._                                          50.00
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                            8.11
    Grinnell. A. A. Murch                                        2.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc., bal. to const.
      MRS. A. B. PEARSALL, L. M.                                16.80
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                    7.25
    Parkersburg. Rev. A. P.                                      1.00
    Tabor. Miss Julia E. Williams, $6, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._; —— J. E. W. $1                                   7.00


  MINNESOTA, $138.09.

    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch. $9; Sab. Sch. $5                        14.00
    Lake City. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                              25.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch., $24.24; —— Mrs. P.
      L. Van Vleck, $10 _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._;
      —— Pilgrim Ch. $2.75                                      36.99
    Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                                 37.10
    Spring Valley. Cong Ch. Quar. Coll.                          0.15


  KANSAS, $10.51.

    Meriden. J. Rutty                                           10.00
    Wellsville. E. F. S.                                         0.51


  NEBRASKA, $51.00.

    Camp Creek. G. F. L.                                         0.50
    Nebraska City. Mrs E. S.                                     0.50
    —— “A Friend”                                               50.00


  COLORADO, 50c.

    Canyon City. D. L.                                           0.50


  MONTANA, $1.50.

    Camp Baker. “A Friend”                                       1.50


  MISSOURI, $10.

    St. Louis. Miss Clara M. Janes, _for Student Aid,
      Hampton Inst._                                            10.00


  OREGON, 50c.

    Forest Grove. Mrs. M. R. W.                                  0.50


  CALIFORNIA, $27.50.

    Rohnerville. Mrs. Mary A. Brown, $2; Mrs. A. B., 50c.        2.50
    San Francisco. Mrs. N. Gray                                 25.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $10.40.

    Washington. Mrs. A. N. Bailey. $10; M. S. C., 40c.          10.40


  WEST VIRGINIA, $1.50.

    Elm Grove. H. M. Atkinson, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                        1.50


  TENNESSEE, $382.93.

    Chattanooga. Miss Blanche Curtis, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo_                                                 10.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                     261.28
    Nashville. Fisk University                                 111.65


  NORTH CAROLINA, $138.52.

    McLeansville. Rev. Alfred Connett, $3.20; Cong. Ch.
      $1.80                                                      5.00
    Raleigh. Washington Sch. $15; Miss E. P. Hayes, $10         25.00
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. $102.39; First Cong. Ch.
      $6.13                                                    108.52


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $278.00.

    Charleston. Avery Inst. $276; A. W. Farnham, $2            278.00


  GEORGIA, $297.70.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch.                                       207.85
    Atlanta. Rent                                               36.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch.                                      53.85


  ALABAMA, $429.28.

    Marion. Girl’s Sewing Class, _for Mendi M._                 21.00
    Maryville. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student
      Aid, Selma, Ala._                                         10.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                    350.00
    Talladega. Talladega C. $47.28; J. W. R. 50c.;
      G. N. E. 50c.                                             48.28


  FLORIDA, $5.00.

    Jacksonville. C. B. Wilder                                   5.00


  LOUISIANA, $80.00

    New Orleans. Straight University                            80.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $30.00.

    Natchez. Rev. C. A.                                          0.50
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., $19.50; Rev. G. S. Pope,
      $9.45; E. E. S., 55c.                                     29.50

  ————— $1.19.

    —— “Friends,” _for Tougaloo U._                              1.19


  PERSIA, $30.00.

    Oroomiah. Mr. and Mrs. B. Labaree, Jr.                      30.00


  INCOME FUND, $150.00.

    Graves Library Fund, Atlanta U.                            150.00

                                                            —————————
          Total                                             26,177.62
                                                            —————————

    Total from Oct. 1st to Jan. 31st
       $55,924.08

  H. W. HUBBARD,
  _Ass’t Treas._


  RECEIVED FOR DEBT.

    Wells, Maine. Rev. B. Southworth                             5.00
    Francestown, N. H. Cong. Ch.                                12.00
    Cambridge, Vt. Madison Safford                              10.00
    Hardwick, Vt. A. M. Amsden, $20; Mrs. Mary B.
      Amsden. $5                                                25.00
    Ludlow, Vt. Mrs L. Martin                                    5.00
    Abington, Mass. Mrs. H. P.                                   1.00
    Bridgewater, Mass. M. S. Dunham                              5.00
    Easthampton, Mass. Mrs. Emily G. Williston                  50.00
    Fall River, Mass. Rev. Wm. W. Adams                         25.00
    Florence, Mass. A. L. Williston                            500.00
    Georgetown, Mass. ——                                        10.00
    Monson, Mass. Cong. Ch. $9.73; Mrs. C. O. Chapin’s
      Class, $5.50                                              15.23
    Newtonville, Mass. Mrs. J. W. Hayes                         25.00
    North Brookfield, Mass. First Cong. Ch.                     50.00
    South Weymouth, Mass. “Friends,” by Rev. G. F.
      Stanton                                                   25.00
    Ware, Mass. First Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.                     8.31
    Winchendon, Mass. Rev. D. Foster and Wife                   25.00
    Worcester, Mass. “M. A. T.”                                  7.50
    Colchester, Conn. Collected by Mrs. S. E. Ransom            27.00
    Easton, Conn. Mrs. R. H. Wheeler                            25.00
    Cromwell, Conn. Cong. Ch.                                    2.50
    Hartford, Conn. Centre Ch., by Mrs. J. W. Cooke            100.00
    Middlefield, Conn. “Friends in Cong. Soc.” by Rev.
      A. C. Denison                                             16.00
    Middletown, Conn. A few ladies in First Cong. Ch.,
      by Mrs. E. Tesey                                          25.00
    Newtown, Conn. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Unionville, Conn. “Friends,” by Mrs. T. E. Daviess          25.00
    Waterbury, Conn. Young Ladies’ Mission Circle of
      First Cong. Ch, by Mrs. E. A. Morris                      25.00
    Binghamton, N. Y. “Friends,” by Mrs. Edward Taylor          57.00
    New York, N. Y. Chas. L. Mead                              100.00
    New York, N. Y. Mrs. L. Smith Hobart, to const.
      MRS. MARY B. COATESWORTH L. M.                            30.00
    Oneida County, N. Y. “A Friend”                            100.00
    Rochester, N. Y. A. Beebe                                    3.00
    Walton, N. Y. Collected by Mrs. Wm. A. White                25.00
    West Winfield, N. Y. Mrs. Luna Bucklen, $3;
      Rev. L. W. C., $1                                          4.00
    Irvington, N. J. Rev. A. Underwood                          25.00
    Morristown, N. J. E. A. Graves                             500.00
    Willoughby, O. ——                                           10.00
    Chicago, Ill. Mrs. L. A. Walker                              5.00
    Elgin, Ill. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Geneseo, Ill. Mrs. L. B. Perry                              10.00
    Millington, Ill. Mrs. D. W. J.                               0.50
    Winnebago, Ill. N. F. Parsons                               10.00
    York Neck, Ill. Anna Reynolds                               20.00
    ——, Ill. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Detroit, Mich. Rev. Frank T. Bayley                         15.00
    Jackson, Mich. Miss Eliza Page                              10.00
    College Springs, Iowa. J. G. Laughlin, $5;
      F. A. Noe, $5                                             10.00
    Osage, Iowa. Children’s Mission Circle, (“Cheerful
      Givers”)                                                   5.00
    Meriden, Kans. J. Rutty                                     10.00
    Wild Cat, Kans. S. D. Pierce                                10.00
    Palataka, Fla. Mrs. E. Baldwin                              25.00

                                                             ————————
        Total                                                2,054.04

        Previously acknowledged in December receipts         9,533.15

                                                            —————————
        Total                                              $11,587.19


  FOR TILLOTSON NORMAL AND COLLEGIATE
  INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Exeter, N. H. Mrs. Augusta F. Odlin                       $100.00
    Hanover, Conn. David A. Allen.                             250.00
    Oberlin, O. Mrs. Wheat                                       1.00

                                                               ——————
        Total                                                  351.00

        Previously acknowledged in December receipts           946.00

                                                             ————————
        Total                                               $1,297.00


       *       *       *       *       *




                             =73,620 MORE=

                 Singer Sewing Machines Sold in 1878

                      THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS YEAR.

             In =1870= we sold =127,833= Sewing Machines.
              “ =1878=  “   “  =356,432=   “       “

        Our sales have increased enormously every year through
        the whole period of “hard times.”

        WE NOW SELL THREE-QUARTERS OF ALL THE SEWING MACHINES
        SOLD IN THE WORLD.

        For the accommodation of the Public we have 1,500
        subordinate offices in the United States and Canada, and
        3,000 offices in the Old World and South America.

                       =PRICES GREATLY REDUCED.=

        Waste no money on “cheap” counterfeits. Send for our
        handsomely Illustrated Price List.

                   THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

             Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York


       *       *       *       *       *


                        =SABBATH READING.=

        SEEING that all Sunday magazines and most religious
        weeklies have much secular matter, especially
        advertisements, I have thought that there was an
        obvious want of a weekly paper composed of matter of
        a high order of excellence and interest, and wholly
        suitable for perusal on the Sabbath-day. Such a paper
        is SABBATH READING. Every number contains a first-class
        sermon, which may be read in meetings where there is no
        preaching, or at home by persons necessarily detained
        from church; also much excellent selected matter, some of
        which is specially adapted for children.

        SABBATH READING is a handsome small eight-page paper,
        suitable in appearance for the parlor table, and suitable
        for binding at the end of the year or half year. It is
        sent post-paid to any address for 50 cents a year, and
        stops when the subscription expires. A club of five will
        be supplied for a year for two dollars.

        This paper, which makes a most acceptable tractate for
        distribution in prisons, poor-houses, asylums, ships,
        etc., or in visitation from house to house, is sent
        post-paid to any part of the continent at the rate of a
        dollar per 100 copies.

                                            Address, JOHN DOUGALL,
                    WITNESS OFFICE, No. 7 Frankfort St., New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       =THE NICHOLS SERIES OF=
                       =STANDARD COMMENTARIES.=

             Nichol’s price, $3.75.    Our price, =$1.50.=

        These Commentaries are from the ablest Puritan Divines,
        who have devoted their whole lives to a single book or
        two, instead of the whole Bible.

        Rev. J. C. Ryle says Nichols is doing an immense service
        to the Church in publishing, at a singularly cheap price,
        the best Commentaries of the Puritans.

        Dr. Thomas, of _The Homilist_, says: “We most cordially
        advise our ministerial readers to enrich their libraries
        with this magnificent and wondrously cheap edition of the
        works of the Puritan Divines.”

        1st. Gouge on the Hebrews, in 3 vols. 2d. Airy on
        Philippians, and Cartwright on Colossians. 3d. King on
        Jonah, and Rainolds on Obadiah and Haggai. 4th. Stock
        and Torshel on Malachi, and Bernard and Fuller on Ruth.
        5th. Hardy on First John. 6th. Marbury on Habakkuk and
        Obadiah. 7th. Bayne on the Ephesians, 8th. George Newton
        on the 17th Chapter of John. 9th. Smith, Pierson and
        Gouge on the Psalms. 10th. Cotton on Ecclesiastes and
        Canticles, and Muffet on Proverbs.

                           =N. TIBBALS & SONS, 37 Park Row, N. Y.=


       *       *       *       *       *


                          A. S. BARNES & CO.
                           PUBLISH THE ONLY
                       SONGS FOR THE SANCTUARY.

        THE HYMN AND TUNE BOOK which stands the test. Revised
        and enlarged. Prices greatly reduced. Editions for every
        want. For Samples (loaned without charge) and Terms
        address the Publishers.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           =LYMAN ABBOTT’S=

                    Commentary on the New Testament

        Illustrated and Popular, giving the latest views of the
        best Biblical Scholars on all disputed points.

        A concise, strong and faithful Exposition in (8) =eight
        volumes= octavo.

                   AGENTS WANTED IN EVERY LOCALITY.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       Gospel Temperance Hymnal.
                               EDITED BY
            Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D. and Rev. E. S. LORENZ.

        Endorsed by =FRANCIS MURPHY=, and used exclusively in his
        meetings.

        This is the first practicable Collection of Hymns and
        Tunes abounding in vigorous Pieces adapted to the Gospel
        Temperance Movement. =It is also the best Book for Church
        Prayer Meetings.=


        =Price 35 cts. post-paid. Special Rates by the quantity.=
                     DON’T FAIL TO EXAMINE AT ONCE.


                    =A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,=
                         =New York and Chicago.=


       *       *       *       *       *


                        Established A. D. 1850.

                                 =THE=
                              =MANHATTAN=
                           Life Insurance Co.,
                         156 Broadway, New York,

                                HAS PAID
                         $7,400,000 DEATH CLAIMS.

                                HAS PAID
              =$4,900,000 Return Premiums to Policy-Holders.=

                             HAS A SURPLUS OF
                       $1,700,000 OVER LIABILITIES

                   _By New York Standard of Valuation._

                   _It gives the Best Insurance on the
                            Best Lives at the most
                               Favorable Rates._

                 EXAMINE THE PLANS AND RATES OF THIS COMPANY
                            HENRY STOKES, PRESIDENT.

                           C. Y. WEMPLE,
                                  Vice-President.

                           J. L. HALSEY,
                                       Secretary.

                           S. N. STEBBINS,
                                         Actuary.

                           H. Y. WEMPLE,
                           H. B. STOKES,
                           Assistant Secretaries.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         =The Book of Psalms.=

                   ARRANGED FOR RESPONSIVE READING IN
               SABBATH SCHOOLS, CHURCHES OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

        The current version is strictly followed, the only
        peculiarity being the arrangement according to the
        _Original Parallelisms_, for convenience in responsive
        reading. Two sizes. _Prices_: 32mo, Limp Cloth, 30 cts.
        per copy, $25 per 100; 16mo, Cloth. 70 cts. per copy, $56
        per 100. Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

        TAINTOR BROTHERS, MERRILL & CO., Publishers, 758
                                               Broadway, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           =UNFERMENTED WINE.=

            =Pure Juice of the Grape; no Alcohol=;
            tested for years; received =International Medal.=
            =T. H. JOHNSON, New Brunswick, N.J.=
            National Temperance Society, 58 Reade St., N.Y.;
            Congregational and Baptist Publication Societies,
            Boston and Philadelphia.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         =Meneely & Kimberly=,

                       BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N.Y.

                Manufacture a superior quality of Bells.
                Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=
                ☛ Illustrated Catalogues sent free.


       *       *       *       *       *


          ORGANS  Splendid =$340= ORGANS for
                  $100. $300 for $90. $275
          for =$80=. =$200= for =$70=. =$190= for =$65=. and
          =$160= for =$55=. PIANOS—=$900= Piano Forte for
          =$225=. =$800= for =$200=. =$750= for =$185=.
          =$700= for =$165=. =$600= for =$135=, cash, not
          used a year, in perfect order. Great Bargains.
          Unrivaled Instruments. Unequaled Prices. Send for
          Catalogue.                      HORACE WATERS & SONS,
                                      40 East 14th Street, N.Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           Brown Bros. & Co.

                              =BANKERS=,

                   59 & 61 Wall Street, New York,
                        211 Chestnut St., Philadelphia,
                                  66 State Street, Boston.

        =Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money
        between this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills
        of Exchange on Great Britain and Ireland.=

        They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory
        guarantee of repayment,

        Circular Credits for Travellers,

        In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent
        countries, and in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of
        the world.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          =W. & B. DOUGLAS=,
                          Middletown, Conn.,
                       =MANUFACTURERS OF PUMPS=,
                 HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP
                 CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS, YARD
                                     HYDRANTS, STREET
                                       WASHERS, ETC.,

                            [Illustration]

                         Highest Medal awarded
                         them by the Universal
                         Exposition at Paris,
                         France, in 1867; Vienna,
                         Austria, in 1873; and
                         Philadelphia, 1876.

                           Founded in 1832.
                          Branch Warehouses:
                           85 & 87 John St.
                              NEW YORK,
                                 AND
                           197 Lake Street,
                               CHICAGO.
                 _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


       *       *       *       *       *


                            [Illustration]

                            MASON & HAMLIN
                            CABINET ORGANS,
                            WINNERS OF THE
                            ONLY GOLD MEDAL
              AWARDED TO AMERICAN MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AT
                        PARIS EXPOSITION, 1878;
   _the highest distinction in the power of the Judges to confer._

                            =PARIS,= 1878
                          Two Highest Medals.
                            =SWEDEN,= 1878
                            =PHILADA,= 1876
                            =SANTIAGO,= ’75
                            =VIENNA,= 1873
                            =PARIS,= 1867.

                            =AT EVERY=
                            =WORLD’S=
                            =EXPOSITION=
                            =FOR 12 YEARS=
                            =They have been awarded=
                            =HIGHEST HONORS=

        At the =Paris Exposition, 1878=, they are awarded the
        GOLD MEDAL, the highest recompense at the disposal of the
        Jury; also the BRONZE MEDAL, the highest distinction for
        excellent workmanship. They have also received the GRAND
        GOLD MEDAL OF SWEDEN AND NORWAY, 1878. =No other American
        Organs ever attained highest award at ANY World’s
        Exposition.= Sold for cash, or payments by installments.
        _Latest_ CATALOGUES, with newest styles, prices, etc.,
        free.

                      =MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN Co.,=
                      BOSTON, NEW YORK or CHICAGO.


       *       *       *       *       *


                 1832.    MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.    1878

                           MANUFACTURERS OF
                           =Table Cutlery=
                     _of every description, with_
           Rosewood, Ebony, Bone, Rubber, Ivory, Celluloid,
                   Pearl and Silver-Plated Handles.

                         The Celluloid Handle
        (of which we are the exclusive makers) is the equal of
        ivory in beauty, when new, and surpasses it in durability
        and appearance in use.

               POCKET CUTLERY & PLATED FORKS & SPOONS.
           All goods bearing our NAME are fully guaranteed.

                         MERIDEN CUTLERY CO.,
                      49 Chamber’s St., New York


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  =MARVIN’S=
  =FIRE & BURGLAR=
  =SAFES=
  =COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK=
  =SCALES=
  _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.,_
  _265 BROADWAY. N.Y._
  7 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._]


      *       *       *       *       *


                              CRAMPTON’S
                              =PURE OLD=
                             =PALM SOAP.=

                            [Illustration]

                          =FOR THE LAUNDRY,=
                             =THE KITCHEN=
                                AND FOR
                     General Household Purposes.
                            MANUFACTURED BY
                         =CRAMPTON BROTHERS,=
                _=Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N.Y.=_
                   Send for Circular and Price List.


       *       *       *       *       *


                              THE FAMOUS
                        _=VIENNA COFFEE POT.=_

                            [Illustration]

             From the Vienna and Philadelphia Exhibitions.
                           Imported only by
                           =E. D. BASSFORD,=
           Home Furnishing, Hardware, China, Glass, Cutlery
                        AND SILVERWARE STORES.
               =NOS. 1 to 17 COOPER INSTITUTE, New York.=
          ☛ To meet the popular demand, prices have been
                     reduced 50%. PRICE LIST FREE.


       *       *       *       *       *


                    =HOW TO OBTAIN THE MISSIONARY.=

        Enclose Fifty Cents for your subscription (or One Dollar
        for two years, or for yourself and some friend), to H. W.
        Hubbard, Esq., Assistant Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
        York.

        If a Life Member or Pastor or S. S. Superintendent of a
        contributing church, or an annual contributor of $5 or
        more to the A. M. A., order it sent to you on that ground.

        Keep us informed of your changes of address, etc.


                     =HOW TO READ THE MISSIONARY.=

        In these busy days few people read anything all through;
        but you can do better than to open at random, read a page
        and lay aside. 1. Read the Editorial paragraphs for the
        latest aspects of our work. 2. Read the titles of longer
        Editorials and Contributions to see if they contain
        anything you want. 3. Read through at least the one which
        attracts you most. 4. The General Notes furnish a summary
        of facts, opinions, legislation, discussion, and progress
        concerning the three races of our cares, such as you will
        not find elsewhere. 5. Glance over headings of Letters
        from the Field, and you will be sure to find something
        you will want to know more about.


                  =HOW TO CIRCULATE THE MISSIONARY.=

        Mark something which interests you in it, and lend it to
        your neighbor.

        Read or refer to a fact gleaned from it in your Prayer
        Meeting or Monthly Concert.

        Secure subscriptions for it in your church or community.
        We will send you a list of present subscribers in your
        town to work from, if you request it.


                    =HOW TO PRESERVE THE MISSIONARY.=

        It is often useful for reference. The December Number
        contains minutes of the Annual Meeting. The February
        Number has our list of workers. Friends from contributing
        Churches come to the office for information, which, nine
        times out of ten, is pointed out to them in a recent
        MISSIONARY.

        To preserve and bind them, punch two holes near the back
        and three inches from top and bottom, through which put
        a string and tie behind; open and add as the monthly
        numbers come to you. This makes a simple, cheap, flexible
        and effective binding, and is not patented.


                       ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

        We invite special attention to this department, of which
        our low rates and large circulation make its pages
        specially valuable. Our readers are among the best in the
        country, having an established character for integrity
        and thrift that constitutes them valued customers in all
        departments of business.

        To Advertisers using display type and cuts, who are
        accustomed to the “RULES” of the best Newspapers,
        requiring “DOUBLE RATES” for these “LUXURIES,” our wide
        pages, fine paper, and superior printing, with =no extra
        charge for cuts=, are advantages readily appreciated,
        and which add greatly to the appearance and effect of
        business announcements.

        Gratified with the substantial success of this
        department, we solicit orders from all who have
        unexceptionable wares to advertise.

        Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the
        month, in order to secure insertion in the following
        number. All communications in relation to advertising
        should be addressed to

                             J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

          ☛ =Our friends who are interested in the Advertising
        Department of the “American Missionary” can aid us in
        this respect by mentioning, when ordering goods, that
        they saw them advertised in our Magazine.=

       *       *       *       *       *

DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.

1. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by
     =equal signs=.

2. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors have been
     silently corrected.

3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOL. 33, NO. 3, MARCH, 1879 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.