VOL. XXXIV.                                                     No. 1.

                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                             JANUARY, 1880.




                              _CONTENTS:_

  EDITORIAL.

    SALUTATIONS                                                        1
    OUR ENLARGED WORK                                                  2
    PROF. CHASE IN AFRICA                                              3
    INDIAN BOYS AT HAMPTON                                             4
    PARAGRAPHS—SATISFIED                                               5
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                               6
    GENERAL NOTES                                                      8


  THE FREEDMEN.

    VACATION REPORTS: Prof. T. N. Chase                                9
    WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN: Miss L. A. Parmelee                       12
    THE GEORGIA CONFERENCE                                            14
    THE CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE                                      15
    GEORGIA—Thanksgiving Services and First Impressions:
      Rev. C. W. Hawley                                               16
    ALABAMA—Emerson Institute, 1865 to 1879: Rev. O. D. Crawford      17
    ALABAMA—Shelby Iron Works—A Revival                               19
    TENNESSEE—A Student Aided: Rev. E. M. Cravath                     19
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS—Health, Business, &c.: Prof. A. J. Steele      20


  THE INDIANS.

    S’KOKOMISH AGENCY—Homes and Schools, Lands and Titles:
      Edwin Eells, Agent                                              22


  THE CHINESE.

    SANTA BARBARA MISSION—Chin Fung: Rev. W. C. Pond                  23


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    AMATEUR HEATHEN                                                   25


  RECEIPTS.                                                           27

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK:

  Published by the American Missionary Association,

  ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




  American Missionary Association,

  56 READE STREET, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    ANDREW LESTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                    *       *       *       *       *

     VOL. XXXIV.               JANUARY, 1880.               No. 1.

                    *       *       *       *       *

                    American Missionary Association.

                    *       *       *       *       *


SALUTATIONS.

We extend to our friends the salutations of the season, and rejoice
that we can do it with more of gratitude and hopefulness than we have
been privileged to do for many years. Like Bunyan’s Pilgrim, we have
passed through the Slough of Despond, and the heavy load of Debt has
fallen from our shoulders; but, as in the case of the Pilgrim, this
is no signal to us, or our friends, for rest in the Arbor, but for
addressing ourselves to the real Christian life-work before us.

1. In this we have many things to encourage us:

(1.) The renewed prosperity of the country puts it into the hands of
our friends to aid us in the needed enlargement of the work before
us. We are grateful for the help given in the dark days of business
stagnation, and we hope that with the reviving industry and commercial
activity, gratitude to God and love for His cause will stimulate the
friends of the poor to increased liberality.

(2.) There is a more full realization of the importance of our work.
Never before since the war has the North so well understood that the
only real solution of the Southern problem is in the intelligence and
real piety of the FREEDMEN. Every day’s developments make this the more
plain. In like manner the rights and wrongs of the INDIAN never forced
him upon public attention with a more imperative demand for answer.
So, too, the right of the CHINAMAN to a home and legal protection
on the Pacific coast, has never become more clearly defined or more
intelligently recognized. Constitutional enactments and hoodlum mobs
have only set forth his wrongs more sharply and made our duty more
plain. Africa looms up with more distinctness as a field of Christian
labor. Not only triumphant exploration and crowding missionary
enterprises stir the Christian heart, but the very difficulties and
disasters arouse new zeal. Our hopeful endeavors to introduce the
colored man of America as a missionary to the land of his fathers adds
a new element of hope and activity.

(3.) The most encouraging outlook before us, however, is in the deeper
spiritual and prayerful interest which our work awakens. Among other
signs of this fact are the aroused attention of the praying women of
the North to the woes and wants of the colored women and girls in the
South, the increasing volume of prayer going up from the churches of
the North for Africa, and the prayer and consecration awakened in its
behalf among the colored people of the South. But above all, we believe
that the followers of Christ are coming to realize that in this whole
range of work it is only in the Divine arm that effectual help can be
found.

2. We have a great work before us.

(1.) In our own special field we have the urgent call to make the
repairs and improvements which we were compelled to refuse when in
our great struggle for the payment of the debt. These can no longer
be denied, in some cases, without sacrificing the health of the
missionaries and teachers, as well as the progress of the work.

(2.) The call for _enlargement_ confronts us on all sides. We cannot
meet the demand in the public mind at the North if we stand still, and
still less can we meet that of overcrowded schools and for new churches
in the South. We refer our readers to the following article for some
stirring details on this subject.

(3.) Our friends need to be on their guard against one incidental
drawback. The Presidential election occurs this year, and the
experience of this, and all other missionary societies, shows that such
years mark diminished receipts. We can only say to our friends: Do your
duty at the ballot-box, but do not forget the contribution-box and the
prayer for missions!

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR ENLARGED WORK.

We have been saying for a long time, when we are free from debt we will
do more work, and now that we are free, we have felt constrained at
once to begin the fulfillment of that promise. The great question is
to find the just mean between cowardice and rashness. No organization
like ours can say, we will never spend a cent that we have not in our
treasury, for we have to make engagements amounting to many times the
sum at our present command. We must follow the leadings of Providence
not only, but its indications, and rely on God’s people to sustain us
in our anticipations of what they will do.

In our Salutation to our friends, we spoke of the call for the
enlargement of our work that confronts us on all sides. During the
struggle of the past few years for the payment of our debt, we could
have but one answer for the pressing appeals that came to us for more
room and better accommodations—an answer which was hard to give and
hard to receive, for those who saw so clearly the great good that would
result from a comparatively slight expenditure of money.

But now that the debt is paid, our friends must tell us whether we can
venture to make a different and more cheering answer to our appeals.
These appeals are coming to us from Mississippi, Louisiana, Alabama,
Georgia, North Carolina, &c., as may be seen by noticing the “Items
from the Field,” in this number of the MISSIONARY. These items were
taken without any special reference to this article, and surprise us,
as we glance over them, by the needs which they disclose.

In addition to these, we give just here a few extracts from letters not
quoted in our “Items.”

One teacher writes:

  “Our school opened with a _rush_. It reminded me of the time
  when I used to attend lectures at L—. A crowd would assemble,
  and as soon as the doors were opened they would press in, each
  intent on the best seat. So it was in my schoolroom, each
  parent striving to get the first chance to enter his child or
  children; and ever since the opening, I have had to turn away
  applicants, though they begged with tears to be admitted.”

Another:

  “If our number increases this year in the same proportion as
  two years ago, in February we shall have 121 boarders; if the
  same proportion as last year, we shall have 134. We can not
  find room for any such number. From present prospects we shall
  reach that number. If anything is going to be done by way of
  enlarging this year, we ought to order lumber immediately.”

And in a subsequent letter:

  “We have more young women boarding than we have had at any
  time before since I have been here, and several others have
  engaged rooms. Every room in the Ladies’ Hall is _filled_. Two
  rooms have four in them. Miss E. expects to arrange beds in the
  sitting-room. We cannot put four into our 10 x 14 rooms. The
  new scholars this fall have mostly come from schools that have
  been taught by our pupils, and have been able to go into the
  Preparatory Department.”

Still another:

  “Something must be done for our relief at once. We are
  overrunning full.”

From another the story is:

  “I wonder if all your stations have such increasing wants as
  this one has! We trust that our request for another teacher is
  honored by an appointment. We intimated that our wants would
  still increase. This is verified. The question now before us is
  this: How much enlargement of this work can you make? Are your
  means equal to the demand? Now, we wish that our building were
  larger by two rooms; especially so, since many tell us that a
  large number are planning to begin school after Christmas. We
  submit very earnestly the proposal that we be authorized to
  rent a building that is contiguous to our grounds, and that
  you send a sixth teacher to occupy it. If we do thorough work
  this year, the demand another year will require a permanent
  enlargement of room. We unite in the most earnest wish that you
  not only send us the fifth teacher, but also the sixth.”

We have already appropriated several thousand dollars more than in
previous years upon the Southern field, and that mainly in the work of
Christian education. If our readers only knew the many things we have
not done, they would count the expansion to be very little. Among other
things, as was indicated in the Annual Report, and as is set forth more
explicitly elsewhere, we have enlarged our Indian work, not in the far
West, but in Virginia. We have allowed something more for the foreign
field, and added a few hundred dollars for the Chinese Mission in
California.

Our friends will have the satisfaction this year of knowing that their
gifts all go to do the work which presses now; no more is needed to
fill up the hollows of the land through which we travelled long ago.
They must not fail us, then, who have helped us in our distress; but
much more, stand by us, now that they have enabled us to give ourselves
wholly to the wants to be met and to the work in hand.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROFESSOR CHASE IN AFRICA.

It has for some months seemed desirable to the Executive Committee that
an experienced man, in the carefulness of whose inspection and the
calmness of whose judgment they might fully rely, should go to see for
them, with his own eyes, the field on the West Coast of Africa, the
missionary band, and the work it is doing. The great difficulty has
been to lay hands upon a man who should unite with the qualifications
required the willingness and the ability to go. That obstacle has given
way at last, and an embassy is on the way.

Prof. Thomas N. Chase had been detailed from his duties as an
instructor in Greek at Atlanta, where his eminent abilities have
been most fully proved by the annual examinations of his classes,
and where his presence has been valued for his manifold service, for
special duties in superintending the plans and erection of buildings
in the Southern field. Some important preliminary work had been
accomplished in that direction, when it was found that the money which
was anticipated for this purpose would not be at the disposal of the
Association for some months. Prof. Chase being thus open to our call,
and being the man of all men we should have chosen for this post, the
proposal was made to him that he should take this trip to the Mendi
Mission, and inspect the work. After some hesitation, but with much
less than was anticipated, and regarding the circumstances and the call
as of the Lord, he consented, with the full agreement in his decision
of his excellent and devoted wife.

On the sixth of December he sailed from New York for Liverpool,
expecting to take the steamer thence to Freetown on the twentieth
of December, and to be in the field at Good Hope by the middle of
January. He is accompanied by the Rev. Joseph E. Smith, a graduate of
Atlanta, who has been for three years in charge of important churches
in the South, and in whom we have every reason to place the highest
confidence. Mr. Smith will, we hope, conclude to remain with the
mission, although that matter is left to his decision. We believe that
he will do what he thinks the Master wishes. Meanwhile he will do good
service as a companion of Prof. Chase, to care for him and aid him in
the accomplishment of his work.

Important questions as to the permanent location of the stations,
the distribution of the work among the missionaries, and their more
complete equipment will be decided, and with the Lord’s blessing on
them we hope for results of lasting value from this embassy.

It is just the time of the year when such a mission can most safely and
effectively be prosecuted. They will reach the country and have three
mouths of the dry season, if so long a time shall be needed, before it
will be necessary that they should come away. They realize, as we do,
that there is always some peril in going to the West Coast, especially
for a white man; but the professor is in his prime, of sound health,
and we believe will be so prudent in all matters of exposure and of
living that we have no great fears for him. And yet, when we remember
those who have fallen, we pray the Lord, and beg all the friends of
Africa to join with us in the prayer, that He will keep these His
servants from harm, will prosper them in their mission and bring them
back in health.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR INDIAN BOYS AT HAMPTON.

The Association has, after conference with General Armstrong, decided
to make appropriations to aid the Indian work at Hampton as follows:
(1.) It agrees to pay the salary of a teacher, whose time is wholly
devoted to this work, and whose enthusiasm and success in it no one
who attended the last commencement can have failed to remember.
(2.) It will support these three boys: James Murie, a Pawnee from
the Indian Territory, a bright boy, who is now in the Preparatory
Department, and will be able to enter the Junior Class next year;
Jonathan Heustice, a Pawnee with some colored blood, apparently a
very good boy; and Alexander Peters, a Menomonee from Wisconsin, who
comes well recommended by his teachers, and is proving an interesting
scholar. (3.) It will clothe the eight boys from Fort Berthold Agency,
sent by the Government last year, and for whose support it is mainly
responsible. The total expense will be $1,450. We shall be very glad
to receive contributions to this work, or for any of these boys in
particular, from those who are specially interested in this new work of
educating Indian boys in our colored schools. The success of the effort
has been so marked, that we no longer look on it as an experiment. It
is the application to this class of the same principle on which we
believe the solution of the great problem of negro citizenship depends.
Let us educate the teachers and the leaders for these races, keeping
them constantly surrounded by the most elevating Christian influences,
and they will have great power in lifting up the masses, who must be
taught and Christianized at home.

       *       *       *       *       *

The news of the destruction of Academic Hall at Hampton, has reached
the friends of that Institution long ere this. The origin of the fire
is unknown; it was discovered in the attic, and was already beyond
control. In a couple of hours all was over. An insurance amounting to
about three-quarters of the expense incurred in building will, in the
lower prices now prevailing, replace it to a great extent. Still it is
a severe loss.

The value of the excellent organization of the school was made apparent
in the perfect order which prevailed. The honesty and loyalty of the
students were thoroughly tested and triumphantly proved. Only a single
day of school work was lost. About $3,000 will replace the loss on
apparatus, furniture, library, &c. The students lost about $1,200 of
personal property. We trust that the friends of Hampton—and they are
many—will come generously and promptly to its relief.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Sunday-schools are in great need of special helps for their work,
and that of all sorts: books for the library and for the service of
song; Sunday-school banners, maps and every thing of the kind. Are
there not Sunday-schools who have such material they have outgrown or
laid aside, and which they can send to us for the dark-skinned children
of the South?

       *       *       *       *       *


SATISFIED.

_He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be
satisfied._—There are many motives which combine to urge the
disciples of Christ to energy and fidelity in the missionary work:
the wretchedness of those who lie in the darkness of heathendom, and
especially in the black night of savage superstition; the wrongs and
crimes which the introduction of a Christian civilization would in
time efface; our sad anticipations for those on whom we must believe
the Lord will look with merciful and just consideration, and yet who
are surely not fit for the kingdom of God. The fact of the command
of Christ were enough, and especially that this was His last and
parting charge. But, amid all these, is there a motive so sweet and
still so energizing as that which we have written above—that in the
contemplation of His salvation accomplished among men, the joy of our
Lord shall be full, the purpose of His love attained, and He content
to have endured the flesh and the cross? If we love Him because He
first loved us, let us remember that His love was not a sentiment, but
a sacrifice; that it was measured by what He did for us, and for our
salvation; and that it is the sacred claim of His love upon ours, that
what sacrifice by us of time, or strength, or means, or life itself,
may contribute to the fullness of His joy, to the completeness of His
satisfaction, we should give with cheerful and continuous readiness.

Other motives may bear upon us with now greater and now less force;
special calls may be heard with more or less distinctness; unusual
disclosures of need may make us eager to relieve; but through all, and
under all, and greater than all, is this, that we may please our Lord,
and contribute somewhat to the completeness of His redemption, and to
His satisfaction in the result of all that He has borne and done for
sinful men.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

TALLADEGA, ALA.—The Southern Industrial Association held its second
annual fair at Talladega, Ala., November 11-14. This Association is
officered in part and largely helped by Talladega College, and its
object is to promote the industry and physical good of the Freedmen.
The weather was favorable, the attendance was large, many coming
quite a distance, and the display of articles was unusually good. In
agricultural and garden products, in fancy articles, in needlework,
both plain and ornamental, and in the culinary department, especial
excellence was shown. The exhibition of stock was meagre, with the
exception of fowls, which were numerous and remarkably fine. Some
blacksmith’s hammers, tables, and an upholstered chair, would compare
well with similar productions from the best Northern workmen. More than
seven hundred entries were made, and the premiums awarded were worth
about three hundred dollars. The fair stimulates industry, and marks a
real advance in the condition of the people. Many of our white friends
paid well-deserved praise, and one late slaveholder, said to have owned
nearly a hundred negroes, was so pleased as to make a cash contribution
to the treasury, and offered to double it should there be a deficit.
On the last evening, the College chapel was full to overflowing, while
Rev. C. L. Harris, of Selma, gave a very bold and moving and powerful
address of more than an hour in length, on the African in America.
The address showed what an African can do, and it pointed out what an
African should become. Take it all in all, the Fair marks a good step
upward and gives fresh hope for the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

MCLEANSVILLE, N. C.—Our school is growing larger—double what it
was at the corresponding time last year. Many expect to come after
Christmas from abroad. Must enlarge our accommodations.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOUGALOO, MISS.—We now have seventy-nine boarders, and have had to go
into the barracks again. A prospect of increased attendance, and what
to do with the students we can none of us imagine. We ought to enlarge
our accommodations immediately.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOBILE, ALA.—School overflowing. If we have room and teaching force
enough, we shall have three hundred in attendance by February 1st.
Without increased room and help we shall be obliged to turn away many
that would enter the intermediate and normal departments. We have
already begun this at the primary door.

       *       *       *       *       *

ATLANTA, GA.—Mr. A. W. Farnham, late principal of Avery Institute, has
become principal of the Normal department of the University, to assist
in making the best teachers possible for that region.

       *       *       *       *       *

FISK UNIVERSITY.—The number of pupils is rapidly increasing, and there
is a prospect that the students will be too many or the accommodations
too few.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOODVILLE, GA.—Our school is crowded. If you had not built the
parsonage, the pupils could not have been accommodated. You have done
a great deal of good for the people at this place. Almost every day,
children are refused admittance, because we are so full. The only hope
of our church, so far as I can see, is in the children educated in our
schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW ORLEANS, LA.—“I wish you could have heard some of the expressions
of gratitude to the A. M. A. in our services during your Annual Meeting
in Chicago. The church observed the day by remembering the Association
in their Tuesday evening prayer meeting.”

       *       *       *       *       *

MARION, ALA.—In one envelope yesterday, the collection being for the
A. M. A., was $5 from a hard-working man, this being one-tenth of
the man’s crop—one bale of cotton, which brought $30—showing that
your work for this people is not wholly unappreciated. We made the
A. M. A. a special subject of prayer at our church meeting last week.
Sixty-three at Sunday-school yesterday. Boys’ meeting at the Home
fully attended. We have had a “reception” at the Home—all our people,
men, women and children, including babies. We only want the special
influences of the Holy Spirit.

       *       *       *       *       *

FLORENCE, ALA.—On the Sabbath, November 23d, a new church edifice
was dedicated at this place. Pastor Wm. H. Ash was assisted by Field
Superintendent Roy; by student Anderson, from Fisk University, who
had preached for the church the year before Mr. Ash came; by the
Presbyterian pastor, who offered the prayer of dedication; and by the
M. E. South Presiding Elder. Fifty of the best white citizens of the
place were present; among them, besides the ministers named, two other
Methodist preachers, ex-Governor Patton and four lawyers. These friends
contributed freely to the balance needed ($70) to put in the pulpit
and pews, which had not yet been secured. It was all raised in a few
minutes after the sermon. The house is spoken of by the citizens as the
only modern church in the place. It is indeed a gem. It is twenty-five
by forty feet, with a brick foundation, a steep roof and a little
belfry. It is well painted on the outside, and on the inside ceiled
in varnished yellow pine. The total cost was $950. It was built with
great economy under the supervision of Mr. Ash. “Howard,” of Boston, is
a man who knows how to make fine investments in this line, as several
of his ventures of this kind have proved. To his $300, the Central
Congregational Church, of Providence, R. I., to which Mr. Ash belongs,
added $100. One year ago, more than twenty of the influential and
well-to-do members of this church removed to Kansas, else so much of
aid would not have been needed. We learn that those people are highly
respected in the communities where they have settled. Pastor Ash and
his educated wife are greatly devoted to their people. They are also
teaching a parish school, which is much approved.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.

Africa.

—Quite full accounts of the Nyanza Mission are given in the last two
numbers of the _Church Missionary Intelligencer_. Mr. Wilson set out
August 23, 1878, from Kagei, at the south end of the lake, for Mtesa’a
capital, at its northern extremity, in the Daisy, but was wrecked on
the way, and compelled to take out a section of the boat with which to
repair the rest of it. Eight weeks were thus occupied, during which
they received great kindness from the chief and people of Uzongora,
a tribe which met Stanley with great violence. They arrived November
sixth at Uganda. Mtesa continued to treat them well, despite the
efforts of the Arabs to prejudice him against them. Mr. Wilson had gone
to meet the three missionaries who were coming to reinforce them by
way of the Nile. Mr. Mackay was teaching reading by charts to a large
number of old and young. Some valuable conclusions have been reached
by their experience—that they do not need ordained men yet so much as
those experienced in practical work. “Unless we succeed in elevating
labor, we shall get hearers, but no doers. Hence slavery—domestic,
at least—cannot cease; and if slavery does not cease, polygamy
will remain.” The need of English traders to take the place of the
Arabs, who want slaves, is emphasized. The cost of maintenance is
very trifling: small presents secure an abundance of goats, coffee,
plantains, sugar-cane, etc. It is hoped that long ere this, seven
missionaries are together in Uganda, viz.: the Revs. O. T. Wilson and
G. Litchfield; Messrs. Mackay, Pearson, Felkin, Stokes and Copplestone.
Sixteen in all have been sent, of whom six have died and three have
returned sick.

—The _English Independent_ of October 30 says: “It would seem, from
communications which have just been received, that the wiles of French
Jesuits have already brought trouble to these missionaries. A letter
of introduction, written by Lord Salisbury to King Mtesa, was read,
and gave great satisfaction. Soon after the arrival of the Jesuits
the aspect of affairs was changed. The king accused the missionaries
of playing him false, an untruthful report having reached him that
the Egyptians were advancing their posts more to the south. Some
months passed in a very unsatisfactory manner, and at length one of
the missionaries was allowed to go to Egypt to prepare the way for
the king’s messengers, who were to be accompanied by Mr. Wilson; two
more were permitted to return to the south side of the lake, ‘on
condition that they would thence send on to Mtesa some mission stores
left there.’ At the end of June, three remained at Uganda, without
the necessary facilities either to carry on their mission work or to
withdraw. With such troubles they are beset, through the combined
intrigues of the enemies of corporeal and spiritual freedom.”

—The same paper says that no direct tidings have been received from
the London Missionary Society’s agents at Ujiji on the Tanganika,
and ascribes this break in communication to the Arab slave traders,
and only hopes that their hostility has been limited to intercepting
letters. Dr. Kirk, the consul at Zanzibar, has been instructed
to institute inquiries. Dr. Laws, of the mission at Livingstonia
(Scotch), has been requested to send messengers to Ujiji to learn the
condition. Great solicitude is felt, and a day of special prayer for
Divine guidance and help has been appointed. The last accounts in the
_Chronicle_ of the London Missionary Society report the death of Rev.
A. W. Dodgshun seven days after his arrival at Ujiji, on the way to
which place he lost nearly all the goods belonging to that part of
the expedition, and the successful progress through Ugogo of Messrs.
Southon and Griffith: they were in good health, and confident of
reaching their destination shortly.

—The _London Telegraph_, of Oct. 22, says: “All alike will be
interested in the following extract from a letter which has just
been received from Mr. Stanley, the famous African explorer, by an
intimate friend. The letter is dated from Banana Point, at the mouth
of the Congo River, Sept. 13, and says: ‘All this year I have been
very busy, and have worked hard. I have equipped one expedition on the
East Coast; have reconstructed another—namely, the International—of
whose misfortune we have heard so often, and have explored personally
several new districts on the East Coast. Having finished my work
satisfactorily to myself, my friends and those who sent me, I came
through the Mediterranean and round to this spot, where I arrived two
years and four months ago, on that glorious day on which we sighted
old ocean after our rash descent of the Livingstone. * * * And now I
begin another mission seriously and deliberately, with a grand object
in view. I am charged to open—and keep open, if possible—all such
districts and countries as I may explore for the commercial world.
The mission is supported by a philanthropic society which numbers
noble-minded men of several nations. It is not a religious society,
but my instructions are entirely of that spirit. No violence must be
used, and wherever rejected, the mission must withdraw to seek another
field. We have abundant means, and, therefore, we are to purchase the
very atmosphere, if any demands be made upon us, rather than violently
oppose them. In fact, we must freely buy of all and every, rather than
resent, and you know the sailor’s commandment—‘Obey orders if it
breaks owners’—is easier to keep than to stand upon one’s rights.’”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


VACATION REPORTS.

PROF. T.N. CHASE, ATLANTA.

A stranger could hardly obtain a more vivid and correct idea of the
far-reaching influence for good that one of the higher institutions of
the American Missionary Association is exerting, than by listening to
the reports of the students as they return from their summer’s work of
teaching. At Atlanta University the first Sunday afternoon of the fall
term is devoted to these reports, and to the teachers it is one of the
happiest and most inspiring occasions of the whole year. We wish that
many of the readers of the MISSIONARY could have been with us on last
Sunday, and seen with their own eyes and heard with their own ears,
since the full rich tones of voice, dignified composure and simple
earnestness of these student-teachers cannot be transferred to paper.
But I did not see you present, and so will give you the benefit of some
notes I took down, departing from my original plan of arranging and
classifying the “testimony,” omitting quotation marks, and introducing
the successive speakers simply by beginning on a new line.

I taught in Tatnal. Other pupils were afraid to go there because it was
a democratic county. People did not want a teacher from outside of the
county, because they did not want the money to go out of the county.
They liked me very much. Colored people have from one acre to 2500
acres of land, and are about as well educated as the whites. Children
are compelled by their parents to come to Sunday-school. I kept up a
Sunday evening prayer-meeting. Several of the children acknowledged
Jesus and _turned over_ to the church. I made two or three speeches on
temperance.

My Commissioner is well disposed toward this Institution. I made two
or three lectures against intemperance, and encouraged the people to
educate themselves and accumulate property. At my exhibition three
lawyers were present and forty or fifty other whites.

The Commissioner did not examine me, saying that this school was the
best in the world and he never intended to examine a pupil from it.
He was a Saturday-Sunday man and did not do any business on Saturday.
I tramped a week and a half for a school and found one on Col. ——’s
place. Parents want their children whipped, and do not think they are
taught any thing unless they are whipped.

Some of us had a convention on temperance, tobacco and morals. The
colored people own a good deal of land and make lots of cotton. One man
made twenty-one bales, but saved only eighty dollars.

Col. —— said Atlanta University must be the best disciplined school
in the State. The poor whites do not want to go to school, and are more
intemperate and degraded than the blacks. If the colored man would only
stand up for his rights, he would not be _hacked_.

I taught in a district called “Dark Corner.” I think I gave them a
right start. Had a prayer meeting which was largely attended. Poor
whites use more whiskey than the colored people. Whites seem kind to
blacks, lend them money and horses, and help them in every way.

I had an average attendance of thirty-three and a night-school of
fifteen. Taught on an old plantation, on which there used to be five
hundred slaves. Ignorance has great sway there. People have good stock,
but cannot buy land. There is a temperance lodge in Camden of one
hundred and forty members.

It was a bad county where I taught. I was _careful_ about teaching
there. They never had a school before. No land is owned by colored
people. There is much opposition to their education. The immorality of
the place is explained by the fact that they formerly had stills there.
Preachers are not moral men. They are opposed to “foreign” teachers.
Poor whites create a good deal of disturbance. Land is owned by those
who owned it during slavery times, and they will not sell it to white
or colored.

I was the first lady teacher that taught in the county and was quite a
novelty. They had bad teachers. One white one was intemperate. White
people were friendly. Three whites raised their hats to me, which
was quite a new thing. I had a very good Sunday-school; white people
attended my exhibition. They like this University very much, and the
Commissioner wanted me to encourage the boys and girls to come up.

Most everybody uses whiskey and tobacco. I talked on temperance,
distributed temperance papers and read to them. Took the New York
_Witness_ and read it to the people. I think I did some good among
the children. The children of the poor whites are _knocking about_ on
the road all the time. They had a school one month, then gave it up.
Young men spend Sunday in gambling; guess they are doing it right now.
Some said I was not teaching them anything because I did not use the
blue-back speller. The houses of poor whites are just like the colored,
but their clothes are not so good.

The people where I taught are intelligent and well-to-do. Most of them
own their own homes. The whites want the colored people educated. A
speaker at an exhibition of a female seminary said that the colored
people were leaving them in the dark, and if they did not look out, the
bottom rail would be on the top. Six or eight colored people own from
one hundred to five hundred acres and stock. The Commissioner’s wife
asked me into the parlor and gave me a rocking-chair.

Where I was last winter, the people kept Thanksgiving. Of course
I enjoyed that, because I knew you were keeping it here. I had a
Sunday-school that was quite large at first, but when big meetings came
on it grew small.

I had seventy-five pupils. I cannot see that I did much good, but I
hope some good will come out of my summer’s work. Public sentiment
seems to sanction the worst things there are.

The people where I taught said they must have a man, that females could
not teach, and they could not stand ladies. The whites, on the whole,
are better to the teachers than the colored people are. I succeeded
in getting six men to stop using tobacco while attending school, and
then they said if they could stop fifty-five days they could all their
life-time.

Somehow they looked at me like they looked at Columbus when he first
came to America. Preachers are all intemperate men, and some of them
said they could not preach well unless they had some whiskey in them.
I taught four times in the same place, and have had a larger school
each time. The morals of the colored people depend on the morals of
the whites. I opened school at eight and closed at six. I saw no
intemperance, because it was the wrong time of the year. I talked
temperance and acted it. There is but little difference between the
whites and colored; they eat together, sleep together, and have the
same kind of houses.

Now to these reports, only a small part of which I have copied, I will
add a few comments:

1. There is no diminution of the desire of colored children to learn,
and of their parents to have their children educated. Parents want
teachers to teach from early dawn to candle-light, and even to _beat_
knowledge into the pupils.

2. Intemperance and licentiousness abound to a fearful extent, not only
among the laity, but also among the clergy.

3. The poor whites need education and moral and religious instruction
as much as the colored people, and our students are reaching some of
them in their influence.

4. Public school privileges in the South are limited, and it will be a
long time before suitable buildings are provided and efficient teaching
secured.

5. The whites are, in the main, well disposed toward the colored
people, and in favor of their being educated.

6. Many of the colored people are acquiring homes and other property,
although in some places the owners of land will not sell it.

7. In some instances the colored people are cheated out of the benefits
of their labor, and ill-treated in various ways.

8. Atlanta University stands high in the estimation of the people,
and needs liberal pecuniary support from its friends to keep up its
reputation and do the great work that lies before it.

9. Social prejudice seems to be yielding somewhat, although the fact
that a white lady invited a colored girl to sit in a rocking-chair in
her parlor, is not so common an occurrence as to make it unworthy of
mention. Tidiness, gentility, intelligence and morality will yet be
considered superior to a light complexion.

10. The hope of this race, as well as of any other, lies in the
training of children, and hence the value of good schools, both day and
Sunday.

11. The American Missionary Association is doing a valuable work among
the _whites_, by showing them what education will do for poor people,
and stimulating them to try to keep the “top-rail” where it is.

12. No one can estimate the influence our school is exerting in favor
of education, industry, economy, temperance, Sabbath observance,
chastity, social order, and, in short, morality and religion.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN.

MISS LAURA A. PARMELEE, MEMPHIS, TENN.

  We give the closing portion of a paper read at the Woman’s Meeting,
  held in connection with the Annual Meeting at Chicago. In the opening
  portions of it, Miss Parmelee describes with frank truthfulness the
  perils which encircle the colored girls of the South by reason of the
  family habits, the laxity of the marriage relation, the ignorance
  of the laws of health, the late hours of their religious and social
  gatherings, &c. We print her statements and suggestions as to the
  remedy and protection.

Of special agencies for training colored girls to better habits,
boarding schools claim the first place. If there had been seventy,
instead of seven homes of this kind, we could to-day report a fairer
record of virtue and purity. Under the constant supervision of faithful
teachers, who regulate the hours, walks and visits of those in their
charge, there is opportunity to acquire a love for systematic ways
and a pure home life. With the instinctive imitation of their race
they adopt the manners and sentiments of the ladies living under the
same roof and sitting at the same table. Yet with this help, there has
been frequent occasion for teachers to ponder the story of the young
crabs that went from the sea-side to a seminary among the mountains,
where they became ashamed of their own gait and diligently tried to
learn the new way of walking, succeeding to the entire satisfaction of
their teachers as well as themselves, and seeming to have forgotten
the old ways, but, upon returning to parents and friends at the shore,
relinquished the accomplishment and walked backwards as in other days.

In two or three schools—possibly more, but I speak only from personal
knowledge—it is the duty of one of the lady teachers to give the
girls instruction in dress, manners, morals and health, particularly
in matters relating to their peculiar physical organization. Once
a week the regular lessons are postponed or laid aside, that the
pupils may have a half hour for listening to the lecture that has
been thoughtfully prepared for their exclusive benefit. Commencing
with points of etiquette, dress, sketches of lives of famous women,
announcing the latest fashion items when they happen to be suitable,
and so winning the confidence and arousing the interest of the class,
it is comparatively easy to come to graver counsels concerning morals,
health, danger of association with people of loose principles, the
lowering of standards of personal honor, and finally the teaching
properly due a daughter from her mother’s lips.

This branch of work is neither light nor pleasant. False delicacy,
fear of speaking injudiciously and of being misunderstood by the girls
and their mothers, too long kept us silent. We shrank from meeting our
full responsibility in this direction, and nerved ourselves to the
task only when circumstances convinced us that it was an imperative
duty. The ordinary study of physiology is good, but in colored schools
something more is needed. Teach young girls to reverence the body,
to regard all its functions as gifts of God, and the possibilities
of motherhood to be sacredly guarded, and they are transformed from
animals to thoughtful women. Do any regard this as dangerous argument?
Those who have tried the experiment are satisfied of its worth. More
sensible and healthful modes of dress, increasing discretion of manners
and modesty of deportment, are immediate results of a plan that a few
regarded as an innovation, but which has abundantly justified itself.
If every well-established school of the American Missionary Association
could be furnished with models for this purpose, far more good would
be accomplished than with empty hands, however wise the teacher’s lips.

These health talks include cookery, sanitary measures, medical hints,
and a thousand items of common information in a land of newspapers, but
unknown to people who depend upon neighborhood gossip for all their
knowledge.

As teachers became better acquainted with the needs of their fields,
sewing lessons were given, or sewing schools established in connection
with daily work. While teaching deft use of the needle, to mend old
garments and cut new, there is opportunity to speak apt words about
love of finery, habits of wastefulness or extravagance, and improper
hours, all of which find quick lodgment in minds eager for new ideas.
It is no slight gratification to teachers that, in large assemblies,
they can select their students by a more quiet, suitable dress and
dignified bearing.

House-to-house visiting is another important means of elevating the
homes and making “life among the lowly” cleaner and purer. In the
early days of labor for the Freedmen, ladies were commissioned by the
American Missionary Association for this purpose. It is encouraging
to note that, through the parent society, the Christian women of the
North are adopting representatives to carry on this branch of work more
systematically. Year by year there are changes in methods, and teachers
have less time than formerly for this outside visiting.

Honorable mention must be made of the part Congregational churches
bear in this work of regeneration. Too much time would be consumed in
explaining the opposition they meet, or the great need of planting this
little leaven that is already moving the mass of blind superstition.
Suffice it to say, that one of the two denominations claiming the
religious loyalty of the Freedmen insists that, once in Christ, a soul
is forever safe, and can commit sin with impunity, because forgiveness
frees from all restraints of the law. The other great body of believers
is equally false in its explanations of truths held by followers of
Whitefield and Wesley.

These are the principal agencies operating for the redemption of
the colored homes, and through them for the emancipation of Africa,
latest called of nations, now stretching out imploring hands for the
light, and health, and hope, streaming from the cross of Christ. I
will not stop to detail incidents illustrating various phases of the
one great plan, nor recount successes attained, nor introduce you to
the homes—truly homelike in peace, purity and domestic love; or to
the little centres of social influence, where refinement and virtue
invite your respect and friendship. There are such homes and circles,
although they are not sufficiently numerous to have the power in their
communities that they deserve.

Between the graduates of Atlanta or Fisk, and the toilers in cotton
patch or rice swamp—between the better homes of Memphis or Charleston,
and the cabins in piney woods or Louisiana glades—there is a great
gulf, to be spanned only by the prayers and labors of Northern
Christians. I have chosen not to paint prospects and aspirations of the
dwellers _this_ side of that chasm; but rather to give you a glimpse of
life beyond in the darkness, that you may comprehend in some degree the
urgency of the need to chase away the clouds that obscure the light of
hope and purity.

I have thought it possible for women to do more than they have
heretofore in distinct efforts for their own sex; that some new effort
might be made to efficiently supplement the work of schools and
churches.

Two years ago, we made a bold venture at Le Moyne Normal School.
Health talks had become popular, and the teachers were convinced of
the wisdom of taking further steps in that direction, when, most
opportunely, there came to Memphis a lady physician, well advanced in
years, of evident culture, and provided with an excellent life-size
model of the human frame. She was invited to lecture to our female
pupils and their mothers, and did so very acceptably. Her gray hair
commanded respect, although the girls were at first a little suspicious
of the manikin. Satisfied with the effect upon the students and of
the lady’s good judgment, her services were secured for a course of
lectures, to which the friends of the girls were invited. It was
a happy idea, as was quickly proven. I cannot tell how many times
teachers were thanked for the privileges thus afforded, or how many
mothers exclaimed, “If I had only known these things sooner, I should
have saved myself and my children worlds of sickness and trouble and
disgrace!”

Ever since that experiment I have longed to see a similar opportunity
offered to all the colored women. If a discreet, motherly woman, who
understood anatomy, hygiene and medicine, could be furnished with a
model of the body and sent through the large cities and villages,
giving free lectures upon health, care of their own persons, proper
food, training of children, and responsibility to God for the chastity
of their sons and daughters, the Freedwomen would receive incalculable
benefit. The teachers cannot always reach out and control the mothers;
the missionary meets but a part of the women in a single city; but
an itinerating lady physician could influence thousands of the very
class most in need of the instruction she could give. I wish the
heart of some woman, qualified for the undertaking, would be stirred
to consecrate herself to this work. I think the officers of the
Association would indorse such a movement. Certainly, pastors and
teachers in the field would heartily welcome her to their churches and
homes, to which she would be a valuable auxiliary, while exerting a
more positive and direct influence upon the women than is possible from
any one of the already established methods of work.

Dean Howson says: “How can you convert a country unless you convert
the families? How can you convert the families unless you convert the
mothers?”

It was once my privilege to minister to an honored friend who was
gently falling asleep in Jesus. Happening to draw up a window-shade an
hour before the eyes closed upon the scenes of mortal life, I received
from the beloved lips this last commendation and counsel: “That’s
right; give us more light.”

Speaking to-day in behalf of our colored sisters, I appeal for light.
“Give us more light” to dispel the heavy clouds of ignorance and sin,
to show plainly straight paths for the feet of stumbling ones, and for
the praise of Him who is able to keep _us_ from falling, and to present
_us_ faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GEORGIA CONFERENCE.

REV. C.W. HAWLEY.

The Georgia Congregational Conference, from which I have just
returned, is a large body, if an extensive framework can make it so.
My share of the travel to its second annual session at Savannah was
about six hundred miles. Of the fourteen churches, two of which are
in South Carolina, all save one were represented, and the meeting
was much enjoyed by all. The color line was a little indistinct and
almost forgotten. The colored brethren were quite in the majority on
the platform and on the floor, and gave good proof of their ability
to preside with dignity—Rev. Floyd Snelson was our Moderator—and
to speak fluently and well. In fact, they showed a real genius
for public address, warranting the statement of a city daily—the
Southern press is growing liberal—that their speeches were “worthy
of the most dignified deliberative body.” Dr. Roy reported the great
meeting at Chicago, giving, as he had already done at Atlanta and
Macon, rich skimmings from the papers and speeches there presented,
and greatly cheering, with these proofs of the sympathy of Northern
Christians, those who must here learn to do without the sympathy of
their near neighbors. His lecture on Congregationalism also elicited
much interest, and nothing but the lack of money to pay the printer
prevented its immediate publication in full, as a much needed campaign
document for the use of the churches. To whatever church a man here
belongs, it becomes him to be able to state and to justify its faith
and polity. There is kept up a running fire of small arms between
denominations here. It was encouraging to see that the men of this
young Conference desire to be intelligent Congregationalists, and able
to defend themselves; but it is hoped that they will not fall into
the mistake of making denominational strife the chief end of their
existence, as some of their neighbors seem to do.

The reports from the churches do not show any rapid increase. “We must
expect the churches to be small, perhaps, for twenty years yet,” said
one who has grown up with this work. There are obstinate prejudices in
the way, and there is a great educational work yet to be done. A lay
delegate sagely remarked: “When the ground is rough we must go slow,
or there’ll be trouble,” adding also his personal testimony that,
in seeking to bring others over to his way of thinking, he found it
“mighty hard to sense them into anything better than their old ideas,
that a man cannot have religion without making a great big fuss about
it, and cannot pray without hollering as though the Lord was deaf;” but
still he was sure that “if we kept pulling at the wheel and rolling on
the chariot we should gain the field.”


TWO COUNCILS.

On the way down to Conference, some of us stopped at Macon, according
to letters missive, for the examination and ordination of Preston W.
Young, acting pastor at Byron; and during the sessions of Conference
another council examined and ordained two others, A.J. Headen, of
Cypress Slash, and T.T. Benson, of Orangeburgh, S.C. These three
young men passed very creditable examinations, and, with Rev. J.R.
McLean, moderator of the second council, formed a very interesting and
promising group—all Talladega men and classmates—a fine illustration
of the good work done by the school for the church. Putting all things
together—Conference and Councils, and acquaintance with the teachers
and their excellent work in Macon and Savannah—it was with us all a
grand week, quickening in its Christian fellowship, and profitable
in its revelations of work already done, and of harvests yet to be
gathered.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CENTRAL SOUTH CONFERENCE.

Education—Discipline—The Exercises.

REV. HORACE J. TAYLOR, ATHENS, ALA.

The Central South Conference embraces the Congregational churches of
Tennessee, North Alabama and Mississippi. Last week we enjoyed the
rare privilege of welcoming to our homes some of the members of this
Conference, and the Field Superintendent of the A.M.A. On Thursday
evening, Nov. 20th, Rev. G.W. Moore preached the opening sermon from
Psalm lxxiii. 24, “Thou wilt guide me by thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory.” The subject was clearly and forcibly presented.
On Friday morning an organization was effected by electing Rev. J.E.
Smith, of Chattanooga, moderator. That morning was spent in hearing the
narratives of the churches. The reports generally showed progress.
Athens alone reported a less membership than last year; but in this
church there has been a growth in grace in many of its members.

In the afternoon we discussed the subject of education. The young
people were especially urged not to be content with a little schooling,
nor even with a good common school education, but to press forward
with a determination to secure the very highest education that can be
secured. The idea that the schools at Chattanooga, Athens, Florence
and Memphis ought to be feeders of Fisk University was well brought
out. These schools cannot give the high education that can be gained
at Fisk, and their success should be measured largely by the number of
students they send to Fisk University. Rev. J. E. Smith read an article
on the necessity of church discipline. The subject was well presented,
and in the discussion that followed, as in the paper, the idea that
church discipline ought to have for its main object the reclamation of
the offender, was clearly brought out. Dr. Roy and others also spoke
as to the method of church discipline, and especially the propriety
of getting evidence from any source. It seems that some, perhaps a
majority, of the churches about here will not receive the evidence of
any but their own members. Some think that Congregational churches
should be bound hand and foot in the same way, so that the devil and
his followers can manage all in their own way. Then any member could
be guilty of theft, adultery, fornication or anything else; if he only
were not seen by members of this church he could remain in “good and
regular standing.” Dr. Roy said emphatically that evidence was to be
sought from any source, and weighed carefully. Others agreed with him.

At night Dr. Roy spoke, using his fine large map, on the work of the
Association in the South. The house was full, and all were deeply
interested. Saturday morning we listened to a paper by Rev. G. W.
Moore, on how to reach the young people. Saturday afternoon was mainly
taken up with hearing reports of committees. Revs. H. S. Bennett and
J. E. Smith were chosen delegates from this Conference to the National
Council. Saturday night we listened to the news of Trinity church and
congregation. This was one of the best meetings of Conference. Sunday
morning Rev. H. S. Bennett preached from Acts ii. 3, and Revs. A. K.
Spence and G. W. Moore officiated at the communion. At night Rev. A. K.
Spence preached to young people from Ps. cix. 9.

I cannot give in this paper an idea of the interesting meetings we
had. Each meeting was a feast of fat things. It was a great privilege
to meet these brethren from abroad, to have them sit at our table, to
talk with them about the common cause we all are interested in, and
above all to meet with them around the table of our Lord. Some of us
may never meet them again in Conference, but the memory of this good
meeting will remain through life; and we trust that this church will
receive a blessing in consequence of this meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Thanksgiving Services and First Impressions.

REV. C. W. HAWLEY, ATLANTA.

I have just come in from our social evening service of thanksgiving
and prayer for the A. M. A. About fifty were present, and there were
repeated expressions of gratitude for blessings here received, and
fervent prayers for the continued and increasing success of the cause.
One brother thought the Association the chief agent in the abolition
of slavery, and spoke most feelingly of the inexpressible relief which
that abolition had brought to him and to his people. Another in his
prayer thanked the Lord for the schools and the church in the city,
expressing the conviction that if the A. M. A. had not sent its workers
here “things would be in a considerably worse fix than they are.”

One woman told her story: her blind gropings as a slave, her joy in
being sought out and taught by the teachers of the A. M. A., just when
she “_did not know what to do with her freedom_,” and made capable
of giving her children, now converted, a Christian training, with a
purpose henceforth to use for the good of others all the light and help
she had received. Another told us how the A. M. A. had reached out its
helping hand to him in this city when he was ignorant and vicious, and
through the influence of a faithful teacher in a night school had saved
him from evil companions and the curse of drunkenness.

It has been an intensely interesting meeting to me, and would have
quickened the zeal of any friends of the A. M. A. who might have been
present. Our regular prayer-meeting comes tomorrow evening and is a
pleasant anticipation to me. I reached the field the 11th inst. and am
not yet well acquainted with it. I am sure to be interested in it. I
have quite enjoyed the welcome given me and have no painful sense of
isolation. Their faces, their intelligence, their quiet good sense,
their homes, so far as I have seen them, all surpass my expectations.
The work that has been done for them _shows_. I shall esteem it a
privilege if I may do something to help it on.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Emerson Institute—1865-1879.

REV. O. D. CRAWFORD, MOBILE.

It was named after Mr. Ralph Emerson, a resident of Rockford, Ill.,
whose timely gift enabled the Association to purchase “Blue College,” a
commodious building, with beautiful grounds, in the western part of the
city, two miles from the post-office. It was originally built for the
education of the white youth. In the transpositions of the times “after
the surrender,” as the close of the war is here styled, it became the
resort of three hundred Freedmen. In April of our Centennial year it
crumbled in the flames. The school went on in unfavorable quarters
until, in May, 1878, it entered its new and elegant building, which was
designed for two hundred and fifty pupils. Last year the yellow fever
delayed the opening of school and crippled many of its friends. But
adverse influences are now disappearing, and the ten thousand colored
people of the city are looking to it again as the hope of their youth.

Last year, two-thirds of our whole number in attendance entered
after the Christmas holidays. This year the second month closes with
fifty names more than the highest number of last year. The rooms are
furnished with the best of modern desks; but their present capacity
is exceeded by more than forty names. If another room and sufficient
teaching force be added by the friends of the Association after New
Year’s, our present number of two hundred and forty will, in every
probability, run up to three hundred. To meet the wants of these, we
should have six teachers besides the superintendent, including one that
should give half an hour each day to instruction in vocal music and
some time to instrumental music. We now have one that is competent for
this work, but she has no time for it. Our overworked force is to be
somewhat relieved by the expected arrival of a fifth teacher this week.

At present we are obliged to receive many primary scholars, not only to
relieve the public want, but also with the view of raising up normal
scholars, for whom the Institute has been specially designed. We regret
the seeming necessity that is laid upon the colored parents of taking
their children from the public schools. We do not advise their action.
The feverish desire for education which seized the body of colored
people immediately after emancipation has subsided. Their best men are
now obliged to urge upon them the duty of educating their children. In
this they have come down to the level of the whites. An organization
has been formed to promote this interest. The largest church has
established a school of more than fifty members. The pastor of the most
influential church, in point of intelligence, has opened one, with an
attendance of more than forty, and teaches it himself, in addition to
preaching three sermons every Lord’s day and performing the other usual
duties of a minister. These schools are intended to awaken their people
in the matter, and to raise up candidates for the work of teaching,
that may get their fuller preparation in our Normal department.

The friends of Christian education could not ask for a more needy and
promising outlook than lies before us. Will they put into the hands of
the Association the necessary means?


The Church—1876-1879.

Organized with forty-seven members, it now has sixty-one. It owes its
origin and existence to the presence of the Institute. Its members are
very poor in this world’s goods, but delightfully rich in grace.

It was natural that the spirit of independence which found full
scope among the Freedmen should seek for a church organization and
connection with an ecclesiastical body whose history was not tainted
with oppression. This disposition, however, has sometimes asked for
more license for fleshly indulgences than pure Congregationalism
permits. In this city it is impossible for your Superintendent to find
a provision store having any considerable variety of goods that does
not include among its principal commodities _wines_ and _liquors_.
Members and officers of churches are engaged in the trade, and scruple
not to advertise conspicuously that branch of their business, which
we regard as exceedingly immoral. Yet there are some churches, both
white and colored, whose rules and discipline would delight the heart
of a Puritan. Congregationalism is an exotic in this soil; and its
Northern friends have reason to be pleased if it grows even slowly.
Among the adverse circumstances against which our church has had to
struggle may be mentioned a frequent change of pastors. In its three
and one-half years it has suffered the perturbations incident to
two summer supplies, and now the fourth pastor. These changes have
tended to prevent some from making their church home with us. More
permanence is a necessity. We have no such opportunity for reaching
those under our educational care as is offered by a boarding-school.
The parents of most of our pupils are connected with some church, and
the children themselves with Sunday-schools. The kind of instruction
they receive is one of the necessities of our continuance. The growing
intelligence of the colored preachers, and the attractiveness of the
large congregations which gather about them, make our beginning less
attractive to the young, who otherwise might prefer our place of
worship.

Your missionary has preached to the largest colored church in a revival
meeting, and exchanged pulpits with the other leading pastor; but we
cannot expect any special help from other churches in building up a new
denomination in the midst of them. J. H. Roberts, now in the Senior
Theological Class at Talladega, supplied the church very acceptably
through the summer, and just before his departure witnessed the
reception of four persons to fellowship. Since then the attendance has
increased some. The interest in the Sunday-school has likewise received
the impetus given it by the return of our schoolteachers; yet our
hopes of an increase in members have not thus far been realized. As
accessory helps we need Sunday school papers and a library. Our problem
is that of reaching the young with Christian influences in the form of
direct religious instruction. For this purpose we have some advantages,
and hope for more. We wish to keep this missionary work upon the
prayerful hearts of our Northern friends.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Revival.

REV. J. D. SMITH, SHELBY IRON WORKS.

During the first week in October we set apart Wednesday as a day of
fasting and prayer. On the following Sabbath we commenced a series of
meetings, which continued three weeks. Brother H. W. Conley stopped
off here on his way from Marion back to Talladega, and preached and
labored very faithfully with us several days. Brother J. W. Strong came
down and labored with me, preaching the word almost every night for
over a week. Brother Jones, of Childersburg, paid us a short visit, and
Rev. F. J. Tyler, of this place, pastor of the Union Church (white),
preached for us. Last of all came Rev. G. W. Andrews, who preached
several times.

Every evening, one half-hour before services, a number of Christians
would assemble in the inquiry-room and converse with those who came to
inquire of the way of salvation. I must say that the inquiry meetings
were the means of great and untold good, as much or more than the
sermons, perhaps.

Well, the meetings closed with twenty-one conversions reported. Last
Sunday fifteen came forward, entered into covenant with the church, and
were baptized, on profession of their faith. _All_ of the candidates
for baptism preferred sprinkling—the first instance, to my knowledge,
where we did not have to immerse some out of so many uniting at
one time; and, more singular than all, a Baptist father and mother
presented their infant boy for baptism. When reminded by some of the
Baptist brethren that they had “broken the rules of the church,” they
replied by saying that if they had five hundred children, they would
have them baptized, because it was right in the sight of God. The work
has a more hopeful outlook for future prosperity than ever before.

Some eight or ten are to unite by letter, the first opportunity, who
did not get ready in time to join last Sunday. Our total membership
will then stand about fifty.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

A Student Aided.

REV. E. M. CRAVATH, FISK UNIVERSITY.

  Our readers will remember a plea for student aid made by President
  Cravath in the MISSIONARY for October. Soon after its publication
  this description of the first young man thus aided came, but has been
  delayed by the special matter which has claimed our columns. There
  are many more such at all our institutions awaiting similar help.

The first answer came in the shape of a draft for fifty dollars from a
good friend of Rochelle, Illinois. On the same day with this answer a
young man from Abbeville, S. C., came to Fisk University for the first
time, and as he was a good representative of the class of young people
for whom our appeal was made in the October MISSIONARY, we assigned him
at once to this scholarship.

A brief sketch of his personal history may encourage some of the
readers of the MISSIONARY who are yet hesitating to give a favorable
answer to our appeal. Mr. Richard J. Holloway was born in Abbeville,
South Carolina, in 1857, and was a slave up to the close of the war.
He brought to the University the following testimonial from his former
master, dated Abbeville, S. C., Sept. 8, 1879;

“The bearer of this, Richard J. Holloway, is a young man who was born
in my family. I have known him from his birth to the present time.
He early exhibited a desire for knowledge, which he has pursued under
great difficulties. Notwithstanding he has made considerable advance,
his laudable desire seems to be unsatisfied, and he leaves this section
of the country to avail himself of advantages offered elsewhere. So
far as I know, his moral character is good. He is commended to the
favorable regard of all to whom this may come.” The first year after
the war, being a lad of nine years, Richard had the opportunity of
attending a school in Abbeville for five or six months. After this he
was under the necessity of working with his parents, but contrived to
study by himself so that he made considerable progress. During the fall
of 1875 he happened to see, upon the table of his minister, a circular
which had been sent out from the school established by the Am. Miss.
Assoc. at Greenwood, S. C., which was then, and is still, taught by
that most faithful and zealous missionary laborer, Mr. Backenstose, of
Geneva, N. Y. Noticing that the tuition was only fifty cents a month,
there dawned upon him the possibility of realizing his long-cherished
desire of securing a good education. Inspired by this thought he left
home and hired out on a plantation to earn some money with which to go
to Greenwood.

By working three months he earned money enough, so that by buying his
food and doing his own cooking he was able to attend school about the
same length of time. He then went to one of the upper counties of
South Carolina and taught a private school for two months, after which
he worked for two months in a cotton-gin near by, while remaining to
collect the money for his teaching. Being compelled to use considerable
of the money he had earned to help his parents, he again secured a
public school for two months, at fifteen dollars a month, and boarded
himself. He then went over into Georgia and taught a public school,
for which he was fortunate enough to receive twenty-five dollars a
month. He was then able to return to Greenwood, where he was again
under the instruction of Mr. Backenstose for nearly three months. Under
the advice of his teacher, he determined to get to Fisk University if
possible and take a thorough course of study, but not succeeding in
earning much money by his teaching during the spring and summer, he
stopped for five months of last year at Biddle University at Charlotte,
N. C. He then undertook teaching again, determined to earn what money
he could during the spring and summer, and to get to Fisk University
if possible at the opening of the next school year. He only succeeded,
however, in getting a three months’ school in Georgia, for which he has
only received payment in part. As soon as his school closed he started
for Nashville and reached here on the 7th of October, just as the
answer came from our friend in Illinois which told us what to do. Mr.
Holloway is a member of the African Methodist church, and his desire
evidently is to secure an education that he may use it in Christian
work among his people.

We are confidently hoping that we shall receive similar answers enough
to enable us to provide for at least a hundred such young men as this.

       *       *       *       *       *


Health—Business—School—Church.

PROF. A. J. STEELE, MEMPHIS.

November 1st found Memphis dull, spiritless, and wearing a half
deserted appearance, its streets strewn with autumn foliage and dry
grass, so that the rustling of leaves beneath the feet was a more
familiar sound than the rumbling of wagons or drays on most of the
streets. Business men who had returned, in most cases without their
families, wore a troubled and doubtful look. Many were discouraged and
without hope for the future of the city, either as a business point or
a place of residence. A few, like the boy in the dark, made a pretence
of courage by “whistling.”

Although the Board of Health had declared the fever ended, there were
still a few cases, with constant rumors of many more. After the cold
spell of October 30, the weather became and continued unusually warm.
Little or no cotton was being received, and orders for goods came not
to waiting merchants. Laboring people returning to the city found no
employment, and many suffered for the necessaries of life.

This state of things continued till the middle of November, when, after
a few frosty nights, and with bright clear weather, the entire aspect
of affairs changed, and rapidly took on a most hopeful and promising
appearance. Cotton, the staple and life of business, began to come in
rapidly, until before the end of November the daily receipts became
the largest ever known at this point, placing Memphis as a primary
cotton market scarcely second to New Orleans. With this revival of
activity the empty talk of a hundred or so self-constituted newspaper
correspondents and pretended scientists ceased to be heard on the
corners and to be seen in the papers. The city authorities and a
committee of citizens began a careful and thorough canvass of the city
to ascertain its condition and needs. Under the advice of a committee
of experts from the meeting of the American Sanitary Association held
at Nashville, a system of sewerage and general sanitary reform was
promptly adopted, and it is now expected that the Governor will convene
the legislature to empower the city to make the needed changes. There
is little doubt but that the hard and painful lessons of the past two
seasons have finally been learned, and that at least another epidemic
will not be invited next year by the criminal negligence of the
authorities.

The school opened November 17 with about forty students. This number
on December 2nd had increased to over 100. We are now receiving new
students every day, of these ten are in the senior or graduating class.
We note with interest a revival of the early desire for education and
the culture which it brings; not _just_ the early desire of ignorant
and foolish expectation, but a steadily deepening conviction of the
need and advantage of patient, continued study and training for better
things in the future. We hope to foster this feeling, and to do what
we may to realize the expectation, by building up honest, manly and
womanly characters in our students. Many of the pupils have taught
during the vacation months; some have not yet completed the term for
which they were engaged. So far as we know, all have labored earnestly
to exert an influence for good in the communities where they have
been located. A few during the sickness were employed by the Howards
or other societies as nurses, one young man saving about $200 at this
work, and gaining an enviable reputation as a nurse.

Our public library is demonstrating its influence and usefulness in a
gratifying way, in awakening in many laboring people a love of reading
and of thought, aside from the great advantage it is to the school
directly and indirectly. During the summer months, considerably over
one hundred volumes were drawn and read. Among many others several
white persons of most excellent standing availed themselves of its
privileges. Of these latter, one is principal of a boys’ and girls’
school in our vicinity.

I cannot close this letter without a word concerning the church here.
During the epidemic, one of its most earnest, reliable members fell a
victim to the scourge. By thrift and saving, every family belonging to
the church, except one only, got through the long summer of idleness
without aid in the way of charity, and before the return of the
teachers, and in the absence of the pastor, the church voted to send a
delegate to the Conference at Athens, raising money at once to pay his
expenses. If this is not an example of commendable church devotion and
courage, show us one that is so.

We look for a fuller, stronger school this year than ever before. I
sometimes think these people have become so accustomed to adversity
and trial, that they come out stronger under it than from any other
experience. May it not be that God is leading them through rough ways
to better things than we think?

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE S’KOKOMISH AGENCY.

Homes and Schools—Lands and Titles.

EDWIN EELLS, AGENT, S’KOKOMISH.

The favor of a kind Providence has preserved us from any unusual
calamities, and general good health, peace and prosperity have attended
us and the Indians under my charge. It has been rather a quiet year,
with nothing very startling, either good or bad, to affect us. Among
the Indians generally, their habits of morality appear to have been
growing stronger. Their general deportment is very good, and their
style of living in their houses is improving all the time. Their
general health, in consequence of their improved manner of living,
has never been better than during the past year. Most of their houses
have been ceiled and good tight floors put in them during the past
winter, so that they are quite as comfortable as the average of white
settlers throughout the country. There has been some land cleared by
them, a decided advance in the kind of fences built by them, and I have
furnished 1,000 fruit trees, which they have set out, nearly all of
which have lived.

Our schools have been well attended, and the progress of the scholars
in their studies has been quite satisfactory. The average attendance
of the two schools has been something over fifty. One feature of
improvement at the Agency, which deserves mention, has been the
employment of apprentices, at small wages, at the various shops at the
Agency. We have had five of our former school-boys employed in this way
during the summer, and they have done very well.

Among the Indians who live off from the Reservation there has been an
increasing desire to take up or acquire land for themselves. One band
living at Clallam Bay, about 160 miles distant from the Agency, have
purchased a tract of 154 acres of land, and have a favorable prospect
before them of doing quite well. Ten individuals contributed the money
to make this purchase. Some other individuals have taken up homestead
claims and are improving them. One has completed his five years’
residence and obtained his title to his claim.

The delay of the Government to furnish the Indians on this Reservation
with titles to their allotments of land, has operated to discourage
them very much in the improvement of their farms. They also had reason
to fear that there was danger of their being removed from here and
consolidated with other tribes, speaking different languages, and to
a distance from the home of their childhood and the land of their
fathers. This has added to their despondency and unnerved them for
effort. With this cloud of despondency hanging over them, it has been
up-hill work to induce them to make sufficient effort to insure any
progress. Their faith in the Government failing, their religious faith
has also weakened, and while it has not led them to any bad practices,
it has prevented them from making progress in Christianity. They reason
in this way: If there is a God who rules the world, and institutes
governments over men; if these governments are unjust and oppressive,
it must be an unjust God who causes all this; and why should they love
and worship such a being? This is the Indian mode of reasoning, and
under the present circumstances there is a barrier raised in their
minds against the Gospel.

As the treaty is soon to expire, and as some of the safeguards they
have heretofore had will be removed, it seems to me very important that
this measure should, if possible, be immediately consummated.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

  PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
  Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
  F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross Rev. S. H.
  Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D., Jacob
  S. Taber, Esq.

  DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
  Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
  E. P. Sanford, Esq.

  SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SANTA BARBARA MISSION—CHIN FUNG.

BY REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

Among the compensations attending my service as Superintendent of our
Chinese Missions is the annual visit I am called to make to Santa
Barbara; and, notwithstanding the great void I found in the absence of
my greatly beloved brother, Rev. Dr. Hough—now returned to his former
flock at Jackson, Michigan—no visit ever made there was more pleasant
to me than my last. The movements of the steamers were such that it
had to be an unusually long visit; and I gained thus the opportunity,
not only to see more of the homes and hearts of our English-speaking
brethren, but to get much closer in Christian affection and confidence
to the Chinese who have begun to believe in the Saviour. Of the
six that from this mission, several years since, united with the
Presbyterian Church, only two remain; but three others were found who
have never yet been baptized, and who seemed to give good evidence of
being born again. My conversations with them greatly interested me.
There seemed to be a simple faith, a hearty and practical consecration,
a readiness to testify, to work and to give for Jesus, which certainly
looked like true tokens of a new life—the eternal life—begun. I
expect that they will be baptized and received into the Congregational
Church at its next communion. The following sentences from a letter
written me by one of them express what appeared to be the spirit of
them all: “Our school is grow up nicely, and have very good teacher
now. Only one thing I be very sorry. I will tell you about. Some
school-boy go to bad way, and disobey our Lord Jesus Christ. I, in
myself, have no strength to make them to love Jesus Christ. * * * Oh, I
hope you pray for them, and ask God to send the Spirit to change their
heart, and make them to ’member Jesus Christ died on the cross for us,
and make them to ’member continue in heart wherefore the heathen too.
[_I. e._, if I understand him, make them consider wherefore they should
continue heathen at heart.] Oh, we are ’member you always in heart,
because you very kind to our countrymen. I have nothing to recompense
you. But I pray to God for you, and ask God to bless you and comfort
you, and give you reward in Heaven.”

The anniversary of the mission was held on Sunday evening, October
26. A large audience was present, and great interest was evinced.
Besides the exercises by the pupils, there was the annual report, and
brief addresses by the pastors of the Congregational and Presbyterian
churches. The exercises indicated some good progress made during
the year. I remember especially a recitation of the 115th Psalm, a
responsive recitation of John, xiv. chap., and a little dialogue about
our mission schools, and what is learned in them—“not only the English
language, but about Jesus Christ our Saviour from sin.” One pupil
recited the Apostles’ Creed, another the Ten Commandments, and none
except one or two very recent comers were without some Gospel text,
which, fastened in the memory, was recited in intelligible English.
Sacred songs, in both English and Chinese, were interspersed, and the
half-hour was fraught with blessing, I am very sure, to all concerned.
I have never been so hopeful of the best results from our Santa Barbara
work as I am just now.


CHIN FUNG

is one of our earliest fruits, a bright intelligent young man whom,
years ago, I invited to become one of our helpers. He declined on the
ground of being too little acquainted with Chinese, having had little,
if any, opportunity of attending school in China. But I remember that
he said, “I have wished very much that I could be prepared to go as
a missionary to my countrymen at home.” I confess that I did not
realize how deep that feeling was. Such expressions are frequent among
our brethren, and I never have doubted their sincerity, but I have
generally thought of them as consciously a wish for the _impossible_,
and consequently never likely to grow to a controlling purpose deciding
the life-work. But it was not so with Chin Fung. With the hope of this
he has been saving all these years, with rigid economy, the slender
earnings of his work as a house-servant. At length, encouraged by the
excellent Christian lady by whom, of late, he has been employed, he
determined to go to Hartford, Conn., and commence his course of study.
Before this letter reaches you, I trust he will be there.

He did not get away without a struggle. The agony of inward conflict
into which he was thrown by the representations of heathen kinsmen, as
to the wrong he was doing his family, the difficulties and calamities
in which he might involve his older brothers if he should thus turn
his back on China, and disregard a possible betrothal which his elder
brothers, it was said, had made for him, (although, with this great
plan in view, he had charged them not to involve him in any such
responsibility,) called forth my intense sympathy. But I felt that it
was the Master’s call to which, these years, he had been listening,
and that to go back to China in obedience to the summons of his
brothers would be to turn his back on Christ. He himself saw it so
at length—saw it _for himself_, and from that instant there was no
hesitancy, “I will start tomorrow,” he said, with an emphasis which
marked the conflict ended and the victory won. He certainly has some
qualities which under skilful training would tend to make him a useful
missionary.


IN GENERAL.

What I have written about the Santa Barbara school, I might have
written of almost all of them. We have an excellent corps of teachers,
and though one or two of our schools are suffering because our
reviving business prosperity involves their pupils in evening work,
others are steadily increasing in size, and increasing still more, I
trust, in usefulness. At the last communion at Bethany church seven
were baptized. A much larger number than that have recently united
with the Association of Christian Chinese, thus avowing themselves as
Christians, and coming into the process of test work and training,
which we feel to be necessary before they are finally accepted in the
church. But we need to do much more: to enter new fields, to send forth
more laborers, and meanwhile in fields already occupied to bring to
hear as never hitherto, the zeal, the wisdom, the living spiritual
power of Him whose name is “God with us.” Brethren, pray for us.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMATEUR HEATHEN.

The small-boy who has been well and piously brought up hates the
heathen, though policy compels him to conceal his feelings. He envies
the heathen small-boy, and at the same time looks upon him as a selfish
and remorseless absorber of Christian pennies. This is natural and
inevitable. The small-boy is told that his heathen contemporary goes
constantly barefooted, wears very little clothing, is never washed,
never goes to school, and is never taught anything that is good and
useful. Moreover, the heathen small boy lives in a country where
tigers and other delightful wild beasts abound, and where the exciting
spectacle of a widow burning to death in company with her husband’s
corpse—an attraction which no circus in this country has had the
enterprise to offer—is frequently exhibited free. Of course, the
small-boy of Christian lands envies the blessed lot of his heathen
brother, and would give worlds had he, too, been born a heathen.
Now, when this envious small-boy is compelled to give 50 per cent.
of his pennies to the heathen, he feels that it is both unreasonable
and unjust, and his anger burns against the heathen small-boy who,
although rolling in every kind of heathen luxury, meanly absorbs the
scant wealth of small-boys who have had the misfortune to be born in
Christian countries. He cannot avoid noticing that the grown-up folks
who think that he should give one-half of his pennies to the heathen,
do not divide their own property in that way, and he never drops a
copper in the collector’s box without feeling that he is the victim of
moral blackmailing.

Now and then there arises a small-boy with a gigantic intellect, and
a degree of courage which marks him as a born leader of his race. It
is the exceptional small-boy of this variety who heads expeditions
against the Indians and organizes gangs of juvenile highwaymen. That
these enterprises do not meet with success is due to forces beyond
his control, but they display the greatness of his intellect and the
boldness of his character. Of this type of small-boy is Master Jaggars,
of North Meriden, Conn., who lately devised an ingenious and entirely
novel scheme for arresting the flow of American copper coins toward the
heathen pockets of juvenile India.

Some two months since, Master Jaggars, who had painfully accumulated
the sum of twenty-five cents, with a view to an expected circus, was
compelled to consecrate fifteen cents to the hated small-boys of
India. It was this last of a long series of pecuniary outrages that
determined him to take a bold stand against missionary assessments,
and he, therefore, summoned a mass-meeting of small-boys on Saturday
afternoon at Deacon Pratt’s barn, ostensibly with a view to rats,
but really in order to propose a plan of defense against heathen
encroachments.

Master Jaggars made a moving speech, in which he glowingly described
the luxury in which the heathen small-boy wallows. “He ain’t washed,
and he can wear just as little cloze as hesermineter. There ain’t
no school for him, nor no Sunday, you bet. He can go swimmin’ every
day, and can just lay off on the bank and see the crocodiles scoop
in washerwomen and such. Then his back yard is chuck full of tigers
and hipopomusses, and no end of snakes, and he can steal his dad’s
gun and shoot ’em out of the back window. This is the chap that rakes
in all our money, and I say its mor’n we ought to stand. Now, I move
that we all turn heathen ourselves. The folks can’t make us wash and
go to school if we’re heathen, and all the other boys will have to
put up their money for us.” It is needless to say that this speech
was received with tumultuous applause. Howls of execration went up as
the luxuries of the hated heathen were described, and the proposal to
adopt heathenism as a profession was unanimously supported. A slight
temporary opposition was manifested by Master Sabin, who maintained
that in order to become heathen they must first have their eyes put
out—a theory which was based upon a misinterpretation of the hymn
which speaks of “the heathen in his blindness.” The objector, however,
was soon convinced of his error, and expressed thereupon a hearty
desire to become a heathen.

The details of the scheme were all arranged by Master Jaggars. A
plaster bust of Mr. S. J. Tilden was decided to be ugly enough to serve
as an idol, and the amateur heathen placed it on an empty barrel in
the barn, and bowed down to it with much gravity. They discarded all
their clothing except a towel twisted around the waist, and blackened
their entire bodies with burnt cork. There could be no doubt that they
were very successful heathen in appearance, and, as it was late in the
afternoon, they resolved to spend the night in the barn; to breakfast
on the spoils of Deacon Pratt’s orchard, and to attend Sunday-school
in a body, in order to collect tribute from the Christian boys. The
Sunday-school opened as usual the next morning, although the absence
of eleven boys created a good deal of remark. Soon after the exercises
had begun, the teachers were astounded at the entrance of Master
Jaggars and his ten associate heathen. It is only fair to say that the
heathen behaved themselves with as much propriety as their professional
duties would permit. Master Jaggars advanced to the Superintendent and
remarked, “If you please, Sir, we’ve all turned heathen. There ain’t
no foolin’ about it. We’ve got a first-class old idol, and we don’t
believe in nothing no more. So, if you please, Sir, will you please
tell them Christian boys to fork over half of all the money they’re
got, and to remember how blessed it is to consecrate it to real genuine
heathen.”

There is no instance on record in which a heathen has been converted
as quickly as was Master Jaggars. The Superintendent held him by one
ear, and at the tenth stroke of the cane Mister Jaggars renounced his
heathenism and promised to smash his idol and return to the Christian
faith without a moment’s delay. The other heathen, alarmed by the fate
of their leader, fled to the barn, washed themselves, resumed their
clothing, and went homeward with sober countenances, singing missionary
hymns. The North Meriden revival of heathenism was a disastrous
failure, but nevertheless the boldness and originality of the scheme
devised by Master Jaggars must command our wonder and admiration.




RECEIPTS

FOR NOVEMBER, 1879.


  MAINE, $173.33.

    Bath. Ladies, _for a Teacher_                             $8.50
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Soc.                              27.51
    Cumberland Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. OREN
      S. THOMAS, L. M.                                        33.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            19.45
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     8.41
    Fryeburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.46
    Limerick. S. F. H., _for Raleigh, N. C._                   1.00
    Litchfield. Ladies, Bbl. of C.
    Newcastle. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.00
    North Anson. ——.                                          10.00
    Scarborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc., “A Friend”               33.00
    Waterford. “A. D.”                                         5.00
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $158.31.

    Auburn. “F. B.”                                            1.00
    Candia. Jona. Martin                                       5.00
    Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             11.00
    Durham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                11.50
    East Alstead. Second Cong. Ch. $5.55; First Cong.
      Ch., $3.10                                               8.65
    East Jaffrey. Mrs. D.                                      0.25
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Harrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.85
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $9.62; G. W., 51c.           10.13
    Jaffrey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                              28.37
    Mason. Anna M. Hosmer, _for Wilmington, N. C._             6.25
    Pembroke. C. C. S.                                         0.51
    Pittsfield. ——.                                           10.00
    West Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          22.80


  VERMONT, $266.76.

    Barnet. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                          7.75
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               23.88
    Danville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $20.50, and Sab.
      Sch. $10                                                30.50
    Fayetteville. ESTATE of Sophia C. Miller, by Milon
      Davidson                                                75.00
    Johnson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Island Pond. Cong. Ch.                                    13.00
    Lower Waterford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       12.19
    North Cambridge. M. K.                                     1.00
    Pittsford. Mrs. Nancy P. Humphrey                         10.00
    Tunbridge. Cong. Ch.                                       2.07
    Saint Johnsbury. Mr. and Mrs. E. D. Blodgett, to
      const. HERBERT W. BLODGETT, L. M.                       30.00
    Swanton. Harriet M. Stone                                  5.00
    West Enosburgh. Henry Fassett                              5.00
    West Randolph. Mary A. and Susan E. Albin                  6.00
    West Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       8.96
    —— ——                                                      0.20
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       26.21


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,626.08.

    Amherst. G. C. Munsell                                     2.00
    Arlington Heights. Joseph C. Gibson                        5.00
    Ashby. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     25.00
    Barre. ESTATE of Phebe Barrett, by Thos. P. Root,
      Ex.                                                     87.55
    Berkshire Co. ESTATE of Lucy Young, by Lucy C.
      Lincoln, Executrix                                     100.00
    Billerica. Orthodox Cong. Sab. Sch.                        8.00
    Boylston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. $1.50 and B. of C.           1.50
    Boston. Mt. Vernon Ch., “E. K. A.” $30, to
      const. MISS SARAH B. ALDEN, L. M.; C. H. N. $1          31.00
    Bradford. Mrs. Sarah C. Boyd, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             15.00
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Missionary Society of
      Pilgrim Ch. $30, to const. MRS. GEORGE R.
      LEAVITT, L. M.; Prospect St. Sab. Sch. $11.68           41.68
    Canton. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   22.68
    Charlestown. Ivory Littlefield                            50.00
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc. _for Student Aid_       26.00
    Cunningham. “Friends.”                                     6.50
    Dedham. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $177.10, and Mon. Con.
      Coll. $15.63; E. P. B. 50c.                            193.23
    Dorchester. Miss E. Pierce                                10.00
    Easton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.50
    Fairhaven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       30.00
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                   110.78
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.88
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              55.50
    Harwich. Cong. Ch.                                        13.27
    Holbrook. BEQUEST of “E. N. H.”                          200.00
    Holbrook. “E. E. H.”                                      25.00
    Housatonic. Housatonic Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 22.36
    Ipswich. First Ch., Bbl. of C.
    Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch., Bbl. of C.
    Leverett. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  2.75
    Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      5.01
    Litchfield. First. Cong. Soc. to const.
      H. B. EGGLESTON, L. M.                                  40.50
    Lowell. Eliot Ch. and Soc.                                 2.34
    Marshfield. Ladies, by Miss Alden, $1.50, and B.
      of C.                                                    1.50
    Mattapoisett. A. C.                                        1.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. $72.25, to
      const. REV. GEO. H. PRATT and MISS LYDIA A. DOW,
      L. M’s; Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.          72.25
    Merrimac. John K. Sargent and Charles N. Sargent,
      $2 ea.                                                   4.00
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.50
    Millbury. M. D. Garfield, $5; —Cong. Ch., $2.20,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta, U._                           7.20
    Milton. First Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                       16.00
    Montville. Sylvester Jones                                 2.00
    Natick. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($50 of which from
      S. S.)                                                 135.79
    Newburyport. Freedmen’s Aid Soc., by Mrs. Mary E.
      Dimmick, $75 _for Lady Missionary, Macon, Ga._;
      —Whitefield Cong. Ch., $10.10; P. N., $1                86.10
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   24.94
    North Brookfield. Miss Abby W. Johnson, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  10.17
    Northampton. “A Friend,” $100; W. K. Wright, $30;
      First Cong. Ch. (ad’l) 75c.; —“Friend,” a New
      Single Harness, _for Talladega_                        130.75
    Orleans. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  10.00
    Phillipston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C.
    Pittsfield. James H. Dunham                               25.00
    Reading. Rev. W. H. Willcox, Books, with cash for
      freight, _for Library, Talladega C._                   410.35
    Roxbury. Bbl. of C. _for Mendi M._ by Miss E. E.
      Backup.
    South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch.                          78.55
    Southampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           42.73
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    28.00
    Spencer. Young Ladies’ Mission Circle, $7 and Bbl.
      of C.                                                    7.00
    Springfield. First Ch. $37.50; Mrs. Dr. Smith $3;
      Eight individuals, $1 each;
      Others, $2.75, _for Millers Station, Ga._
      by Mrs. E. W. Douglass;—Wm H. Hale, $6                  57.25
    Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        100.00
    Thorndike. James H. Learned, $10; Mrs. E. L.
      Learned, $2                                             12.00
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             29.00
    Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  5.00
    Watertown. Mrs. S. S. 60c; Mrs. E. S. P. 60c; W. R.
      60c; Corban Soc. 2 Bbls of C.                            1.80
    Westborough. Freedman’s Miss. Ass’n. Bbl. of
      Bedding and C. _for Atlanta U._
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc. _for Student Aid.
      Straight U._                                            10.00
    West Newton. J. H. P.                                      1.00
    Worcester. Union Ch. $30; Salem St. Ch. and Soc.
      $36.99; Mrs. Mary F. Gough, Bbl. of C.                  75.99


  RHODE ISLAND, $390.10.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  89.75
    Providence. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., $192.00;
      —Young Ladies’ Soc. of Beneficent Ch., $100, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._;—Plymouth Cong. Ch., $7.75       300.35


  CONNECTICUT, $2,188.92.

    Ashford. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Berlin. “A Friend,” _for Student preparing for
      African M._                                             50.00
    Bristol. Mrs. P. L. Alcott                                 5.00
    Colchester. Mrs. C. B. McCall, $10;—Rev. S. G.
      Willard, $10, _for Student Aid, Straight U._            20.00
    Cornwall. ESTATE of Hannah D. Cole, by Geo. H.
      Cole, Ex.                                               50.00
    Danbury. Second Cong. Ch.                                  3.00
    Durham. Ladies’ Missionary Ass’n, $3, and Bbl. of
      C. by Mrs. Harriet C. Chesebrough, _for Talladega
      C._                                                      3.00
    East Hampton. Talladega Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           12.50
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.17
    Glastenbury. First Cong. Ch.                             140.00
    Hadlyme. Cong. Ch.                                        11.24
    Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                        22.90
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               40.00
    Hartford. “A Friend,” $300; “Pearl Street Cong.
      Ch.” $91.90; Rev. E. E. R., $1.00                      392.90
    Harwinton. ESTATE of F. S. Catlin (ad’l), to const.
      VIRGIL R. BARKER and MRS. ELLEN M. BARKER, L. M’s       65.55
    Litchfield. “L. M.”                                        3.00
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            15.00
    New Haven. Nelson Hall, $30; “A. T.” $25                  55.00
    New London. TRUST ESTATE of Henry P. Haven                50.00
    New London. W. C. Crump, _for Fisk U._                    10.00
    New Preston. Rev. Henry Upson                              5.00
    North Madison. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of Books by
      J. M. Hill.
    Norfolk. Robbins Battell, _for Fisk U._                   50.00
    Norwich. BEQUEST of Mrs. Daniel W. Coit, by
      Chas. W. Coit, Ex., _for the Freedmen_                 500.00
    Norwich. Dea. Ed. Huntington                               5.00
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MRS.
      NELLIE ROBINSON, L. M.                                  38.45
    Plainville. Cong. Ch.                                     57.04
    Prospect. ESTATE of Andrew Smith, by David R.
      Williams, Ex.                                          200.00
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                      10.87
    Rockville. George Maxwell, $100; Second Cong.
      Ch. $25, _for Fisk U._                                 125.00
    Southport. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         25.00
    Stratford. Cong. Ch.                                      21.10
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      26.70
      Waterbury. “A Friend,” _for a young man preparing
      for African M._                                         20.00
    Westport. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Wolcottville. L. Wetmore                                 100.00
    Woodbury. North Cong. Ch., $18.25;
      Sab. Sch. Class No. 13, $7; Friends, $1.25              26.50


  NEW YORK, $1,589.08.

    Brasher Falls. Elijah Wood, $15; Mrs. Oliver Bell,
      $5                                                      20.00
    Brooklyn. ESTATE of Mrs. Eli Merrill, by Eliza L.
      Thayer, Ex.                                            500.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., $40, _for Lady
      Missionary, Charleston, S. C._, and to const.
      GEO. A. BELL, L. M.; JULIUS DAVENPORT, $30,
      to const. himself, L. M.; J. E., $1                     71.00
    Buffalo. W. G. Bancroft                                  200.00
    Canandaigua. Hon. M. H. C.                                 1.00
    Canastota. ESTATE of Mrs. Lezetta Mead, by Loring
      Fowler                                                 300.00
    Central Square. W. S. T.                                   0.51
    Deansville. “L.”                                           5.00
    Deer Park. Artemus W. Day                                  8.50
    Evans Center. L. P.                                        0.50
    Gaines. M. and B. H.                                       1.00
    Gloversville. Alanson Judson, $25; Wm. A. Kasson,
      $5, _for Fisk U._                                       30.00
    Irvington. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin                              5.00
    Malone. First Cong. Ch., $34.37; Member First Cong.
      Ch., $2                                                 36.37
    Newburgh. John H. Corwin, to const. MISS LOUISE
      CORWIN, L. M.                                           50.00
    New York. Rev. L. D. Bevan, D. D., $100;—A. Lester
      & Co., Carpet and C., _for Hampton N. and A.
      Inst._                                                 100.00
    Oneida Co. “A Friend”                                     20.00
    Oswego. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            30.00
    Penn Yan. Chas. C. Sheppard                              150.00
    Pharsalia. “Friend”                                        0.15
    Ransomville. John Powley                                   5.00
    Seneca Falls. “A Friend”                                  50.00
    Springville. Lawrence Weber                                3.00
    Troy. “Little Margaret” and Mary F. Cushman                2.00


  NEW JERSEY, $180.14.

    Jersey City. First Cong. Ch.                              40.89
    Mendham. Rev. I. N. Cochran, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Orange. Trinity Cong. Ch., $93.75; A. T. M., 50c          94.25
    Red Bank. Mrs. R. R. Conover, Bbl. of Books.
    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        20.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $2,416.38.

    Alleghany. Plymouth Cong. Ch., _for Mission Work,
      Berea, Ky._                                             34.38
    Hillsdale. Miss Jane Wilson                                2.00
    Pittsburgh. B. Preston                                    25.00
    Washington. ESTATE of Samuel McFarland, by
      Abel M. Evans, Ex.                                   2,343.00
    West Alexander. Thomas McCleery                           10.00
    West Middletown. Mrs. Mary Mehaffey                        2.00


  OHIO, $238.74.

    Andover. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    Bellevue. Elvira Boise, $25; S. W. Boise, $20             45.00
    Cardington. R. M.                                          1.00
    Cleveland. G. A. R.                                        0.50
    Edinburgh. Cong. Ch.                                      17.34
    Geneva. First Cong. Ch., C. Talcott, $5;
      Mrs. G. F. Sadd, $5; Others, $20                        30.00
    Gustavus. Mrs. L. A. King, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Hudson. M. Messer                                         10.00
    Huntsburgh. A. F. Millard, $5; Mrs. M. E. Millard,
      $5                                                      10.00
    Madison. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._         9.25
    Medina. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. _for Chinese M._           2.50
    Oberlin. First Ch. Branch of Oberlin Freed Woman’s
      Aid Soc. by Mrs. W. G. Frost, Treas., $75, _for
      Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._; —“A Friend,” $5,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           80.00
    Painesville. E. E. J.                                      1.00
    Radnor. Edward D. Jones                                    5.00
    Talmadge. Miss Josephine Pierce                            6.00
    Wauseon. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Wayne. H. F. Giddings and wife ($1 of which _for
      Chinese M._)                                             2.00
    Weymouth. Cong. Ch. _for Chinese M._                       2.15
    Zanesville. Mrs. M. A. D.                                  1.00


  ILLINOIS, $623.64.

    Aurora. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Blue Island. Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
    Canton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, $250, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._;—“Mrs. E. S. D.” $60 to const. MISS
      EVELYN L. ROLLS and MISS LILLIE AGNES ROLLS,
      L. M.’s;—James W. Porter $25, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            335.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch.                                    3.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                          24.29
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                15.00
    Galesburg. Mrs. Julia T. Wells                            15.00
    Geneva. Mrs. G. R. Milton                                  5.00
    Lyonsville. Arthur and Annie Armstrong, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    1.50
    Northampton. R. W. Gilliam.                                5.00
    Oneida. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    2.00
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        7.40
    Rochelle. Wm. H. Holcomb, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Rockford. Mrs. David Penfield, $50; Ladies of
      First Cong. Ch., $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        75.00
    Roscoe. Mrs. A. A. Tuttle                                  2.50
    Sandwich. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 5.95


  MICHIGAN, $283.34.

    Flint. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch., $46.24;—Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      $24.21; E. P. C., $1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        71.45
    Hillsdale. J. W. Ford                                      2.00
    Lansing. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                               46.30
    Metamora. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Olivet. Students of Olivet College and Citizens (of
      which Wm. B. Palmer, $20) $60, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._;—Cyrus Ellis (Bbl. Wheat, _for Agl.
      Dept., Talladega, C._), $3.75;—Alex Tison $2            65.75
    Richland. Mrs. S. A. S.                                    0.51
    Romeo. Cong. Ch., $57; E. W. Giddings, $5                 62.00
    Saint Johns. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     23.33


  IOWA, $174.32.

    Chester Centre. Cong. Ch. $23;—Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      $15, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                         38.00
    Cincinnati. W. T. Reynolds                                 2.00
    Council Bluffs. First Cong. Ch. Sab. School _for
      Student, Talladega C._                                  30.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Plymouth Cong.
      Ch. (of which $5 _for Student Aid, Fisk U._)            30.00
    Emerson. E. H. D. F                                        1.00
    Glenwood. Cong. Ch.                                        7.31
    Green. R. L.                                               1.00
    Grinnell. Mrs. Day, $5; _for Student Aid_; —Mrs.
      Kendel, $2; Friends, $1; Mrs. G. $1, _for Millers
      Station, Ga._                                            9.00
    Iowa Falls. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
    Leon. Miss J. K.                                           1.00
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch.                                      22.71
    Osage. Cong. Ch. _for Millers Station, Ga._                5.00
    Riceville. “Friends,” $5; Mrs. B. and Mrs. A. P. $1        6.00
    Strawberry Point. Cong. Soc.                               4.30
    Tabor. “A Friend.”                                         5.00


  WISCONSIN, $118.04.

    Black Earth. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                      5.00
    Delaware. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Durand. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Elkhorn. First Cong. Ch.                                   9.62
    Genoa Junction. Cong. Ch.                                  9.77
    Kenosha. Cong. Ch. _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             50.00
    New Chester. First Cong. Ch.                               1.65
    Plattesville. Cong. Ch.                                   20.00
    Two Rivers. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00


  MINNESOTA, $89.23.

    Lake City. Sab. Sch., by Miss Robinson, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00
    Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                         2.93
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                           16.75
    Plainview. Cong. Ch., $29; and Sab. Sch. $6               35.00
    Wabasha. Cong. Ch.                                         9.55
    Northfield. Minn., Correction. In Dec. number,
      Bethel Sab. Sch. $2.09, should read Blackman Sab.
      Sch. $2.09.
    Waterford. Union Ch. should read Union Sab. Sch. $4.


  KANSAS, $6.60.

    Burlingame. “A Friend”                                     1.00
    Seneca. Cong. Ch.                                          5.60


  NEBRASKA, $26.50.

    Red Willow. “A Friend”                                    26.50


  OREGON, $13.25.

    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch., $12.75; Mrs. M. R. W., 50c.      13.25


  CALIFORNIA, $127.10.

    San Francisco. Receipts of the California Chinese
      Mission                                                127.10


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $130.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch. ($50 of which _for
      Howard U._)                                            120.00
    Washington. Mrs. A. N. Bailey                             10.00


  MARYLAND, $100.

    Baltimore. Rev. Geo. Morris, _for a Teacher, Fisk
      U._                                                    100.00


  KENTUCKY, $10.

    Ashland. Hugh Means                                       10.00


  TENNESSEE, $116.10.

    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              116.10


  NORTH CAROLINA, $102.78.

    Raleigh. Cong. Ch. _for Mendi M._                          1.00
    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition $93.25; First
      Cong. Ch., $8.53                                       101.78


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $311.60.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         311.60


  GEORGIA, $779.02.

    Augusta. Capt. C. H. Prince, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch. Tuition, $459.12; Rent, $12;
      Atlanta U., Tuition, $118; Rent, $22.50                611.62
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, $67.65; Rent, $7         74.65
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition                            82.75


  ALABAMA, $392.02.

    Mobile. Emerson Institute, Tuition                       105.75
    Montgomery. Public School Fund, $175; Cong. Ch.,
      $21                                                    196.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           6.60
    Talladega. Tuition, $80.67;—J. R. Sims, $3, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              83.67


  LOUISIANA, $37.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                         37.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $53.88.

    Bates Mills. “Friends,” _for Tougaloo U._                  2.20
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $39.30; Rent,
      $12.38                                                  51.68


  TEXAS, $1.00.

    Goliad. By Rev. M. T.                                      1.00


  CANADA, $9.

    Montreal. Rev. Henry Wilkes                                5.00
    Paris. Mrs. N. Hamilton                                    4.00


  SCOTLAND, $100.

    Kilmarnock. J. Stewart, _for a Teacher in Fisk U._       100.00


  ENGLAND, $55.20.

    London. “Readers of The Christian,” £11 10s.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              55.20


  AFRICA, $2.

    South Africa. E. Brewer, _for Raleigh, N. C._              2.00

                                                          —————————
                Total                                    $13,889.41

                Total from Oct. 1st to Nov. 30th         $26,577.05


         RECEIPTS OF CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

  I. FROM AUXILIARIES.

    Sacramento Chinese Mission—Chinese pupils                  6.75
    Santa Barbara Chinese Mission—Annual Memberships,
      1879-80: $2 each from Mrs. J. P. Stearnes, N. C.
      Pitcher, Gin Foy, Wong You, Gin Sing, Gin Foon,
      Lue Sam—$14; Collection, $5                             23.15
    Stockton Chinese Mission—Chinese pupils                    3.00
                                                              —————
                Total                                         32.90


  II. FROM CHURCHES.

    San Francisco—First Cong. Church                          18.20
    San Francisco—Bethany Church, Chinese                      1.00
    At annual meeting: Antioch—Rev. John B. Carrington         2.00
    Benicia—$2 each from Mrs. C. B. Deming, Mrs. N. P.
      Smith, Miss H. L. Smith                                  6.00
    Haywards—Wm. Stewart                                       2.00
    Oakland—$2 each from Deacon and Mrs. Snow, A. L.
      Von Blarcom, Mrs. M. S. Post, Rev. S. V.
      Blakeslee, and $5 from Rev. G. Mooar, D. D.             15.00
    Rio Vista—Rev. and Mrs. W. C. Merritt                      2.50
    Sacramento—Rev. and Mrs. I. E. Dwinell                     4.00
    San Francisco—Rev. Aaron Williams, $2; Miss Mary
      Perkins, $2                                              4.00
    Other friends—names not reported                          14.50
                                                              —————
                Total                                         69.25


  III. Bangor, Maine—a friend                                 25.00
                                                              —————
                Grand total                                 $127.10


  E. PALACHE,
  Treas. California Chinese Mission.


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Millbury, Mass. M. D. Garfield                             5.00

    Previously acknowledged in Oct. receipts               1,510.34
                                                           ————————
                Total                                     $1,515.34


  FOR SCHOOL BUILDING, ATHENS, ALA.

    —— “Friend of Missions”                                    1.00
    North Bloomfield, Ohio. Elizabeth Brown                   10.00
    North Bloomfield, Ohio. Annie F. Brown                    10.00
    Painesville, Ohio. Mrs. Emeline Hickok                     5.00
    Painesville, Ohio. Mrs. D. E. Gore                         1.00
    Northfield, Minn. First Cong. S. S. $25,
      incorrectly acknowledged in December number from
      Mich.
                                                              —————
                Total                                         27.00

  Previously acknowledged in Oct. receipts                    56.00
                                                              —————
                Total                                        $83.00


  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Blanchard, Me. “Three Ladies”                              5.00
    New Lebanon Centre, N. Y. Bbl. of C. by Mrs.
      F. W. Everest.                                         ——————

                          ————————————

    Receipts for November                                 13,926.41

                Total from Oct. 1st to Nov. 30th         $28,372.39
                                                         ==========

  H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
  56 Reade St., N. Y.




                       THE NEW YORK TRIBUNE.


        THE TRIBUNE is conceded by eminent men in this country and
        Europe to be “THE LEADING AMERICAN NEWSPAPER.” It is now
        spending more labor and money than ever before to deserve that
        pre-eminence. It secured and means to retain it by becoming
        the medium of the best thought and the voice of the best
        conscience of the time, by keeping abreast of _the highest
        progress_, favoring _the freest discussion_, hearing all sides,
        appealing always to _the best intelligence_ and _the purest
        morality_, and refusing to cater to the tastes of the vile or
        the prejudices of the ignorant.

             _Premiums for 1879-’80.—Extraordinary Offers._

        THE TRIBUNE has always dealt liberally with its friends
        who have used their time and influence in extending its
        circulation, but it now announces a Premium List surpassing in
        liberality any heretofore offered by any newspaper. We take
        pleasure in calling attention to the following:

                   THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE,

        Being the last (1879) edition of CHAMBERS’S ENCYCLOPÆDIA,
        a Dictionary of Universal Knowledge for the People,
        complete and Unabridged, with large additions upon topics
        of special interest to American readers, in twenty
        volumes, the first fourteen comprising the exact and
        entire test of Chambers’s Encyclopædia, omitting only
        the cuts, and the last six containing several thousand
        topics not found in the original work, besides additional
        treatment of many there presented. This portion is
        designed to meet the special wants of American readers,
        supplying the natural deficiencies of the English work.

        The twenty volumes will actually contain _over 12 per
        cent more matter than Appleton’s Cyclopædia_, which sells
        at _eighty dollars_!

        Two of the volumes are now ready for delivery, the third
        is in press and will be ready in a few days, and then
        they will be issued at the rate of two volumes per month
        until the entire twenty volumes are completed, which will
        be about August or September, 1880.

        We offer this valuable work on the following terms:

        =For $12.=—THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE, 20 vols.,
        substantially bound in cloth, and THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE 5
        years to one subscriber.

        =For $18.=—THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE, 20 vols.,
        as above, and the SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE 5 years.

        =For $18.=—THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE, 20 vols.,
        as above, and ten copies of THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE one year.

        =For $27.=—THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE, 20 vols.,
        as above, and twenty copies of THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE one
        year.

        =For $26.=—THE LIBRARY OF UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE, 20 vols.,
        as above, and THE DAILY TRIBUNE 2 years.

        The books will in all cases be sent by mail, express or
        otherwise as the subscriber may direct, at his expense,
        but with no charge for packing. We shall begin sending
        them in the order in which subscriptions have been
        received on the 1st of January, 1880, when certainly five
        and probably six volumes will be ready, and shall send
        thenceforward as subscribers may direct.

                       A MAGNIFICENT GIFT!

           Worcester’s Great Unabridged Dictionary Free!

        THE NEW YORK TRIBUNE will send at the subscriber’s
        expense for freight, or deliver in New York City
        free, Worcester’s Great Unabridged Quarto Illustrated
        Dictionary, bound in sheep, =edition of 1879=, the very
        latest and very best edition of that great work, to any
        one remitting:

        =$10= for a single five-years’ subscription in advance,
        or five one-year subscriptions to THE WEEKLY; or

        =$15= for a single five-years’ subscription in advance,
        or five one-year subscriptions to THE SEMI-WEEKLY, or one
        year’s subscription to THE DAILY; or

        =$30= for a single three-years’ subscription to THE DAILY
        TRIBUNE.

        =For One Dollar= extra the Dictionary can be sent by mail
        to any part of the United States.

             Terms of the Tribune, without Premiums.

                POSTAGE FREE IN THE UNITED STATES.

            DAILY TRIBUNE, 1 year                    $10.00
            SEMI-WEEKLY TRIBUNE 1 year                 3.00
              Five Copies, 1 year, each                2.50
              Ten Copies, 1 year, each                 2.00
            And 1 free copy for every 10 subscribers.

            THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE: Single Copy, 1 year   $2.00
              Five Copies, 1 year, each                1.50
              Ten Copies, 1 year, each                 1.00
            And 1 free copy for every 10 subscribers.

        When the fact is considered that THE WEEKLY TRIBUNE, both in
        the quantity and the quality of its reading matter, is the
        equal of any and the superior of most of the $3 and $4 literary
        and religious papers, and that the SEMI-WEEKLY contains twice
        as much reading matter every week as THE WEEKLY, this reduction
        in price is one of the most notable instances of journalistic
        enterprise.

        Remittances should be made by Draft on New York, Post
        Office Order, or in Registered Letter. Address

                      THE TRIBUNE, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           THE ADVANCE.

                               1880.

         “_Reaching forth unto those things which are before._”

        1. The ADVANCE is a religious journal, published weekly.

        2. It is loyal to “historic Congregationalism” up to
        date, and still more so to the Congregationalism that is
        and is to be.

        3. It is a _news_-paper. It aims to gather and
        _summarize_ the news, sifting out and noting just the
        things that have the most significance.

        4. It is _aggressive_. It does not stick in ruts. It
        hates cant and abhors cowardice.

        5. The ADVANCE is a constantly mediating and
        co-ordinating agency for all the interests which
        specially concern the churches, binding all the “causes,”
        missionary and others, into one cause, so as to bring to
        bear the momentum of the total Christian movement of the
        time in aid of every specific Christian endeavor.

        6. It purposes to be as helpful as possible to all
        pastors.

        7. It keeps in view all the wants of the family, and with
        a warm sympathy for both parents and children sincerely
        endeavors to make itself welcome in every home.

        =TERMS.=—Single subscribers $3 per year in advance. To
        ministers and missionaries, $2.20.

        =OTHER PERIODICALS.=—We club with all the leading Papers
        and Magazines, and am save our subscribers something on
        the price of each if they will order them with their
        ADVANCE. Send for our clubbing list.

        =CHURCH CLUBS.=—If the pastor or any officer or member
        of a church is interested to attempt the increase of our
        subscribers, some advantages are offered, both to new and
        old, by our “Church Club” rate, the particulars of which
        will be sent on application.

        ☛ Sample copies sent free.

                 C. H. HOWARD & CO., Publishers,
                                      Chicago, Ill.


       *       *       *       *       *


                   THE WORLD’S MODEL MAGAZINE!

                        Demorest’s Monthly.

        The Largest in Form, the Largest in Circulation, and the
        Best in Everything that makes a Magazine desirable.

        Demorest’s Monthly Magazine presents a grand combination
        of the entertaining, the useful and the beautiful, with
        stories, lovely oil pictures, steel engravings and other
        art features.

        Single Copies, 25c., post free; Yearly, $3.00,

        With the most costly and valuable prize offered to
        subscribers, a copy of

                     REINHART’S GREAT PICTURE

                          “CONSOLATION,”

                        Size, 20 × 28 in.,

        To each subscriber, post free; or when mounted on canvas
        and a stretcher, and sent free of transportation, 50
        cents extra; or a selection from twenty other valuable
        premiums. “Consolation” is truly a beautiful and artistic
        picture representing a prostrate mother, her grief
        consoled by a group of angels, one of whom bears her
        child in its arms. The picture is full of sentiment,
        and the original, both in color and treatment, so that
        artists cannot distinguish them apart, and combines one
        of the most interesting, artistic and valuable pictures
        ever published (sold at the art shops for $10.00).
        Splendid inducements for agents. Send for specimen copy
        of the Magazine, or postal card for circular giving
        particulars. Address

                                 W. JENNINGS DEMOREST,
                                No. 17 East 14th Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Bros. & Co.

                             BANKERS,

        59 & 61 Wall Street, New York, 211 Chestnut St.,
        Philadelphia, 66 State Street, Boston.

        Issue Commercial Credits, make Cable transfers of Money
        between this Country and England, and buy and sell Bills
        of Exchange on Great Britain and Ireland.

        They also issue, against cash deposited, or satisfactory
        guarantee of repayment,

        Circular Credits for Travellers,

        In DOLLARS for use in the United States and adjacent
        countries, and in POUNDS STERLING, for use in any part of
        the world.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          GET THE BEST.

                          The “OXFORD”

                         [Illustration]

                        TEACHERS’ BIBLES

                     IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                    At prices to suit everybody.

           Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

          THOS. NELSON & SONS, 42 Bleecker Street, New York


       *       *       *       *       *


                       Meneely & Kimberly,

                    BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

           Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.

           Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.

           ☛ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


       *       *       *       *       *


        =A PRINTING PRESS= for =75= cents. With ink roller, =90=
        cents. Both by mail =$ 1.60=. A complete Printing Office,
        viz., press, roller, font of type, type tray, ink, leads,
        furniture, gold bronze, and 50 cards, =$2.25=. All by
        mail for =$3.25=. Sample package of =40= varieties of
        cards, =10= cents. Specimen Book of type, &c., =10=
        cents. YOUNG AMERICA PRESS CO., =35= Murray Street, New
        York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                    Every Man His Own Printer.

                         [Illustration]

        Excelsior =$3= Printing Press.

        Prints cards, labels, envelopes, &c.; larger sizes for
        larger work. For business or pleasure, young or old.
        Catalogue of Presses, Type, Cards, &c., sent for two
        stamps.

        KELSEY & CO., M’f’rs, Meriden, Conn.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                            =MARVIN’S=
                         =FIRE & BURGLAR=
                              =SAFES=
                 =COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK=
                             =SCALES=
                    _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO.,_
                       _265 BROADWAY. N.Y._
                    _627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._


       *       *       *       *       *


                          =73,620 MORE=

               Singer Sewing Machines Sold in ’78

                   THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS YEAR.

             In =1870= we sold =127,833= Sewing Machines.
             In =1878= we sold =356,432= Sewing Machines.

        Our sales have increased enormously every year through
        the whole period of “hard times.”

        We now sell Three-Quarters of all the Sewing Machines
        sold in the World.

        For the accommodation of the Public we have 1,500
        subordinate offices in the United States and Canada, and
        3,000 offices in the Old World and South America.

                       PRICES GREATLY REDUCED.

        Waste no money on “cheap” counterfeits. Send for our
                  handsomely Illustrated Price List.

                   THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY,

             Principal Office, 34 Union Square, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          =W. & B. DOUGLAS=,
                          Middletown, Conn.,
                       =MANUFACTURERS OF PUMPS=,
                 HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP
                 CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS, YARD
                                     HYDRANTS, STREET
                                       WASHERS, ETC.


                            [Illustration]

                         Highest Medal awarded
                         them by the Universal
                         Exposition at Paris,
                         France, in 1867; Vienna,
                         Austria, in 1873; and
                         Philadelphia, 1876.

                           Founded in 1832.
                          Branch Warehouses:
                           85 & 87 John St.
                              NEW YORK,
                                 AND
                           197 Lake Street,
                               CHICAGO.
                 _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


       *       *       *       *       *


                     THE THIRTY-FOURTH VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       American Missionary,

                               1880.


        We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the
        increasing appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the year
        now nearly past, and purpose to spare no effort to make
        its pages of still greater value to those interested in
        the work which it records.

        Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list
        for 1880?

        A little effort on the part of our friends, when making
        their own remittances, to induce their neighbors to
        unite in forming Clubs, will easily double our list, and
        thus widen the influence of our Magazine, and aid in the
        enlargement of our work.

        Under the editorial supervision of Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON,
        aided by the steady contributions of our intelligent
        missionaries and teachers in all parts of the field, and
        with occasional communications from careful observers and
        thinkers elsewhere, the AMERICAN MISSIONARY furnishes
        a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
        among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and
        the Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries
        in Africa.

        It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters
        affecting the races among which it labors, and will give
        a monthly summary of current events relating to their
        welfare and progress.

        Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
        Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read
        it, and assist in its circulation. Begin with the next
        number and the new year. The price is only Fifty Cents
        per annum.

        The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to
        the persons indicated on page 412, December Number.

        Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                              H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.


                         TO ADVERTISERS.

        Special attention is invited to the advertising
        department of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular
        readers are thousands of Ministers of the Gospel,
        Presidents, Professors and Teachers in Colleges,
        Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
        a specially valuable medium for advertising Books,
        Periodicals, Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of
        Learning, Church Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

        Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price
        charged for space in its columns, considering the extent
        and character of its circulation.

        Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the
        month, in order to secure insertion in the following
        number. All communications in relation to advertising
        should be addressed to

                            J. H. DENISON, Adv’g Agent,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

        ☛ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising
        Department of the “American Missionary” can aid us in
        this respect by mentioning, when ordering goods, that
        they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *

DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.


        1. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text
          by =equal signs=.

        2. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors
          have been silently corrected.

        3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as
          printed.

        4. Ditto marks have been replaced by the text they
          represent in order to facilitate alignment for eBooks.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 34, NO. 1, JANUARY, 1880 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.