VOL. XXXV.                                            NO. 1.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                          JANUARY, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    SALUTATION—FINANCIAL                                         1
    PARAGRAPHS                                                   2
    RETIRING FROM BUSINESS—WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT—ARTHINGTON
      MISSION                                                    3
    MORE MISSIONARIES—THE GOSPEL WAY                             4
    WEEKLY OFFERINGS—OBJECTION CONSIDERED: Rev. Geo. Harris      5
    A FEW WORDS TO THE CHURCHES                                  6
    DISCUSSION OF INDIAN AFFAIRS                                 7
    WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN: Miss Mary E. Sawyer                  9
    BENEFACTIONS                                                12
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese                      13
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                        15


  THE FREEDMEN.

    THE “CENTRAL SOUTH”: Pres. G. F. Magoun, D. D.              16
    SOUTH CAROLINA, CHARLESTON—“Tannerism” in Church
      Work—Charm of Old Songs                                   18
    GEORGIA—Atlanta University                                  19
    GEORGIA—Georgia Conference                                  20
    ALABAMA—Visit to Marion                                     21
    TENNESSEE—Revival at Memphis                                22


  THE CHINESE.

    LETTERS FROM PUPILS                                         23


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    CHRISTMAS GIFT LIKE BELL BENNET’S: Mrs. T. N. Chase         25


  RECEIPTS                                                      28


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                  32

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




                 American Missionary Association,

                      56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    H. L. CLAPP,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    A. J. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. C. C. PAINTER, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of Thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXV.      JANUARY, 1881.      NO. 1.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


SALUTATION.

We know of no Society that has more occasion for expressing
cheerful congratulations than the American Missionary Association;
and we wish its patrons and workers a thankful and prosperous Happy
New Year.

By the merciful blessing of God and the prayerful liberality of
His people, we have been sustained in our work. The number of our
pupils has multiplied. The Holy Spirit has been poured out upon
our churches. A great improvement in public sentiment South has
been witnessed. Questions relating to the policy of the government
have been settled. We have escaped the bondage of debt, and, better
still, have received a munificent gift for additional school
facilities, and, like the prophet of Israel, are ready to exclaim,
“The God of Heaven, He will prosper us, therefore we, His servants,
will arise and build.”

Our missionaries and teachers at home and abroad have been spared
and blessed abundantly. Let us rejoice, but not stop in our work.
Our best joys spring forth from busiest toil. The work before us is
great—greater than ever.

We are called most encouragingly to stand on our Western shores,
and in the name of Christ to welcome the Chinaman. We bear good
tidings amidst ice and snow in the Northland to the American
Indian. Kansas utters a voice for her Freedmen refugees; while
the sunny South, we believe, has almost passed its winter of
discontent. Seed time, with more favoring skies, is right upon us;
and Africa—land of shadows, land of trouble and wrong—from her vast
domains is stretching out her hand for our Freedmen to come over
and help. There is no quarter of the globe where the principles
we advocate are not wanted. The millennial year rushes on to our
view. It is a question of prayer—a question of sacrifice and
thanksgiving—a question of the patience of hope and the labor of
love.

God grant us all a preparation for the hour and all its
possibilities.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL.

The receipts in our treasury for the two months of the present
fiscal year (Oct. and Nov.) are $29,258.57, as against $26,577.05
for the corresponding months of last year, showing an increase
of $2,681.52, and are gratifying as a response to our appeal for
enlargement, made at our annual meeting at Norwich. Never before
was such an appeal of ours met in a more business-like way than
at that meeting. There was no hasty vote calling for large sums
of money the coming year, but a discriminating examination, and a
strong setting forth in reports and addresses of the great need
of enlargement. We have since ventured to suggest twenty-five per
cent. of an advance over last year. This is indeed inadequate to
the pressing and increasing claims made upon us by the wants of the
field, but it will be a great relief. The advance as shown in these
two months is but nine per cent. We are persuaded that a thoughtful
purpose on the part of pastors, churches and individual friends
will easily secure the larger percentage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The story we publish in our children’s department, by Mrs. T. N.
Chase, is worthy of a word of explanation. The account she gives of
the Georgia colored school-teacher, her efforts for a school-house
and for the education of her sister, is strictly true; but as Mrs.
Chase wrote before Christmas, she was obliged to anticipate a
little. The fact is, the girl never got the $300, which Mrs. Chase
says, in a note to us, is needful for the school-house alone. We
see no way out of the difficulty now, unless some good Christian
mothers will send us the sum named. If they will do this, we will
warrant there will be more than a large school of colored children
who will believe that Mrs. Chase’s narrative is a very good one.
And what would Mrs. Chase think to get $300 for her story?

       *       *       *       *       *

President Fairchild of Berea, Ky., in a private letter, gives
a very interesting account of a convention of the Young Men’s
Christian Association at Bowling Green. Two Berea students, one
white and the other colored, attended the meeting, and gave a
report of the proceedings on their return. It appears that both
were welcomed by the Association, while Mr. Titus, the colored
man, was treated with marked attention, many taking pains to make
his acquaintance. The feature of chief interest at the meeting was
the discussion of questions relating to the religious education of
the Freedmen. Mr. Titus was urged to assist in the organization
of Christian Associations among the colored people in Louisiana.
The tone of the meeting was exceedingly favorable. Pres. Fairchild
concludes as follows: “A glorious time for work in the South is
just before us.”

       *       *       *       *       *

It is said that the tendency now is for the few to give largely,
while the gifts of the churches, as such, are less. Sad, if true.
The recent large gifts of the generous few are as gratifying as
they are surprising. They are one of the hopeful signs of the
substantial growth of Christian liberality and consecration. But
if they are to be purchased by the drying up of the charities
of the many, it is in the end no boon, for woe to the churches
when they do not share in giving, even to the widow’s mite, for
the spread of the Gospel. A piety that delegates its charities
and self-sacrifices to the few will die. Such a state of affairs
is like the Sahara of parching sands with a few green oases, as
compared with the fertile and well cultivated lands where each
spear of grass and blade of corn does its part towards the golden
and abundant harvest.

       *       *       *       *       *


RETIRING FROM BUSINESS.

It is a debated question whether a man should retire from business
when he has accumulated a competency. On the one hand, tired
nature pleads for rest, and on the other it is claimed that the
retired man is not only useless, but unhappy. A gentleman gave us
the other day what seems to be the true solution—and the charm
of his plan is that he is carrying it out in his own case. It is
that the wealthy man while still active, should retire from his
secular business and give himself to efficient service in mission
and charitable organizations, and in Christian work for the poor,
and the advancement of Christ’s kingdom. There is wide room for
such workers. We venture to say that among those most efficient on
mission, college and charitable boards in this country are such
men, and there is need of many more. A still larger share of the
reliable members of such boards are men yet in active life, whose
business will not permit them to devote the time needed to the most
efficient service in charitable work. The man who has accumulated
his fortune, or at least his competence, has also accumulated an
amount of experience and practical knowledge that would be of
immense value in Christian work. Is it not, then, wise to retire
from work, and yet work? The change would be rest and usefulness.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT.

We have received many cheering words since our Annual Meeting at
Norwich, through the press and by letters from the long-tried
friends of this Association.

The following, from our honored Vice President, Col. G. C. Hammond,
is a good illustration of the appreciative and hopeful tone
exhibited by the many of those who give bountifully and prayerfully
for our work.

“Dear Brother: I was anxious to be at your anniversary at Norwich,
and disappointed that my health prevented. You may well suppose
with what relish I have devoured the last ‘Missionary.’ I feel
constrained to write you a word of congratulation, not intended
to tax your valuable time for a reply, but to assure you that,
so far as I can judge, the papers presented to you at that
time, and now printed, by far exceed any heretofore presented
within my recollection. The obstacles that lie in your path, the
encouragement to work, and the plans and principles which govern
the Association in their labors, are laid down so plainly, and so
commend themselves to the appreciation of Christians, that it would
seem that means must flow into the treasury in no stinted measure.
But, alas, how true it is that the love of money shuts out even
from Christian souls the just appreciation of the Saviour’s claims.
My prayer is that God will, by His spirit, make His children
appreciate the great joy of giving. How much they would gain by
liberal giving!”

       *       *       *       *       *


ARTHINGTON MISSION—A SIGNIFICANT ANSWER TO PRAYER.

It will be remembered by our readers that a little more than a year
since, the Executive Committee of this Association voted that on
receipt of £3,000 from Mr. Arthington and a like amount from the
British public, raised through the efforts of Dr. O. H. White,
it would undertake the establishment of a new mission in Eastern
Africa. Dr. White has been laboring patiently with fair success,
and from present indications we judge he will be able to secure the
balance needful during the coming season.

The following extract from a recent letter from him is very
significant. “A gentleman in London, who heard me preach six months
ago in Scotland, came to our office and said, ‘I will give £100 to
your Arthington Mission on condition that some other person will
give another £100.’ So I went in to find the person. After seeing
some, and writing to others, I found a man who also heard me in
Edinburgh, and he gave the £100. I then saw the first man and told
him I had the money, and he said, ‘I will not give in the money
just now, but I will pledge another £100 on the same condition.’
But I had called on so many in the past year, that really I did not
know which way to turn. So I laid the case before God, and had in
that connection the most _direct answer_ ever given to me.

“The very next day a lady came to the office and said, ‘I felt all
the afternoon yesterday that I ought to go to London and give you
£100 for the proposed new mission, and here it is.’ It was a £100
bank-note. I asked her name, that I might write a receipt. She said
‘No.’ I said ‘Give me your initials.’ She said ‘No, put it down to
“a friend,” and you may see me again.’ So when the London gentleman
pays in his £200 we shall have £400.”

       *       *       *       *       *


MORE MISSIONARIES—THE GOSPEL WAY.

There never before was a time when the openings for missionary
endeavors were so abundant. Barriers which formerly opposed, have
been broken down almost everywhere. In many places there is some
condition of things that invites the Gospel directly or indirectly.

This is notable on the Pacific coast, where the Chinese are so
eager to learn English that they are more than ready to use
the Bible as a textbook. Nor are the Chinese peculiar in this.
Knowledge of the English language is equal to a competency in other
lands, and the Bible can be freely used in teaching it.

Commerce has also removed many barriers; and what is of equal
importance, it has necessitated the building of ships, the
construction of railroads, the laying out of highways in the
desert, and a telegraph for every quarter of the globe. The press
has done its share of work as well. Through it, intelligence has
penetrated almost to the remotest bounds of heathendom. All these
things have made way for more missionaries. To this it must be
added that the increase of missionary organizations and the natural
development of their operations, all multiply the demand for more
men to run to and fro throughout the world, heralding the tidings
of joy unto all people.

Still another barrier has been virtually removed. Once _money_ was
lacking, but now the church of Christ has the means needful to
send forth all the men that the new condition of things demands.
Not that the wealth is yet consecrated, but it is in possession,
and by the simplest gift of grace from the Lord of the harvest, it
will be forthcoming when required. The men have also been raised
up. They have not enlisted, but they have been trained. The records
of our colleges show now, and have shown, an increased number of
students as the years go by. New colleges have been springing up
over the country, until the list can be reckoned by scores and
hundreds. From these classic halls armies of men march forth,
brave, sacrificing, full of life and hope, fitted for missionary
endeavors, and able—God helping them—to capture the world for
Christ.

There is neither lack of opportunity, money or men for the domain
of missions. The trouble is that the men and the means have not
as yet been transferred. There is some one thing lacking which no
human power can supply.

It is a question of _disposition_ on the part of those who hold the
wealth, and of the men fitted for the service. God only is able to
deal with this question of disposition successfully. He can do it,
and we can help.

This brings us directly to our part in the work. How we are to
do it is no mystery. Our Saviour has pointed to us the way—“Pray
ye, therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that He will send forth
laborers into His harvest.” Our call is a call to prayer. That
is the one thing lacking. Not that no prayers are offered, but
that, as yet, the prayers of God’s people for this object are not
sufficiently abundant. The church has not qualified itself to pray
as it ought, by right living. More Godly sincerity, more humility,
more faith, more charity, are needful to elevate the tone of piety
in the Church, until its prayers shall lay hold on the promises,
with a power that God himself has already rendered irresistible.
Then He will send forth the laborers into His harvest. Then the
money and the men for the grandest and most complete missionary
enterprises will be lifted from their moorings amidst worldliness,
and transported, freely, graciously, from sea to sea, and up
the rivers to the ends of the earth. In these days, when we
are especially reminded of the advent of Him who came to bring
good tidings of great joy for all people; when we solemnly and
joyfully set apart a week for prayer; in these days when the great
heart-beatings of those who manage our missionary organizations
find vent only in unceasing calls for more missionaries, it is a
great relief—indeed, a rest and assurance—to follow right on in the
Gospel way.

Already the day has dawned, and as we pray, joining with the angels
and the heavenly host, deep calling unto deep, over against the
prayer we are taught to utter will follow the certain interrogation
from the Captain of our salvation, which answers itself, lovingly,
royally and sufficiently: “Whom shall I send and who will go for
us?”

       *       *       *       *       *


WEEKLY OFFERINGS—AN OBJECTION CONSIDERED.

REV. GEO. HARRIS, PROVIDENCE. R. I.

It is objected to the system of weekly offerings, that it
practically does away with the presentation from the pulpit of the
claims of our missionary societies. The objection is not a serious
one, and serves only to show that the real difficulty lies further
back than the method of giving. It proceeds on the assumption
that in churches where occasional collections are taken, sermons
are preached annually by the pastor or by the secretaries on the
claims of all the principal societies. This is not true. There
are very few churches, with whatever methods of giving, where
sermons are frequently heard on missionary subjects. The objection
assumes that under the system of weekly offerings sermons are not
and cannot profitably be preached on the claims of our missionary
societies. This, also, is not true. In these churches such sermons
are sometimes preached, and may be very effective, taking the years
together.

The objection assumes that people are to be interested in missions
chiefly by listening to frequent discourses on the subject, while
the truth is, that preaching is only one method among others. The
real difficulty, I have said, lies further back than the particular
method of giving which may be used by a church. The difficult thing
is to produce an intelligent and sustained interest in Christian
work beyond local limits. This difficulty has been felt for years
and cannot be met by simply making public appeals from time to
time. There are various methods which may be employed with some
success under any system of giving, but which will leave much to
be done anywhere. It should be well understood, first of all, that
it is the duty, not of secretaries, but of pastors, to keep the
people alive to the progress of Christ’s kingdom in the world. The
first condition is, that pastors be well informed about missionary
enterprises and deeply in sympathy with them. If it were certain
that the pastors know the progress and plans of missions, and that
they are really solicitous to remove the ignorance and apathy of
the people, the battle would be more than half won. Now, when the
pastor has an intelligent interest in missions at home and abroad,
the following suggestions may be useful:

A sermon devoted to this subject may be preached occasionally, and
the preacher may enrich sermons on other subjects by illustrations
from the multiform conditions and incidents of missionary work,
and thus accomplish two objects at the same time. But the second
service, which should be devoted to instruction rather than
persuasion, may frequently become a missionary meeting.

The prayers of the pastor may be made more effective for missions
than his sermons. If he makes mention in his prayers of the
servants of Christ who are toiling among the heathen, or the
Freedmen, or the Western settlers, and prays, not with a tedious
enumeration, but with fervor and definiteness, he will put missions
on the hearts of the people. What has a place frequently in our
prayers has a place in our sympathies. Yet how often the petitions
of public worship are confined to the boundaries of the parish.

Something may be done by increasing the circulation of missionary
magazines. Let the annual contribution make as many life members as
possible, to whom these publications will be sent.

Thus there are various means to be used in the interest of
missionary work. What is needed is the flavor of missions in
the life of the churches, the vision of Christ’s kingdom kept
continually before the imagination and faith of the people, the
proportions of the local, not magnified into excessive size, but
brought into true harmony with the greatness of our Redeemer’s
work for the race. Not all people can be aroused into interest for
missionary work by any methods; whatever the zeal of the pastor,
some indifference will remain. But if he has the missionary spirit,
he will not be contented with an occasional preaching. He will
determine the tone of worship and the direction of all endeavors
by his enlarged view of God’s plan for the redemption of men. New
suggestions, allusions, illustrations and prayers will swell the
current of sympathy for missions, and increase contributions under
any method of giving.

But, at all events, if the pastor thinks it wise to preach on the
subject, or introduce a Secretary when collections are to be taken,
there is no reason why he may not pursue the same course when
pledges of money are made only once a year.

       *       *       *       *       *


A FEW WORDS TO THE CHURCHES.

It is customary for our District Secretaries at this season to
send to the churches letters and circulars containing statements
of receipts and appeals for future co-operation. We give below
extracts from circulars issued from our offices at Boston and
Chicago, commending them as pertinent, timely, and fitted to
provoke unto love and good works.

The following comes from Secretary Woodworth:

  The battle for the Republic and her institutions will be fought
  _in the South_; and for the simple reason that the battle will be
  fought where the causes of the battle exist, and the principles
  which underlie our free institutions encounter most of opposition
  and danger.

  And this battle for the foundations of the Republic, and for the
  administration of every public right and interest, is now upon
  us. The war itself involved no graver questions, and called for
  no higher style of patriotic sacrifice and zeal. Every appliance
  of Christian education and of moral power must be enlisted to
  uplift the people and unify the nation; and for this work the
  time favors. For four years, at least, we have an open course;
  the political signs are more auspicious; and we may hope to _push
  far ahead_ the forces of intellectual and moral regeneration.

  The colored people are intensely loyal to the rule of majorities;
  they believe, heart and soul, in those who broke their chains;
  they accept their principles, and receive joyfully the lessons
  of their teachers and their preachers. With them we can build
  up free schools, Christian churches and homes, and plant and
  develop the seeds and forces which have their type and prophecy
  in Plymouth Rock. Now is our time.

  Arm them with a true manhood; educate them into a true knowledge
  of their duties to God and to man, and they will bring peace and
  strength to our land, now threatened with storm and wreck, and
  prepare the way for the redemption of the Dark Continent itself.

Secretary Powell’s appeal concludes with special requests, inviting
immediate attention. He says:

  The Executive Committee ask for an increase of twenty-five per
  cent. this coming year to the contributions from churches and
  individuals.

  1. If your Church has not yet made a contribution to the American
  Missionary Association during the year, will you please ask them
  to do so before the year ends?

  2. When your Church reviews the benevolence of the past year, and
  plans for the next, will you please see to it that the A. M. A.
  is placed on the list of causes for which contributions are to be
  made, and that the time of year when the contribution is to be
  taken is chosen with a full view of the great importance of our
  work? The time of year selected often makes all the difference
  between a large and a small contribution.

  3. At the monthly concert will you please plan so that the work
  of the A. M. A. will have a place in the prayer and thought of
  your people, and that some field or branch of our work shall be
  reported? The despised races of America, and those who, in great
  self-denial, privation, and sometimes opposition, labor for them,
  should not be forgotten when God’s people meet to pray for the
  conversion of the world.

  4. Will pastors please arrange so that at some time during the
  year they will preach a sermon to their people on the work of the
  A. M. A.? The November number of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY will be
  found rich in fact and suggestion for such a discourse. The theme
  will prove to be of great interest both to preacher and hearer.

  5. Will you endeavor to enlarge the circle of the readers of our
  monthly magazine, THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY?

  Specimen copies in any number will be sent you free if you so
  request. The Magazine gives reliable information respecting our
  work, and notices the current events that relate to the welfare
  and progress of the races for whom we labor. It will be found a
  helpful factor in the development of an intelligent, patriotic
  and tender piety to the membership of the churches.

  May we not confidently look for the co-operation of every one
  into whose hand this appeal comes to make certain that the
  increase asked for by our Executive Committee shall be secured?
  Plan for it, pray for it, talk about it, interest others in it,
  and don’t forget to _give_ for it.

       *       *       *       *       *


DISCUSSION OF INDIAN AFFAIRS.

We rejoice in the continued agitation of the Indian problem. It
is only under the shelter of popular indifference that wrong
and revenge become the order of the day—with murders, wars and
boundless expense. Under “the sunlight of publicity” the wrongs
are detected and the remedies are projected and applied. Just
now we are favored with three valuable papers on this subject.
In the first place we have the report of the Committee of Indian
Affairs, giving a very encouraging statement of the progress of the
Indians in the arts of civilization. We have next the elaborate
report of Hon. Carl Schurz, Secretary of the Interior, in which,
with a frankness as rare as it is commendable, he acknowledges the
change of views and policy of the Administration in relation to
Indian affairs. He then with great clearness outlines its present
policy, and takes occasion to speak minutely of the case of the
Poncas. The injustice done to them in their original removal from
Dakota is admitted, but it is also clear to him that it “would
be contrary, alike to their own interests and to those of the
country at large, to remove them from their present homes. This
conclusion is arrived at by reason of various considerations, such
as the fact that their present condition in the Indian Territory is
prosperous; that they do not themselves want to return North, and
also because if they are removed back to Dakota, the other Northern
Indians now in the Indian Territory would be made restless with a
desire to follow their example. This would, in all probability,
result in an extensive evacuation of the Indian Territory, and of
that part of it which contains the lands coveted by the intruders,
and which lands are held against them on the ground that they are
reserved for Indian settlement. It is obvious,” says the Secretary,
“that the evacuation by the Indians of the region held for Indian
settlement, and defended on that very ground against intruders,
would be apt greatly to encourage and stimulate the projects of
invasion, which, although repeatedly repelled, are pursued by
evil-disposed persons with persistent activity.” The last of these
papers is the President’s message, in which he endorses and briefly
recapitulates the views of the Secretary of the Interior in regard
to the Indians. We clip from this a few paragraphs presenting the
attitude of the Administration:

“It gives me great pleasure to say that our Indian affairs appear
to be in a more hopeful condition now than ever before. The
Indians have made gratifying progress in agriculture, herding and
mechanical pursuits. The introduction of the freighting business
among them has been remarkably fruitful of good results, in
giving many of them congenial and remunerative employment, and
in stimulating their ambition to earn their own support. Their
honesty, fidelity and efficiency as carriers are highly praised.
The organization of a police force of Indians has been equally
successful in maintaining law and order upon the reservations,
and in exercising a wholesome moral influence among the Indians
themselves.

“Much care and attention has been devoted to the enlargement of
educational facilities for the Indians. The means available for
this important object have been very inadequate. A few additional
boarding-schools at Indian agencies have been established, and
the erection of buildings has been begun for several more, but an
increase of the appropriations for this interesting undertaking is
greatly needed to accommodate the large number of Indian children
of school age. The number offered by their parents from all parts
of the country for education in the Government schools is much
larger than can be accommodated with the means at present available
for that purpose. The number of Indian pupils at the Normal School
at Hampton. Va., under the direction of General Armstrong, has been
considerably increased, and their progress is highly encouraging.
The Indian School established by the Interior Department in 1879,
at Carlisle, Pa., under the direction of Captain Pratt, has been
equally successful. It has now nearly 200 pupils of both sexes,
representing a great variety of the tribes east of the Rocky
Mountains. The pupils in both these institutions receive not
only an elementary English education, but are also instructed in
house-work, agriculture and useful mechanical pursuits.

“The interest shown by Indian parents, even among the so-called
wild tribes, in the education of their children, is very gratifying,
and gives promise that the results accomplished by the efforts now
making will be of lasting benefit.

“I concur with the Secretary of the Interior in expressing the
earnest hope that Congress will at this session take favorable
action on the bill providing for the allotment of lands on the
different reservations in severalty to the Indians, with patents
conferring fee-simple title inalienable for a certain period, and
the eventual disposition of the residue of the reservations, for
general settlement, with the consent and for the benefit of the
Indians, placing the latter under the equal protection of the laws
of the country. This measure, together with a vigorous prosecution
of our educational efforts, will work the most important and
effective advance toward the solution of the Indian problem, in
preparing for the gradual merging of our Indian population in the
great body of American citizenship.”

We have never doubted the honest purpose of President Hayes’
Administration to deal justly and wisely with the Indian problem,
and the plan it now proposes must meet the approbation of all
good citizens. The great question still remains: How far will the
Nation insist on the necessary legislation by Congress to carry
out these plans? It is in this point of view that we hail with
gratification the continued agitation of the subject, even if it
should involve differences of opinion among the warmest friends
of the Indians. And there are such differences. For example, it
is said that the claim of great improvement among the Indians, as
shown in their making demand for lands in severalty, and in their
progress in agricultural industries, is mere rhetoric, for it has
been repeated over and over again for years, in the reports of the
Indian Department. “Fine words butter no parsnips” for the Indian,
any more than for the white man. Give to the Indian his patents and
secure to him his rights. The _doing of it_ is the thing demanded.

Then, too, Mr. Tibbles and Bright Eyes are still on the war
path, with a following so earnest and respectable as to command
attention. We do not pronounce on the justice of their claim, but
we do welcome the agitation. The great thing to be dreaded is the
relegation of the Indian question to indifference and neglect. It
has many aspects, and its permanent and righteous settlement is the
immediate and imperative duty of the nation.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S WORK FOR WOMAN.

MISS MARY E. SAWYER.

A Paper read at the Women’s Meeting, held in connection with the
Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association at Norwich,
Ct.

Before every Southern teacher to whom comes the opportunity of
presenting this cause, so dear to us, to the Christian women of the
North, two pictures rise.

Looking upon the one, you would shrink back in dismay, wondering
if it be not hopeless to try and illumine a darkness so gloomy,
to raise a class so utterly buried in ignorance, superstition
and sin. But, could we turn to you the other view, show the work
done, acquaint you with the trials, the sacrifices, the glorious
victories over fiery temptations, the patient continuance in
well-doing in the face of obstacles almost insurmountable, then,
indeed, you might be tempted to take the other extreme and feel
that missionaries are hardly needed among a people whose Christian
record shines brighter than our own. So, coming as pledged
witnesses before you to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, we shrink from the vastness of the undertaking, for
while exactly fulfilling the last requirement and telling nothing
but the truth, we keenly realize the many contradictions, and know
that the whole truth cannot be told in a single hour—can never,
indeed, be fully known till seen in the light of eternity.

We read of nations with no word for home. Come through the cabins
of the South and you will find not the name but the reality
wanting. You will not find there any incentive or help to personal
modesty, any retirement or any sense of impropriety in the state of
things. From these influences and homes many of our girls come to
us with minds and characters such as might be expected from such
surroundings. We sometimes speak of them as _children_, but the
comparison is hardly just. Never do I realize more keenly their
deprivations than after talking with Northern children—little
children whose precocity, to one fresh from the South, seems
almost alarming, suggestive of brain fevers and early death. From
babyhood their wits have been quickened by contact with other and
mature minds, their many questions wisely answered till they have
_absorbed_ knowledge enough to be intelligent companions before
their so-called education begins. But put them in the place of
the colored children, remove all books, all papers, all pictures,
let them have no knowledge of the outside world, let all their
questions be addressed to people as ignorant as themselves, and you
will find the youth of sixteen far behind the child of six.

To many of the girls, entering school is like entering a new world.
They sit for the first time in their lives at a well ordered table,
utterly at a loss as to the proper manner of conducting themselves.
The refined manners of the older students bewilder them.

The door of a teacher’s room is suddenly and unceremoniously thrown
open, and two or three girls march silently before her to the
fire, and standing with vacant faces by its warmth, are perfectly
unconscious of any impropriety in such a mode of entrance, or of
the need of a single word of explanation. It is no uncommon thing
for a girl to throw herself, fully dressed, on the outside of her
freshly-made bed and there pass the night, having no conception of
properly undressing and going to bed.

Our school work, then, includes much more than one would at first
imagine. Each girl has some part in the household work, and must
be taught the neatest, quickest and best method of doing it. This
does not mean once showing, but careful, patient oversight for
days and weeks. Her room, clean and tidy, when given her, must be
kept in the same condition, and this necessitates very frequent
and very thorough inspection, till she at length comprehends fully
that a hasty use of the broom, leaving the sweepings under the bed
or behind the door, a scrambling up of all loose articles into one
pile on the closet floor, or a set of drawers with finger marks
outside and a motley collection of clean and dirty clothing within,
will not satisfy the requirement.

The same care is exercised over her person; clean, whole clothing,
well-kept hair and thorough bathing transform her outwardly, while
the loud, boisterous tones, the coarse expressions, the uncouth
manners are toned and softened by constant care.

Sewing, in which they are woefully deficient, receives due
attention, and girls whose hands can manage a plough or a cotton
bag much more easily than they can hold a needle, become at the
end of the course very nice seamstresses, whose work would rejoice
the hearts of the advocates of hand sewing. In these classes,
besides plain sewing of every description, the girls are taught
patching and darning, and the cutting and putting together of
garments, and in at least one of the colleges, each girl who
graduates must leave behind a garment cut and made entirely by
herself, as a specimen of her skill.

A few minutes daily are spent in giving the assembled school a
brief summary of the important items of news in the great outside
world, and more or less time is devoted to plain talks on practical
matters, manners, morals and care of the health,—the last a
subject, by the way, with which they seem wholly unacquainted, and
which the girls especially need to become familiar with. Dress
reform in two directions needs to be impressed upon them, as the
uncouth garb of the girls from the woods, and the thin slippers,
cheap finery, powder, paint and corsets laced to the last verge of
human endurance donned by the city girls, bear testimony.

But this is not all. These girls are sent to us to be trained for
Christ, and knowing the utter folly of attempting to build up
a pure, noble womanhood on any other foundation than Christian
principle, we try by all our system and watchfulness and oversight
to establish them in this, earnestly praying the Master to send
from on high that blessing without which all our labors will be
nothing worth.

Have you never in some late Spring watched the brown leaf-buds, as
day after day they seemed to remain unchanged, till you were tired
of waiting for the fulfilment of their promise? And do you remember
your joyful surprise when, leaving them thus at night you woke to
find the whole tree aglow with the fresh, tiny bits of color from
the bursting buds? So we feel often as we wake to realize that the
rough, awkward girl who came to us has developed into the quiet,
refined Christian woman, leaving us for her life work. Nor are we
the only ones to see the transformation.

“I am looking to see what kind of a woman you are,” said a child to
one of the Talladega students as she opened her log cabin school in
the pine wood. “You look to me like a white lady.” The teacher’s
face was of the most pronounced African type, and black as ebony,
but her quiet dignity and refined manner excited the child’s wonder
and elicited the unconscious compliment.

As teachers, these girls carry the missionary spirit with them,
and feeling their responsibility, open Sunday-schools and engage
in temperance work as surely as they begin their day schools. Into
the cabins they carry, as far as may be, a regard for neatness,
order, and those little adornments which make home what it is.
Happy the young colored minister who wins one of them for his wife,
thus establishing a home which shall supplement his sermons and
act as leaven in the homes of his people. More than one graduate
of the colored theological seminaries is gravely hampered in his
usefulness by an ignorant, careless wife. As one frankly expressed
the matter to a brother minister, “My wife is more trouble to me
than all my work put together.” And in thus training our girls to
be careful, efficient housewives, we know we may be moulding not
them alone, nor their immediate households, but the whole community
of women over whom, as ministers’ wives and the most thoroughly
educated women, they will exert a powerful influence.

But we have deeply felt the need of more direct and personal
influence over the women. The work of the school needs to be
supplemented by that of the missionary: mother and daughter must
work together for the best result. But the teacher had little time
after the school duties were performed, and the lady missionaries
so sorely longed for, were very few in number. Why not, then, work
through our tried colored helpers? The description of the way this
has been done in other States I leave to those whose experience
is wider than my own. In Alabama, we have a “Woman’s Missionary
Association,” holding annual meetings in connection with the State
conference of churches, and having auxiliary societies in these
several churches. The colored women who compose these societies
have heartily and faithfully assumed the duties devolving upon
them, and helping others have themselves been helped.

The work done is varied, no rigid plan being laid down. Sewing
classes for the women and girls, prayer-meetings for the mothers,
Bible-readings, visiting from house to house, bearing food and
medicine for the sick, clothing for the destitute, and comfort
and sympathy for all, health talks—than which nothing can be more
needed,—literary societies to develop their untrained minds,
foreign missionary meetings to broaden their sympathies; all these
and other ways of working for the Lord are reported at their last
meeting. In April, for the first time, this annual meeting was
visited by several white Southern ladies. Our surprise at their
coming was only equalled by their amazement at the revelations.

“You put our ladies to the blush,” said one. “You are far ahead of
us in Christian work.”

“Only to think,” exclaimed another as she listened to the carefully
prepared papers and systematic reports,—“Only to think that we have
kept such women as these in slavery!”

There are bright, promising girls all over the South, who, to make
just such women as these, need only your help. You cannot leave
your home duties to go yourself to them, but you can provide the
means by which they may be fitted to act as your substitutes among
their people. “Ten times one is ten,” you know, and the girl to
whom you lend a hand may win many more souls into the kingdom. They
stand to-day on the border: your arm lifting, they will come into
power and usefulness: your heart closed to them, they will sink
back into the old life. There must be many in this room to-day who
have aided this work by gifts dearer to them than their own lives.
Does not the scene come back to you, when through blinding tears
you looked for the last time on brother or husband or son, as for
love of God and country the dear ones marched away to find a grave
beneath the Southern skies? They rest from their labors. It remains
for us, for their dear sake, to see that this work they so nobly
begun shall be as honorably carried on.

Doubtless the Lord could perfect this work without our aid, but He
has chosen to entrust it to our keeping. And with every instinct
of humanity, every impulse of patriotism, every principle of
Christianity urging us to the work, shall we not receive it as from
our Saviour’s hand, holding fast that which we have, that no man
take our crown?

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. Cyrus H. McCormick has given $100,000 to the Presbyterian
Theological Seminary of Chicago, to place it entirely out of debt.

The late David N. Lord, of New York City, left by will $100,000 for
foreign missions, and $50,000 to the American Bible Society. He
also bequeathed $62,500 to local objects of charity.

Mr. R. L. Stewart, of New York City, has given $200,000 to be
divided equally between Princeton College and Princeton Theological
Seminary, to be applied for the endowment of Professorships.

By the will of Mrs. Altana Wescott, of Jersey City, nearly $100,000
is given to institutions connected with the Episcopal Church.

The widow of the Cologne banker, Von Oppenheim, has given $150,000
for a hospital for poor children of all denominations, in memory of
her late husband.

Mr. Wm. B. Spooner, of Boston, left by will $3,000, the income of
which is to be expended for the education of the colored people
at the South. He also made liberal provision for the State Total
Abstinence Society and the National Temperance Society of New York,
besides other bequests to worthy objects.

Mr. John T. Crawford, of Cincinnati, has left an estate valued from
$30,000 to $100,000, to be applied for a home for aged colored men.
His directions were that the institution be built on College Hill.
There seems to be some doubt about the ability of the executors to
carry out the conditions of the bequest.

The American Presbyterian Board of Missions has received from the
estate of the late Mrs. Lapsley, of New Albany, Ind., the sum of
$215,000, with the prospect of receiving $60,000 or $70,000 more
from the same source.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


Africa.

—Sir Garnet Wolseley has given to the Berlin Missionary Society
a large tract of land in South Africa to be used for a Mission
Station.

—The mission at Frere Town, East Central Africa, has proved an
inviting rendezvous for run-away slaves. The missionaries have
no power to keep them, but have opportunity to expostulate with
their owners for any cruelties they may inflict upon them. The
practical result is that the masters become intimidated and angry,
and would make an end of the missionaries if they had the power.
The settlement has already been threatened with destruction. It is
hoped, however, that the impending calamity may be over-ruled, to
the overthrow of slavery on the coast.

—_The Victoria Nyanza Mission_ of the C. M. S., despite every
difficulty and disappointment, still exists. Letters from Uganda
bring intelligence down to Aug. 14. It appears that Mtesa had
engaged Mr. Pierson to build him a boat, and that Mr. Litchfield,
in company with Mr. Mackay, had made a journey to Uyui, arriving
at that point June 5. As the locality proved favorable to
Mr. Litchfield’s health he intended to remain there with Mr.
Copplestone, while Mr. Mackay had gone back to Uganda. These
brethren are cheered by the belief that the hearts and minds of
many of the heathen with whom they have labored have been prepared
for the Gospel.

Mr. Litchfield writes: “I have invariably found the poor people
ready and eager to listen to the story of the cross. Numbers of
instances rise up before me as I write, where the hearers have
testified their astonishment and joy at the love of Jesus in dying
for them. Do not give away an inch,” he says, “if the place is
proposed to be given up. On Dec. 23 we had that crushing vote to
reject Christianity and stop our teaching. Now things are changing
and public opinion is coming round in our favor. The hand is on the
plow and we must not look back.”

—The Jesuits have purchased a large tract of ground near
Alexandria, Egypt, and purpose to build a convent for the reception
of the members of their order who have been expelled from European
countries.

—A short time since, the Khedive of Egypt commissioned Col. Sala
to take charge of an expedition for the capture and liberation
of slaves who are brought down the Nile from the Soudan into
Egypt. The expedition crossed the Nile at Assouan and searched
several localities where slaves were illegally retained. After
much difficulty and many fruitless endeavors, Col. Sala succeeded
in surprising a village during the night time, and capturing
and liberating twenty-one negroes. This endeavor set on foot by
the young Khedive indicates a more hopeful condition of affairs
relating to the East African slave trade than any other event of
recent occurrence.

—_News from Mr. Stanley._—A letter from Mr. Carrie, superintendent
of the Mission at Loango, gives interesting details gathered from
Mr. Protche, a French naturalist, concerning Mr. Stanley and his
operations. Mr. Protche visited him for the purpose of connecting
himself with the expedition, but failed in his object.

He reports that Mr. Stanley was living at Vivi, in a village which
he had built with lumber from Europe. The houses were said to be
quite comfortable. Mr. Stanley had already constructed a road
extending three leagues east of his village, and was performing a
large amount of work in a way that must be quite assuring to those
who are responsible for his expeditions.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—The number of Indian youth learning trades in work-shops at
the agencies under the care of the United States Government has
increased from one hundred and eighty-five last autumn to three
hundred and fifty-eight this year. Brick-making has been begun,
and houses for the Indians are now almost exclusively built by
the Indians themselves. The aptitude shown by the Indians for
mechanical work, has, in many cases, been surprising.

—Nearly two thousand freight wagons have been in use by the
Indians this year, with the result of saving considerable money
to the government compared with the amounts formerly paid for the
same transportation (of supplies, &c., to the agencies), besides
furnishing a civilizing and welcome employment to a large number of
otherwise restless Indians.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—Two Chinamen were baptized and received into the Church at
Stockton, Cal., Nov. 7. They were the first of that nation to join
any church in that city.

—_Restriction of Chinese Immigration._—A treaty has been made by
the United States with the Chinese Government which practically
leaves the subject of regulating Chinese immigration to the
authorities at Washington. Owing to the fact that the Chinese
Government has never been anxious to have its citizens emigrate to
any country, little difficulty was found in negotiating the treaty.

—The _Christian Advocate_ has a very interesting report of the
sermons preached by the native pastors at the Methodist Conference
at Foochow, China, in October last. We select one. Rev. Sia Sek
Ong preached from the single word “Go:” “Leave father, mother,
friends, fields; preachers go thus; world-men don’t like to go in
that fashion. Where must we go? To the sea, for the fish. They are
not on the surface; they are in the depths. We may find shrimps
in shallow water, but we must go to the deep water for the large
fish. Go to the mountains to seek the lost sheep. There are lions
and tigers and snakes in the mountains; but we must go, not to
find sport, but to find the sheep. Go to the vineyard, to work,
to watch, to plant, to water. Go to the field to sow seed. Study
the soil, and sow accordingly. Field-work is not play. Go to
the market-place, and bid guests to the Master’s feast. Go into
the army, to fight, to wrestle with the devil, to put forth your
strength, and to come home singing songs of victory.

“Ask the Master for Peter’s hook to bring up the right fish; for
David’s crook to guide the sheep aright; for Gideon’s torch to
light up the dark places; for Gospel seed, without any tares in
it; for Moses’ guiding rod; for the brazen serpent, to cure the
bites of the world’s snakes; for David’s sling to prostrate your
giant foe; for the armor inventoried by Paul in the last chapter of
Ephesians; but above all, for the wonderful Holy Spirit, to help at
all times. If we have all these, it is no matter where we go. We
will come with rejoicing to conference next year, with songs and
shouts of victory.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—During the latter part of November a precious work
of grace was going on in Fisk University, more than fifteen of the
students having decided to come over upon the Lord’s side.

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.—As a result of some special meetings held by
pastor Jos. E. Smith, assisted by Rev. E. J. Penney, of Marietta,
Ga., the Church was greatly confirmed and six or seven were added
to the company of the disciples.

TOUGALOO, MISS.—In the University Chapel, on the last Sabbath of
November, Superintendent Roy preached a sermon, and delivered a
missionary address before the young people, who were about to
organize a Society of Inquiry in addition to their mission school
association, and was permitted to rejoice on that day with the
teachers over the conversion of a young man, who had been the
occasion of a great deal of solicitude to them. Half a dozen others
have been coming along this fall in a quiet way; whereas, one
year ago, the Spirit appeared almost as a rushing, mighty wind,
leaving nineteen students to the Saviour within twenty-four hours,
all of whom are still holding on their way beautifully. There are
now 107 boarding students, while not a few have been turned away
for lack of room. The new house for the home of the President is
nearly completed. A third story is to be put upon the Ladies’ Hall,
and other enlargements are sufferingly needed. The industrial
department is in vigorous condition.

PARIS, TEXAS.—On the 23d of Nov., an Ecclesiastical Council, at
this place, after an eminently satisfactory examination, ordained
two young men, graduates of the theological department of Talladega
College, licentiates of Alabama Conference,—Mr. J. W. Roberts as
pastor of the “African Congregational Church” of Paris, and Mr. J.
W. Strong to go to Corpus Christi, to take the church work, while
Rev. S. M. Coles, who has been doing double service there, will
retain the charge of the school. Rev. W. C. McCune, of Dallas,
preached the sermon, Rev. R. H. Read of the other Congregational
Church, of Paris, delivered the charge. Rev. Albert Gray, who has
had charge of the Church for several years, having been an old-time
African preacher, extended the right hand of fellowship, and Supt.
Roy, the moderator, offered the prayer of ordination, having spent
five days in confirming and preaching for the cluster of churches
in the country about, that have branched off from this one. These
are Pattonville, New Hope, Paradise and Shiloh. The mother church,
which, in 1868, paid $112 in gold for an acre and a half lot in the
suburbs, has now bought a more central lot and will work toward a
new “church house.”




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE “CENTRAL SOUTH.”

PRES. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D.

MY DEAR DR. WARREN:—Across the street from where I write is a
Freedmen’s church, of modest pretensions, in which the Central
South Conference of churches (Congregational) is sitting. It
comprises the churches and pastors of Tennessee, Mississippi and
Alabama. Just within the door a low pillar in the centre supports
an “offertory,” to use an English, but hardly an American word,
with the legend “Help us.” It is from great poverty and hardships,
as well as great wrong, that this scion of ecclesiastical New
England has grown, and the people are still needy. Behind the
pulpit is the motto, “Take my yoke upon you;” they have accepted
that of Christ as they have rejected that of man. Very happily,
the earnest and intelligent young pastor elect, in welcoming
the members of this Conference this morning, reminded them that
they come to a Memphis unlike that of antiquity, from which the
task-master has forever passed away.

This is a genuine Congregational body save in hue—one cannot long
say just that, for we are to have many of the same hue. Its modes,
motions, votes, reports, papers on appointed subjects, discussions,
care to recognize the precedence of churches over mere officers
of churches, and its devotional spirit, are like those of Maine
Conferences. But in the half a hundred brethren and sisters who
are present forenoon and afternoon, white faces are to be seen
only here and there; those who possess them are admitted, so far
as I can see, to an entire equality with others! The moderator
is a white professor of languages in Fisk University; the scribe
a colored pastor at Nashville. The preacher last evening was a
colored minister from Alabama; a white minister from Iowa assisted
him, whose daughter, teacher of music in the Normal Institute for
Freedmen here, led the choir. In one corner sits Rev. Dr. J. E.
Roy, the A. M. A. Field Superintendent in the South. The (white)
chairman of the business committee is at the head of a church
and one institution supported by the Association in Mississippi.
Fervent and spiritual, yet orderly as a Northern prayer-meeting,
were the devotional exercises of the first hour this morning.

Narratives from the churches coming first in the proceedings,
indicated the practical working character of the Conference. One
of them was the story of a church holding on its way without a
pastor, growing in steady Christian work in its prayer meetings
and in its Sabbath attendance, and fostering an institution of
learning the while. Another was a written apology from the pastor
for absence, because of conversions and a promising work of grace.
Another was a thrilling narrative of a brotherhood whose main body,
thirty strong, went two years ago to Kansas, and its Sabbath-school
has twice since been swept away; yet it has come up from six to
forty-five in numbers, built a pleasant house of worship, and
made Christian education victorious over the deadly opposition of
secular public education. I learned of another, not represented
to-day, whose real acting pastor is a lady teacher, nineteen years
at her solitary post. The dashing heroism of anti-rebellion days
has been succeeded by the quiet, persistent heroism that is often
the greater of the two; and the self-sacrifice of many of both
races for the cause of Christ is wonderful.

There is hopefulness among these brethren and sisters as to the
reviving of God’s work in the special direction of practical
righteousness. With all the immense moral evils of a Federal
election, they feel that conscience has been stirred, and profound
gratitude to God for the result has been awakened among the
Freedmen. Thought and energy, it seems to them, are more likely
to turn in the direction of religion now than in any other great
common channel, and they have courage and cheer for coming work. No
salvation movement among them can overpass their need.

I add, at a later date, that an afternoon given to church extension
and the spread of education was of the deepest interest. Between
the two papers, or addresses, was another on more generous giving
by the churches, entirely in keeping. How vast a work in both
church and school is laid upon them, one needs to be among them,
and to see and hear them, in order to realize. How the treasury of
the A. M. A. could fill to repletion if all who support it could
have an inside view. In conversations at Andover on two different
occasions, Prof. Park uttered the strongest and most anxious
impressions respecting our national future and the condition of the
South. I am sure that he and all deep-sighted and far-sighted men
would find them intensified on actual examination of the facts.
The task before us is vast, and, but for divine help, overwhelming
and impracticable. Nothing in church order and work can save these
people but the freest and most intelligent system; nothing in
education but practical training for the duties and competitions
with a more favored race, guided and inspired by thorough Christian
principle.

Another afternoon was given to an ecclesiastical council, called
by the 2d Congregational church of Memphis, to advise as to the
ordination of a pastor. The examination of the young man who
had been preaching to them for some months was a thoroughly
delightful one, specially full and rich in the recital of Christian
experience. The young brother is a light colored man, a native of
Pennsylvania, of an earnest, intense nature, studious, modest,
instructive as a preacher, and edifying to a group of Northern
white teachers in Le Moyne Institute, and bore himself as to
clearness and soundness of doctrine, in a manner so admirable,
that many candidates for the ministry from the more favored race
might well look up to him. Very tender and sweet was his testimony
to parental faithfulness, and the divine blessing upon it in
the Presbyterian church in which he was brought up, and to the
providential leading that guided him into the ministry “for the
sake of the work in the South.” The Conference, at an earlier
session, licensed two other young brethren, whose work in gathering
churches and schools is sorely needed in the communities they
represent. One of these preached before it.

Twice this week I have given before Freedmen’s institutions
lectures prepared for Northern college audiences. One’s respect for
these institutions and for their students could only be raised by
the intelligent attention given. The city press—Democratic—has made
courteous and even generous notice of the religious proceedings
of the week. Dr. Roy and myself were promptly invited to occupy
Presbyterian pulpits in the city, and were most kindly and
respectfully received. We were assured that we should be heard
with pleasure again, and that the Gospel which we preached was
that which they received, knowing “no North, no South.” On Sabbath
evening the place of worship of the 2d Congregational Church—the
first is of white people—was crowded with attentive hearers of both
races while the ordination exercises were held. The young pastor
had been chosen by the Conference delegate to the National Council
at St. Louis, and the people, at the close of the ordination,
raised a sum of money to defray his expenses. I have never seen
more genuine and grateful joy among a Christian flock at the gift
of a pastor and teacher than these people showed as they crowded
up to take his hand after he had pronounced the benediction. They
are ordinarily more social and demonstrative at all religious
gatherings than white Christians.

Some views of their future, and of the great and grave problems
involved in their elevation by a free Christianity and by Christian
education, were deeply impressed upon me during my week among them,
to which I may give utterance hereafter.—_Christian Mirror._

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH CAROLINA.

Tannerism in Church Work—Charm of Old Songs—Temperance Revival.

REV. TEMPLE CUTLER.

Two years ago Plymouth church, Charleston, was in the hands of
a man whom it believed to be a good man, and in the enthusiasm
of the moment it undertook to support him without aid from the
Association. They ran the church nine months, and then were glad
to get back under the sheltering wings of their cherishing mother.
They did not return a moment too soon. Life was at a very low ebb,
and the church required very tender nursing to bring it up. The
most I can say of it now is, that it is convalescing. The pulse
is regular, the digestion normal, the eye is brighter and more
hopeful, there is a degree of buoyancy in the step, the skin is
more healthy, and if there shall be no relapse, we may confidently
hope for full recovery. But I would not advise a repetition of such
experiments. It isn’t a good plan to try how near we can bring
ourselves to the gate of death and then get back. _Tannerism_ isn’t
good for church work.

The greatest burden of the church now, is a debt of $1,200 which
it owes to the A. M. A. We would like to pay this off, and no
doubt the money would be of great use in some other department of
our great work, but the people are very poor. They are willing to
do what they can, but we find it hard to pay the interest on the
mortgage. If any of the readers of the MISSIONARY desire to help a
worthy cause, let them send their donation to Dr. Strieby, to be
set to the credit of Plymouth church in Charleston.

We have been revising our list of membership. In the spring we had
a solemn renewal of fellowship, and from that renewal we made up
our list. In doing this we were obliged to drop from our record
twenty-five names. We number now, present and absent, 180; but, I
am sorry to say, some of them who are in the city, and who solemnly
covenanted to walk in the fellowship with the church, still absent
themselves from all our services. Still they regard themselves as
exemplary Christians, and resent the imputation that they are not
living consistent lives. It is here, as everywhere, a few faithful
ones are the bone and sinew of the church.

I wish I could take you into one of our prayer meetings, such a
one as we sometimes have, for they are not all of the same degree
of spiritual fervor, but one of our good meetings is exceedingly
enjoyable. The songs are so weird and the prayers are so fervent
and frequent, and their attitude so devout—well, perhaps your
fastidious taste would be shocked, but somehow I am drawn a little
nearer Heaven here than anywhere else. I can’t help saying “Amen”
down in my heart. And when they sing my body sways with theirs,
just as the sailor rolls his gait with the motion of the deck. We
sing a good many of the old time tunes, and some that have not
yet been translated into written song. Our people sing their good
old household hymns to these tunes. They have a happy faculty of
adapting the words to the music, no matter what the metre may be.
For instance, the tune in the Jubilee Songs, “I will die in the
field,” is made to fit the hymn, “When I can read my title clear.”

Sometimes the hymn is divided up, and the chorus sandwiched in
between the lines most ingeniously. But, however incongruous it may
be to the rules of music, it has a peculiar charm.

The church was well supplied during the vacation by Rev. David
Peebles, of Dudley, N. C. Bro. Peebles kept them together and
strengthened their hands. His ministry was most acceptable to the
people. If nothing happens to us we have every reason to expect
the church now to grow. We need the baptism of the Spirit. We are
looking forward to a meeting, soon to be held in the city, under
the direction of Rev. H. E. Brown, who has been laboring in the
interest of the colored people in the South with great success. The
Minister’s Union has taken hold of the matter, and stands ready
to give him a hearty co-operation. Bro. Brown’s method introduces
Bible Readings in public, and from house to house. This is what we
need, and what the people want. We hope for a large blessing to
follow.

There is a large territory spiritually to be occupied in
Charleston. We have a population of 50,000, a large part of whom
are colored. In this county there are 71,000 colored people and
only 30,000 white. There are 604,000 colored people in the State,
and 391,000 white. The colored vote is 40,000 in majority. There
is great wickedness among these colored people. They copy and
improve upon the vices of the whites, in addition to their natural
depravity. Gambling, profanity, drunkenness, licentiousness and
Sabbath-breaking abound. Some of these vices have been born of
freedom, others have been increased by it. Drunkenness was rare
among the blacks in slavery. Gambling was comparatively unknown.
Now both of these vices prevail to an alarming extent. Outside
the city limits on Sunday groups of men and boys are to be seen
everywhere, throwing dice or engaged in some other form of
gambling. An effort is on foot to reach these outlying masses and
bring them under the influence of the Gospel. I know of but one
missionary who gives her time to the work of visiting the thirty
thousand colored people of this city. We could use advantageously a
dozen.

Oh, how much there is to be done, and how few to do it; and how
weak all our instrumentalities in the face of these obstacles! May
God help us! Oh, that the churches at the North could see what a
field is open to them here in the South! If we could have at least
one more missionary here in Charleston we would be glad, and the
money it would cost would be well expended.

The white people are waking up to more effort in missionary work.
They have commenced in the temperance reform, and already a
petition with 5,000 names attached has been presented to the Mayor
and Council, asking that no more licenses be granted for the sale
of intoxicating drinks. It is a beginning. A noble Christian woman,
Mrs. Chapin, has been the prime mover of this endeavor. We hope its
influence will not be lost if the petition is rejected. May God
give us other and stronger petitions until the authorities see that
Christian people mean business.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Atlanta University.

REV. C. W. FRANCIS.

Several facts of interest are connected with the opening of the
school year at Atlanta University.

1st. We are in possession of several valuable improvements,
which give increased facilities long greatly needed. These are
in consequence of recent gifts, the first fruits of which a
conjunction of favorable circumstances made thus early available.
They consist of an addition to the building for girls, nearly
doubling its capacity for lodgers; to the dining room, furnishing
nearly forty more seats; to one school room, furnishing desks for
sixty pupils, and two convenient recitation rooms. And these are
all in full demand, and the inquiry presses, “What shall we do next
when the January rush comes on?”

2d. A largely increased attendance, especially of girls, 79
being now present as boarders, and these new pupils come largely
from remote regions, some traveling more than 300 miles to reach
school. This increase is the result of no special appeals or
inducements—indeed, until much more extensive preparations were
made it would not be safe to invite a larger attendance—but grows
chiefly out of the interest awakened by old pupils in their own
community, and in the schools taught by them during the summer
vacation.

3d. A very satisfactory report of vacation work by nearly all of
the more than 150 who engaged in it.

(_a._) Every pupil who was competent and desired a situation in
the public schools, obtained one, and many were taken who had made
but little progress in studies, and after all were gone, more than
a score of applications were made for teachers to be sent from
here, which could not be met from any source, and the schools were
disbanded.

(_b._) No obstacles were met by any pupil caused by any of the
white citizens of the state, but on the contrary, much assistance
and support was cheerfully given, and that too, in many remote and
rude regions.

(_c._) Temperance work had especial prominence and effectiveness.
All were provided with a good supply of suitable temperance
reading, which they distributed in connection with schools taught
by them both on Sabbath and week days. This work was followed up
by family visits and lectures and personal work, so that in some
counties the vote was carried for prohibition under the local
option law.

       *       *       *       *       *


Georgia Conference.

The Conference of this State held its annual meeting in Atlanta, at
the First Church—Rev. C. W. Hawley’s—from the 2d to the 5th inst.,
Rev. Jos. E. Smith Moderator, and Rev. S. E. Lathrop and Prof.
S. B. Morse, Secretaries. Rev. J. R. McLean preached the opening
sermon, upon the encouragement to run the Christian race from the
example of Christ. It was a refreshing and edifying discourse, too
much in earnest for an introduction, but made three points and
stuck to them and stopped at the end. The preacher is a graduate of
Talladega.

As a good example for other Conferences, one evening was given
to addresses in behalf of the several Congregational Societies,
with alternation of color as to the speakers, but not as to the
speeches. Supt. Roy reported the anniversary of the A. M. A. and
the St. Louis triennial, and gave an address upon the independence
of our churches as related to their fellowship. Rev. P. Snelson
and Prof. C. W. Francis led off on “Church Discipline,” President
Ware opened on “The School and the Church,” showing their natural
relation as evangelizers. A half day was given to a visit at the
Atlanta University, and one evening to a sociable. Two “church
houses” have been built during the year at Marietta and Cypress
Slash. The Conference missed Rev. R. F. Markham’s stirring way,
but rejoiced in the coming in his place at Savannah of Rev. B. D.
Conkling, whose transition from the moderatorship of the fortieth
annual meeting of the Wisconsin Convention to a place in this
humble body did not appal him. His sermon at the University was
greatly appreciated. His combination of pulpit and business talent
will find full scope in this work. _The Atlanta Constitution_ gave
a report of the Conference each day.

On Monday the members of the Conference, called by letters missive,
repaired to Marietta, twenty-one miles out, to sit in Council for
the installation of Mr. E. J. Penney, a graduate of the Atlanta
University and of Andover Seminary. The young pastor is taking hold
of his work grandly. Let it be observed that the Congregational
Churches of the South are seeking after the old paths. This is the
third installation of a colored pastor within a month. The others
were Rev. B. A. Imes, of Memphis, and Rev. J. W. Roberts, of Paris,
Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

A Visit to Marion.

REV. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA.

Marion was reached Saturday night, a grand old town of three
thousand inhabitants, and an educational centre for the State. As
the hacks were full, a colored brother, an old friend, and deacon
in our church at this place, took my bag, and I hastened along the
sidewalk a mile or more to what was once the “Teachers’ Home,” but
now the parsonage, a house to which I was introduced ten years ago
when I left my Connecticut pastorate for a winter in the Sunny
South. I cannot tell you how I felt, passing along the streets,
as I recalled the experiences of ten years ago. I shuddered as I
neared the house where my friend, now of Chattanooga, came near
losing his life in the small hours of the night by the hands of
masked and armed men. The rush, the rope, the tree, the cries
for help, the final deliverance, and much more, were very vivid
and real to my awakened mind. I thought, also, of those eight
consecutive nights when none of our family lay down to rest as
usual; of the armed guard of twenty brave men in and about the
house all those nights; of the warning letters received, the
threats made, the Henry rifles in our chairs when we bowed around
our family altar; of the preaching with hands in my pocket on my
revolver; of the fear and trembling that seized us when special
danger threatened; of our isolation from all except the poor we had
come to bless by our labors. I thought, too, of the school-house,
the three hundred eager learners, the little church of a dozen
members, the precious meetings, the great outpouring of the
Spirit, the hundreds of conversions, the “never to be forgotten”
prayers and songs—in all the most precious revival of my life. As
a drowning man recalls the events of a whole life in a moment, so
in an incredibly brief space of time passed before me those early
experiences of missionary life in this strange land, impossible
for me now to relate. All is changed now. To-day the missionary is
welcomed by many Christian people in Marion. The dreadful past is
fading from our minds in the love and friendship of the present.

Sabbath morning I looked out upon the many cottages and cabin homes
in the woods and fields all about, while near by I saw the church
edifice with its graceful and airy bell-tower in which hangs a
choice bell from the foundry of Veasy & White, of East Hampton,
Connecticut, and the gift of the people there. The house will seat
three or four hundred, is well proportioned, nicely painted and
frescoed,—the most handsome and best kept church edifice of the
colored people in the State.

I wish it were possible for me to give some suitable account of
the Sabbath greetings and services. A few touches only, and your
imagination must supply the rest. The bell called us to the house
of God at 9 a.m. You first meet the men and women who joined
the church ten years ago, and are now pillars in it and in the
Sabbath-school. And such a welcome!—such hand-shaking, such glad
hearts! You very soon know Paul’s warmth towards his beloved Church
of Philippi, his first love in Europe, as this was my first love in
Alabama. It was nearly five hours before these morning greetings,
the Sabbath-school, the preaching and then more hand-shaking, were
ended, and the people willing to go to their homes. The promise,
“He shall bring all things to your remembrance,” seemed that day
fulfilled. Precious memories of the wonderful work of grace that
drew so many of them into the fold were present to all with power.
“Our hearts burned within us” as we talked of these things there,
and “by the way.” The night service, the Monday calls, the informal
social gathering, the eager questions, the manifest Spirit’s
presence, the next day’s farewells—all made a deep impression on
us, and led us to feel anew that this missionary work is God’s
work, for it was that work that inspired our hearts and was our
theme from first to last.

This church has already put five young men into the Christian
ministry, and is in morals, intelligence and management a pattern
worthy to be copied.

Since my arrival home the one question that presses heaviest on my
heart is, how can we provide for the boys and girls of Marion and
other places visited that want to come to the college to school? In
Childersburgh, Shelby Iron Works, Calera, Selma and Marion, places
along the line of my journey, I found many smart boys and girls
anxious to become educated men and women. In one place I found
twenty-five eager to come, not one of whom could pay more than a
small part of necessary school expenses. Low wages, poor crops, the
cotton worm and inherited poverty keep them where they are, and so
far as I can see they must live and die there in their poverty and
hopelessness, unless those whom God has more highly favored are
moved to help them. Our college expenses are so low that seventy
dollars will keep one pupil in school one year, and sometimes,
on account of labor done or aid from home, a much smaller amount
will suffice. We need more than one thousand dollars to be used in
this way this year, above the amounts already pledged. Christian
education transforms these boys and girls. I wish you could see the
eight young men that were graduated last June from the Theological
Department of the college, and hear them preach the word to their
people; you could but say, “Verily, this is God’s way and I
must chime in with it.” Several young men are just now entering
the Theological Department who are every way worthy, but wholly
dependent for means to prosecute their studies to the end.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Revival at Memphis.

PROF. A. J. STEELE.

I know you will rejoice with us at the outpouring of the Spirit
which just now is so manifest.

Our evening prayer-meetings, held for the past week each day
immediately after school, are being greatly blessed. One of the
students, a young man, professed Christ three days ago; the
earnestness since then has deepened. The meetings of yesterday
and the day before were especially blessed, and this morning two
promising girls of the school rose directly after devotions, and
before the entire school, gave most earnest and clear testimony
to Christ as their Saviour. In this afternoon’s meeting, to which
nearly the entire school remained, two smaller girls and two
prominent young men professed, with rejoicing. The entire school
seems moved, many are seeking most earnestly, and this evening, at
seven o’clock, we have a special meeting in the sitting-room at the
Home.

We are all rejoicing, as we doubt not angels are, over the
repentance and return of those estranged from God. Will you not
give thanks with us and pray for a continuation of the presence of
the Spirit with us in our work!




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D.D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H.
Willey, D.D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D.D., Jacob
S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James. M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTERS FROM PUPILS.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

I often receive letters from pupils in our schools, and still more
frequently read letters addressed to their teachers, which I have
wished I could show to the Christian friends who are enabling us to
carry on our work.

It is encouraging to see how much of saving truth they have
contrived to learn, and still more to feel all through the
throbbings of a Christian heart. The English is often in a sad
tangle, but the effort to get hold of idioms so utterly opposite
to their own sometimes gives an appetizing quaintness to their
utterances such as freshens even oldest truth.

I venture to fill our columns for this month with a few extracts,
realizing the fact that our interest in them may be wholly due to
our personal interest in the writers, and that I incur the risk of
their falling quite flat on the ears of others.

Here is one from Gin Sing, a member of the Presbyterian Church in
Santa Barbara, now in Mexico: “Dear Sir, Mr. Pond: How are your
health now? I hope you alway strong and able to do things. I have
leave off [left] the city of Santa Barbara last Jan. 21st, but
we living in Sonora of Mexico the county, at place of San Felix
Mine. * * * I like to stay Santa Barbara very much, and so I have
a chance to go church every Sunday; and this country none have
church, and not very good country, but only mine was good, and
country was dry the all time, and hot, too, and cold—sometimes
was cold as can be. Oh, Dear Sir, I hear from Ah Foy [a Chinese
brother, member of the Congregational Church] sometime ago. Tell
me about Lee Wing Tie [a Baptist brother from San Francisco] been
to Santa Barbara; done many good things for mission boys before he
left; but Mission boys like him very much indeed, and very happy
that time, and large school, too. Now Miss Clarke write me very few
boys come. I am sorry. Sorry as can be. * * * Be prayerful, patient
and pleasant, and never lose faith that the love and help of God,
the Father, are with us in every hour. May God bless you always.”

And here is one recently received from Ny To Ging, a Stockton
brother: “Mr. Pond: Dear Friend * * * Since I left you so long
time, I never written to you any. Alway do I remember your
kindness. I hope God will bless you and give you much strength to
do his work. We are all sinners, and have wandered from God like
lost sheep that have gone astray from the fold, but God is ready
to forgive and take us back again in order to save us; so that we
ought immediately to repent and become the disciples of Christ
and be always prepared to do the will of Jesus. The Bible is the
word of God. Holy men wrote it as the Holy Spirit taught them. The
truths of the Bible never change. Every word is true, and God’s
truth shall last forever. * * * I write to let you know and two
Chinese [are to be] baptized in Stockton Church Congregational
the next Sunday. I do not know how to write a letter well, but
I make the attempt to write a little, hoping you will overlook
all mistakes.” [In some portions of the above I think that as to
the English our brother must have had the aid of his teacher’s
corrections but the thoughts, I am sure, are his own.—W. C. P.]

This is from Jou Mow Lam, recently baptized in Bethany Church,
addressed to his teacher in Stockton: “My dear teacher, Mrs. L.
Langdon, I write few words to you. I think you good take care your
scholar. I leave you long time. I do pray to God, hope you very
well. I was very sorry, can get no work, know you help me. Pray
to God to change my new heart [change my heart: make it new] no
make me darkness. Soon I have baptized [shall be baptized]. I have
read also in the gospels about Jesus; he rose from the grave on
the third day after he was crucified, and went to heaven. I wish
to be a Christian that I may go to heaven. I do not cease to pray
for the pardon of my sin, and a new heart. I cannot tell you how
I long to meet you my dear Christian friend.” This one is from Ny
King, a beloved brother in Bethany Church, addressed to teachers
who had recently removed from San Francisco to Stockton. It was
written just as he was about to sail for China: “I sorry I can not
write all I want, but I will try to write a few words to you. You
are kind and patient to teach our Chinese, and I am very sorry you
have to go to Stockton and leave us. Still we are glad, for you
shall have a good chance to do much good for our Christian Chinese
up there. I hope you remember me while you pray, that I may go home
to China, to hold up the light of Christ, and tell the kindness
of your Christian people to my own countrymen which they might
receive it. One day, one of my heathen friends call up to me in a
store: ‘Ny King,’ said he, ‘are you go home next steamer? I will
tell you something, that you might not forget it. Now you say you
are a Christian, but in about a month more, you will say you are
something thing else,’ for he thought the Christian only good for
here, and never can be in China. If the power of man, it might be
so, but God who is the highest [is] _Almighty_. Now I must close my
letter. I have no time to write any more. Good bye.”

Many other letters lie before me, each with its own point of
interest, but I shall trespass on another’s space if I indulge
in any more extracts. I will venture, however, to give without
connection, the following sketch of a sermon from Wong Ack, a
helper recently introduced into service, and from whom our readers
have not heard before.

The text is Matt. ii., 28: “Come unto me all ye that labor,” etc.

1. The world is now already led by Satan, that who follows him, it
is heavy labor he has to bear: and every grief in his heart that
never feels any comfort, so that Jesus has shown His kind heart,
and sound His merciful voice that whosoever will leave the devil
and come to Him, they will receive His rest.

2. Jesus now on this world is like to what?—Like a gong which is
sounding on the place while the thieves surround the people at
night, and might wake them up, so they know the mischief was near,
and try to escape out of the murderers’ hands, and hope they might
save their life.

3. Our friends, this mischief nobody is able to deliver you from,
but only Jesus who is our Saviour: He will preserve us, if we trust
in Him. Oh! how sorry for them now which are asleep! Their hearts
were full of dreams, and their eyes were closed up by Satan’s
plans. Wake up, our friends, wake up! Come, come to Jesus as
possible as you can [as quickly as you possibly can]. He is ready,
waiting for us. * * *

4. That labor which I had spoken of is in this world. But you
ought to know beforehand _that labor_ which [is in] the world to
come. Now turn to Luke, xiv chapter and 24th verse: that will tell
you how that is. Therefore Jesus said, “Come unto me.” What you
think of this voice? * * * Now, our friends, should we all come
to Him? Should we rather love to go to heaven, than go to hell?
Yes, we must all come to Him, and turn our hearts toward the way
of heaven, and hope our Lord Jesus Christ lead us in to His glory
forever and ever.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CHRISTMAS GIFT LIKE BELL BENNET’S.

MRS. T. N. CHASE.

“Annie, will you please come in a minute?” called Mrs. Duncan to
a merry maiden tripping home from school. Annie Bennet looked
up, nodded, and turned toward Mrs. Duncan’s mansion. As soon as
her feet touched the grand stone steps, she felt changed into a
dignified young lady, as quickly as ever Cinderella turned into a
fairy. And as handsome Will, just in from the same school, opened
for her the massive doors, some fresh roses jumped into Annie’s
cheeks and some fresh sparkles into her dancing eyes. As soon as
the three were seated in the cosey bay-window, Mrs. Duncan said,
“Annie, you know, with my lame foot, I cannot go to see your
mother, so I called you in to tell you my Christmas plan for our
little May. You know how the child loves your little sister Bell.
Well, last night while the little darling was saying her prayers,
she added, ‘Please, Lord, tell Santa Claus to bring a Christmas
gift to Bell just like the one he brings to me.’ Now we had planned
getting her a tiny diamond ring, it would be so lovely on her
dainty little hand, and I thought if your mother knew of May’s
sweet little prayer, she’d like to strengthen the child’s faith by
getting one for Bell like it.” Annie thought it was a beautiful
idea and hastened home to tell her mother.

As soon as Mrs. Bennet heard Annie’s story, a greater pain came
into her heart than had been there for many a day; for they had
lately received a fortune from a rich uncle, and she felt that
her motives for simplicity and economy would not be understood.
Her greatest anxiety, however, was for her children. How she had
prayed that the love of this money might not be to them “the root
of all evil,” and “pierce them through with many sorrows.” She
well knew how her precious Annie would now be petted by the gay
and fashionable, and here had come her first great trial in this
irresistible message from charming Mrs. Duncan. Annie understood
her mother’s hesitation and said, “Mamma, wouldn’t it be a pity to
have little May think her prayer was not heard?”

“My child, May did not pray for a diamond ring, but for a gift like
Bell’s. Perhaps if you tell Mrs. Duncan I cannot conscientiously
grant her request she will get a simple gift like one we get for
Bell.”

“Oh, mamma, I never could tell Mrs. Duncan that. Don’t you think
the habit of economy, that of necessity you have practiced all
these years, may be mistaken for conscience?”

“The habit doubtless makes it easier for me to obey conscience,
but I cannot think I am mistaking one for the other,” replied Mrs.
Bennet.

“But, ma, do you think it proper for us to live as simply now as we
did when papa had a salary of only $2,000 a year?”

“Annie, dear, have we not been able to dress respectably, has
not our table always had well-prepared, wholesome and appetizing
food, has not our little cottage contained all that was absolutely
necessary for real home comfort?”

“Yes, ma, we have a sweet home: you know I love it. I was not
complaining of the past, but why did God give us this fortune if He
did not wish us to enjoy _luxuries_ now as well as comforts?”

“I think He did, Annie. I’m sure we can all now enjoy the luxury of
doing good as we never have before. Then just think what a luxury
it will be not to weary ourselves with making over worn garments.
We can now give them to the needy and help still others by hiring
them to make our new clothing,—not that we may be idle, but that we
may have ‘a heart at leisure from itself to soothe and sympathize.’
We can have dear grandpa and grandma with us all the time. We will
have several cosey bed-rooms added to our cottage, and shall not
feel too poor to invite our less favored cousins and many dear
friends to spend long vacations with us.”

“But, ma, we might do all this and still appear poor, while if we
had a grand home like Mrs. Duncan, and exquisite curtains, and
a fine carriage, and Bell had her diamond ring, and we all wore
expensive and stylish clothing, everybody would know papa was rich.”

“Yes, Annie, and what good would it do people to know papa was
rich?”

“Well, I cannot think of any good it would do them.”

“What good would it do _us_, darling, to have people know it?”

“Oh ma, it would be so pleasant to have every one polite to us, and
treat us beautifully as they do rich people.”

“Do not all who _know_ us treat us well, Annie?”

“Oh yes, ma, _very_ well; but you know even _strangers_ admire
those who dress, dine, and drive as only the rich can.”

“Now think, Annie, what this consideration of strangers costs.
Friends envy us, the poor hate us, the irreligious question our
sincerity, our own hearts are made vain, if not proud, millions
are spent in useless luxuries that might bless the poor, and—well
Annie, this is enough for once, isn’t it? When you have been in the
city did you ever notice boys slowly pacing the streets and often
ringing a bell, who were all covered over with an advertisement of
some sale or show?”

“Yes, mamma.”

“Well, I often see young ladies on the street who always remind
me of these advertising boys, as their dress makes them a walking
advertisement of their father’s wealth. One Sunday night, after
attending service in a very wealthy church, I dreamed that all
the ladies wore pocket-books on their heads instead of bonnets.
Some were too full to be closed, and small coin often dropped out.
Others were tightly clasped and ornamented with all manner of
precious stones. A few were thin and worn, but all were labelled
with the exact amount of contents. And when one lady walked in with
$2,000,000 blazing in diamond figures on her pocket-book how all
the congregation bowed down.”

“Oh mamma, what a funny dream!”

“Now Annie, if Christian women would all feel that they were
Christian stewards of their Lord’s money, and could see what
foolish vanity it is to wish the world to know of their wealth,
then we should all have some comparatively definite standard of a
Christian style of living. But as long as Christian women have no
guide but the varying length of a husband’s purse, we shall have no
standard, no conscience in the matter, and the world will continue
to jeer and the poor to suffer.”

Annie’s dread lest Will Duncan and his mother should think them
old-fashioned or Puritanical, or possibly avaricious, was a sore
temptation to her, and once more she plead—“But ma, would it not
be right to call this ring a thank-offering for the great dowry we
have received?”

“My dear Annie, I cannot see how a gift that would simply be a
badge of our wealth, and tend to flatter the vanity of our innocent
little Bell, would be a suitable thank-offering to the Lord. I
believe in thank-offerings, however, and have written my dear old
friend Mrs. W——, who is engaged in missionary work South, you
remember, inquiring how I can best help her. Perhaps when her reply
comes you will feel differently.”

Poor Annie avoided passing Mrs. Duncan’s home for two days,
dreading to speak of her mother’s decision. The second day the
expected letter came from Georgia. It told of a delicate little
colored girl—a graduate of the Higher Normal Department of an A. M.
A. School. This girl’s father had run away $150 in debt, and the
home that sheltered the little family was to be sold at sheriff’s
sale to pay the debt. This girl found a man who would pay it and
wait for her to pay him in small sums as she earned it by teaching.
As soon as this was paid she begged her sister to go to the school
from which she graduated. The sister thought she was too old to
begin to go to school again, and could not be persuaded till at
last she was told—“Now Sis, kind friends at the North have helped
me get my education and _I_ am going to send _some_ poor girl to
that same school, and if you don’t go, some one else will be glad
of my help.” So now she is paying nine dollars a month for that
sister’s board and tuition, and buys her books and clothes, better
ones, too, than she wore herself. A letter was also enclosed from
this girl to her old teacher, begging for help to build a school
house where she is now teaching. So besides educating her sister
she is trying to build a school house. But I have the letter and
will let the girl tell her own story:

  “Dear Friend, Mrs. W——: I know you are very busy, and will not
  want to hear the word ‘building,’ but I don’t know whom else to
  write to. We have paid $71.70 on an acre of land for our school
  lot. We have $68.30 to pay and twelve months to pay it in, with
  no interest. We want to ask the A. M. A. if they will help us
  build a school house. We can begin now as soon as we are able.
  We want the A. M. A. to take full control of the house and the
  building of it, and we will help all we can. We want this to be a
  school for _everybody_. We have six men as trustees of the land,
  and have worked hard and are working still. * * * The whites
  are helping us and urging us to go on. Three white men gave $5
  apiece, and others less. They were a little careful about giving
  this time, as money has been solicited twice before for the same
  purpose, so most of them would put their names down and say,
  ‘Come when you are ready for it.’ There was no trouble in getting
  it yesterday when we went for it. I was anxious to decide the
  matter and make a payment yesterday. I’ll try to get my money to
  you by the 10th for sister.

                      “Very truly,
                                             ———— ————”

When Annie got home from school she read both letters with great
interest, but said, “Ma, don’t you suppose such letters are
sometimes gotten up for effect?” “Perhaps they are, but I am sure
this one was not, for you know I wrote asking for some case of
pressing need, and the girl’s letter never could have been written
for my eyes, as it is dated some weeks ago.”

“But, ma, I have seen some missionaries who are so long-faced and
sanctimonious that some way I can’t enjoy their reports.”

“I am glad you hate cant, Annie. So do I, but if you should see
this friend of mine who wrote that letter, you’d feel very sure
there was none of it about her. She is one of the merriest,
sunniest, most genial ladies I ever knew. And I never knew a person
hate shams or pretense of any kind more thoroughly than she. How
I wish you had been home when she was here two years ago; but you
must take the letter to Mrs. Duncan, for she is a dear friend of
hers too.”

“Is she, ma? I’m so glad.”

Annie stopped next morning at Mrs. Duncan’s and left the letter
with the servant at the door, saying she’d call for it on her way
home. When she called in the afternoon, Mrs. Duncan told her how
delighted she’d been to hear from her old school friend, and that
she must certainly help that brave little colored girl build her
school house. Annie then ventured timidly to say her ma felt she
ought to do that instead of buying so expensive a gift for Bell.

“Now, Annie, that is just like your sweet mother,” said Mrs.
Duncan. “I wish I was half as good. I did hope, though, little
May’s prayer might be answered.”

“Ma says it might be if you could get a simple gift like the one we
get Bell,” shyly suggests Annie.

“Sure enough,” exclaimed Mrs. Duncan; “how stupid I was not to
think of that. I’ll do it, and then I’ll have twice much to give
the little Georgia missionary.”

So the two mothers purchased for the children inexpensive gifts,
and sent to the Georgia colored girl a generous donation for her
chosen work.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR NOVEMBER, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $56.16.

    North Anson. Mrs. Eunice S. Brown                        $10.00
    Skowhegan. Mrs. C. A. Weston, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            5.00
    Thomaston. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                          6.16
    Winthrop. Henry Woodward                                   5.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        30.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $93.54.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch., $16.29; Miss L. W. B., 50
      cts.                                                    16.79
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    Concord. Ladies, Bbl. and box of C. _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Dover. Mrs. Dr. L.                                         1.00
    Exeter. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Hopkinton. Rev. D. S.                                      0.60
    Milford. Peter and Cynthia S. Burns                       30.00
    New Boston. “A Friend”                                     5.00
    Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.15
    Temple. Mrs. W. K.                                         1.00
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.00
    West Campton. T. J. Sanborn                                5.00


  VERMONT, $222.82.

    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.00
    Johnson. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         11.00
    Lower Waterford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       13.28
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch. and Soc., and Sab. Sch.                 12.01
    Springfield. Mrs. Frederick Parks                        100.00
    Thetford. Mrs. L. N. Rugg, deceased, $2; P. R. $1          3.00
    Wells River. Charles W. Eastman                            5.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      DEA. JUSTIN MONTAGUE and CHAS. DANA, L. M’s             66.53
    Williston. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,967.62.

    Andover. “Friends,” by C. R. B., _for Emerson
      Inst._                                                  28.00
    Ashby. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Ashby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  6.25
    Ashland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            8.50
    Billerica. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 8.25
    Boston. Mt. Vernon Ch., in part, $30; Mrs. E.
      P. Eayrs, $5; “R. W. P.,” $5                            40.00
    Boston Highlands. “A Friend,” to const. MISS
      ELIZABETH F. BACKUP, L. M.                              30.00
    Boxford. F. E. C.                                          1.00
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Trin. Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., to const. REV. J. C. BODWELL, L. M.               60.75
    Brocton. “A Friend of Missions,” to const.
      CHARLES P. HOLLAND, L. M.                               30.00
    Byfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.54
    Cambridgeport. “A Friend”                                  5.00
    Campbello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            100.00
    Chelsea. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc., $10.55; “A
      Member of Central S. S.,” $2; Miss E. H. T.,
      50 cts.                                                 13.05
    Charlemont. First Cong. Ch.                                8.25
    Dedham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               188.00
    Dorchester. E. P.                                          1.00
    Dracut. “Friends,” by C. R. B., _for Emerson
      Inst._                                                  10.00
    Enfield. Edward Smith                                    150.00
    Everett. Mrs. C. K. Farrington, _for Kansas
      Refugees_                                                5.00
    Fitchburgh. Rollstone Cong. Ch.                           57.61
    Florence. Florence Cong. Ch.                             115.00
    Framingham. “A Friend,” $5; E. K. S., $1                   6.00
    Framingham. Mrs. Mann, two Bbls., one bag and
      bundle of C.
    Gloucester. “A Friend,” $1; Miss M. A. H., 10
      cts.                                                     1.10
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $63.50; R. M.
      Woods, $40                                             103.50
    Holbrook. “E. E. H.”                                      25.00
    Holliston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $21; Bible
      Christians, Dist. No. 4, $5; “A Friend,” $1;
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              27.00
    Hopkinton. Bbl. of C., by Mrs. S. B. Crooks,
      _for Refugees_
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       75.16
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          6.78
    Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch. ad’l $84;
      “Thanksgiving,” $4                                      88.00
    Lawrence. Bbl. of C.
    Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   92.25
    Littleton. Mrs James C. Houghton, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         3.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Howard
      U._                                                      2.00
    Marblehead. J. J. H. Gregory, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. CATHARINE B. GREEN, L. M.                         104.00
    Medfield. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C. _for Savannah, Ga._
    Middleborough. Central Cong. Ch.                          35.95
    Mittineague. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Talladega C._            3.00
    Monson. Mrs. C. O. Chapin and her S. S. Class,
      _for Indian boys, Hampton N. and A. Inst._               9.00
    Montville. Sylvester Jones                                 2.00
    Mount Washington. Rev. S. W. Powell                        1.75
    Newbury. Ladies of First Parish, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Kansas_
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   39.72
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Ch. by Rev. Mr.
      Phipps, Eleven Bbls. of Apples, _for
      Atlanta, Ga._
    Newton Lower Falls. M. A. M.                               0.50
    Newtonville. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $58.44; Mrs.
      A. C. G., $1                                            59.44
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $57.32;
      William K. Wright, $30; “B.” $10                        97.32
    Northampton. Sarah M. Lyman, _for furnishing a
      Room, Atlanta U._                                       25.00
    Northborough. Ladies, box of C., _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Sandwich. Miss H. H. Nye                                   2.00
    Salem. MRS. E. B. MANSFIELD, $30, to const.
      herself L. M.; E. F. P., 50c.                           30.50
    Southampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           35.39
    South Abington. N. N.                                      1.00
    South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch. and Soc.                107.61
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           23.07
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      bal. to const. MISS MARY E. LOVELL and MISS
      MARY ANNA CADY, L. M.’s                                 47.00
    Springfield. Mrs. S. E. B.                                 1.00
    Sudbury. “A Friend.”                                      10.00
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.16
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            117.50
    Uxbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              35.00
    Ware. East Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Talladega C._            53.73
    Watertown. Mrs. W. R.                                      0.60
    Watertown. Corban Soc., two Bbls. of C., _for
      Talladega, Alabama_
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Aid Soc., _for freight_            1.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              16.50
    Westhampton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              14.45
    West Newton. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    52.58
    West Newton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Room,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., $25 _for furnishing
      Room, Atlanta U._, and $3 _for freight_                 28.00
    Winchendon. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $16.36; “A
      Friend,” $5                                             21.36
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            85.78
    West Roxbury. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                               20.00
    Worcester. Union Ch., $105.72; Mrs. J. F.
      Lovering, $5                                           110.72
    Worcester. David Whitcomb, _for Student Aid,
      Hampton, N. and A. Inst._                              100.00
    Worcester. Salem St. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $2,742.62
    Legacies.—Holbrook. “E. N. H.”                           200.00
    Waltham. Lucy H. Burnham, by Rufus G. Brown,
      Ex.                                                     25.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $2,967.62


  RHODE ISLAND, $234.41.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  72.26
    Kingston. Cong. Ch.                                       26.08
    Providence. Young Ladies’ Mission Band of
      Beneficent Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             100.00
    Providence. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      30.00
    Westerly. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.07


  CONNECTICUT, $1,454.26.

    Ansonia. First Cong. Ch.                                  24.14
    Ashford. Wm. D. Carpenter, $2.50; Lois H.
      Carpenter, $2.50                                         5.00
    Avon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  41.60
    Berlin. “A Friend,” _for Student preparing for
      African M._                                             50.00
    East Hampton. Cong. Ch., to const. JARED C.
      KELLOGG, C. O. SEARS and SAMUEL KIRBY, L. M.’s         117.51
    Ellington. MRS. HARRIET H. TALCOTT, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    Elliott. Dea. Wm. Osgood.                                  2.00
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. SAMUEL HEMINGWAY and LUCIUS S.
      LUDINGTON, L. M.’s                                      60.77
    Fair Haven. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              35.00
    Granby. First Cong. Ch.                                    4.00
    Greenwich. D. B.                                           1.00
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               47.85
    High Ridge. C. A. P.                                       0.50
    Lebanon. “Five Ladies,” _for furnishing a
      room, Atlanta U._                                       25.00
    Litchfield Co. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C., Fisk U., and Indian Dept.,
      Hampton Inst._, $100 each                              300.00
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch.                                    21.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                          3.50
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         14.00
    Naugatuck. Isaac Scott                                   200.00
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            26.00
    New Hartford. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.12
    New Haven. C. A. S.                                        1.00
    New Preston. Rev. Henry Upson                              5.00
    North Guilford. Mrs. Eben F. Dudley                        5.00
    Norwich. W. A. A.                                          0.50
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                    8.96
    Putnam. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Hampton Inst._                                     15.00
    Tolland. James L. Clough                                   2.00
    Washington. S. J. Nettleton, $5; Mrs. D.
      Nettleton, $5                                           10.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            25.81
    Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                                 17.00
    Woodstock. Elias L. Snow                                 300.00
    ——. “A Friend in Conn.”                                   25.00


  NEW YORK, $881.20.

    Brasher Falls. Elijah Wood                                15.00
    Bronxville. Miss M. P. L.                                  1.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Buffalo. First Cong. Church                              200.00
    Buffalo. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           10.00
    Chenango Forks. J. B. Rogers                               5.50
    Cincinnatus. Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
    Columbus. Miss Sally Williams                             10.00
    Crown Point. George Page, M. D., $25; Miss A.
      McDonald, $5                                            30.00
    Deansville. Mrs. P. M. Barton                             25.00
    Evans Mills. Rev. C. H. Gaston                             5.00
    Harlem. “A Friend,” _for furnishing a Room,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Hamilton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Malone. First Cong. Ch.                                   40.37
    Marion. “Life Member”                                      2.00
    Millville. Mrs. E. G. Lindsley                             3.00
    Newburgh. John H. Corwin, package of Reading
      Matter
    New York. Dr. H. C. Houghton, _for Berea C._              25.00
    New York. Mrs. Elizabeth F. Giles, $3, through
      Madison Av. Cong. Ch., by J. E. Brush; Mrs.
      H. P., 50 cts.                                           3.50
    Norwich. Mrs. R. A. B.                                     1.00
    Penn Yan. M. Hamlin, $200; Chas. C. Sheppard,
      $150                                                   350.90
    Poughkeepsie. Mrs. John. F. Winslow, _for
      furnishing Room, Atlanta U._                            25.00
    Rochester. Abraham Hubregtse                               2.00
    Symrna. Sab. Sch. Miss. Soc. of 1st Cong. Ch.             25.00
    Syracuse. Mrs. S. J. White                                10.00
    Walton. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $29.33; Mrs. T.
      J. O., 50 cts.                                          29.83


  NEW JERSEY, $36.90.

    Newark. First Cong. Ch.                                   36.90


  PENNSYLVANIA, $176.00.

    Clark. Mrs. Elizabeth Dickson, $15; Miss Eliza
      Dickson, $15                                            30.00
    Eastbrook. James H. Patton, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Harford. Miss M. A. Tiffany, to const. ADA J.
      BUTLER, L. M.                                           30.00
    Hermitage. W. F. Stewart, $5; Miss E. P., $1               6.00
    West Alexander. Robert Davidson                          100.00


  OHIO, $331.57.

    Aurora. Cong. Ch.                                         15.35
    Bellevue. Elvira Boise, $25; S. W. Boise, $20;
      Cong. Ch., $20.20, and Sab. Sch., $3.03                 68.23
    Brownhelm. Cong. Ch.                                      13.50
    Bucyrus. F. Adams, $5; Abram Monnett, $5; G.
      W. Hull, $5; D. E. Fischer, $3; John Scott,
      $3; J. B. Gormly, $2; E. Blair, $2; M.
      Roher, $2; M. D., $1; J. N., $1; _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            29.00
    Cincinnati. Columbia Cong. Ch.                            18.54
    Claridon. L. T. Wilmot                                    10.00
    Cleveland. Fanny W. and John Jay Low                      15.00
    Crestline. James N. Stewart                                5.00
    Fremont. S. J. G.                                          0.50
    Harmar. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Hubbard. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                   1.65
    Hudson. Cong. Ch., $6.60; and Sab. Sch., $8.25            14.85
    Leetonia. S. I. A.                                         0.50
    Madison. Mrs. H. K. Brewster                               2.00
    Mahoning Co. “Clerk”                                       1.00
    Mansfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Medina. Woman’s Miss Soc., by Mrs. Mary J.
      Munger, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                  8.25
    Oberlin. Sab. Sch., by C. P. Goss                          1.50
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                     18.00
    Ravenna. Young Peoples’ Assn. of Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              25.00
    Ripley. Mrs. Mary Tweed                                    2.00
    Sulphur Springs. Dr. C., _for Tougaloo U._                 1.00
    Thomastown. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                8.50
    Wakeman. Second Cong. Ch.                                 15.00
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   22.20
    Weymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00


  INDIANA, $16.00.

    Cynthiana. Individuals, _for McLeansville, N. C._          2.00
    Fort Wayne. Plymouth Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.              12.00
    Solsberry. “Friends,” ad’l _for McLeansville,
      N. C._                                                   2.00


  ILLINOIS, $331.73.

    Bone Gap. C. R. $1; Others 75 cts., _for
      McLeansville, N. C._                                     1.75
    Chicago. Union Park Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Mobile, Ala._                                           25.00
    Chicago. Rev. S. J. Humphrey, D. D., _for
      President’s House, Talladega, Ala._                     10.00
    Champaign. Individuals, _for McLeansville, N. C._          1.30
    Claremont. Individuals, _for McLeansville, N. C._          0.50
    Danvers. Cong. Ch.                                        10.36
    Dover. Cong. Ch.                                          37.20
    Elmwood. Cong. Ch.                                        30.89
    Farmington. D. B.                                          1.00
    Galesburg. Mrs. Julia T. Wells                            15.00
    Granville. Sunbeam Circle, Cong. Sab. Sch.                10.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Lake Forest. Mrs. M. A. W. Ferry, _for
      furnishing a room, Atlanta U._                          25.00
    Lee Centre. Cong. Ch.                                     13.00
    Marseilles. Cong. Ch.                                      2.58
    Millburn. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               50.00
    Oswego. S. P.                                              1.00
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                          7.63
    Plymouth. N. F. Newman                                     5.00
    Princeton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    9.15
    Quincy. L. Kingman                                        10.00
    Rochelle. W. H. Holcomb, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Savoy. Mrs. H. B.                                          0.50
    Sumner. A. C., _for McLeansville, N. C._                   0.25
    Tonica. N. Richey, (Thanksgiving offering)                 6.62
    Walnut. Mrs. E. D. W.                                      1.00
    Woodburn. Nickel Miss. Soc.                                5.00


  MICHIGAN, $532.29.

    Calumet. Cong. Ch., ad’l                                 136.88
    Custer. Rev. L. Curtiss                                   10.00
    Detroit. Fort St. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                             50.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Woodville,
      Ga._                                                    30.00
    Greenville. First Cong. Ch.                               60.00
    Hamilton. Rev. Saml. F. Porter                             5.00
    Jackson. First Cong. Ch.                                 150.00
    Kalamazoo. Mrs. J. A. Kent                                 5.00
    Marble. Mrs. Josephine Barnes                              5.00
    Memphis. Ladies’ Missionary Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                              2.00
    New Haven. Cong. Ch.                                       4.10
    Northport. Cong. Ch.                                       8.11
    Romeo. Cong. Ch.                                          55.20
    Saint Joseph. Mrs. J. S.                                   1.00
    Union City. Mrs. I. N. Clark and Miss Sarah B.
      Clark, $5 each, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00


  IOWA, $309.03.

    Alden. Ladies’ Miss Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            2.00
    Anamosa. Mrs. D. McC.                                      0.50
    Burlington. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        28.50
    Chester Center. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   15.00
    Denmark. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss. Soc., Plymouth Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                 25.00
    De Witt. J. H. Price                                      10.00
    Dubuque. First Cong. Ch.                                  24.00
    Dubuque. Miss Anne Millard and Sab. Sch. of
      Christian Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               10.00
    Farmersburgh. Cong. Ch.                                    2.50
    Grinnell. John K. James, to const. HATTIE F.
      JAMES, L. M.                                            30.03
    Grinnell. Infant Class, Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Ind. Sch., Memphis, Tenn._                               6.00
    Hampton. Mrs. M. R., _for Emerson Inst._                   0.75
    Iowa City. Cong. Ch.                                      67.00
    Lansing. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Onawa City. Cong. Ch.                                      7.75


  WISCONSIN, $112.10.

    Beloit. Cong. Ch. ($2.50 of which from Mrs. A.
      A. Tuttle, Roscoe, Ill.)                                21.50
    Delevan. Cong. Ch.                                        26.00
    Emerald Grove. Cong. Ch.                                  12.73
    Johnstown. Cong. Ch.                                       3.00
    Mazomanie. “A Friend.”                                     0.75
    Menasha. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               40.00
    Ripon. Mrs. M. H., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              1.00
    Two Rivers. Cong. Ch.                                      2.12
    Whitewater. C. M. Blackman, _for Le Moyne Ind.
      Sch._                                                    5.00


  KANSAS, $2.00.

    Garden City. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00


  MISSOURI, $11.75.

    Sedalia. First Cong. Ch.                                  11.75


  MINNESOTA, $25.23.

    Audubon. Cong. Ch.                                         1.50
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 21.73
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                       2.00


  NEBRASKA, $44.00.

    Fremont. Cong. Ch., $19, and Sab. Sch., $25               44.00


  CALIFORNIA, $421.95.

    Hollister. C. S. D.                                        0.45
    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                        421.50


  WASHINGTON TER., $20.

    S’kokomish. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                    20.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $76.25.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                               75.00
    Washington. Children of Gen. John Eaton, _for
      Indian M._                                               1.25


  MARYLAND, $246.95.

    Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                               146.95
    Baltimore. Rev. Geo. Morris, _for a teacher,
      Fisk U._                                               100.00


  WEST VIRGINA, $10.00.

    Valley Grove. P. Whitman.                                 10.00


  KENTUCKY, $1.00.

    North Middletown. Mrs. J. S. B.                            1.00


  TENNESSEE, $363.45.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   233.10
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              130.35


  NORTH CAROLINA, $107.25.

    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                         107.25


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $320.05.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         320.05


  GEORGIA, $786.47.

    Atlanta. Storrs School, Tuition, $509.97;
      Rent, $12                                              521.97
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition                              81.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, $65.25; Rent,
      $7                                                      72.25
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $101.25; Rent,
      $10                                                    111.25


  ALABAMA, $507.52.

    Childersburg. Rev. Alfred Jones                            2.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $217.25; Cong.
      Ch. $1                                                 218.25
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                           4.05
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                         108.22


  MISSISSIPPI, $2,086.50.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $86.50; State
      Appropriation, $2,000                                2,086.50


  LOUISIANA, $83.25.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                         83.25


  DOMINION OF CANADA, $20.00.

    Kingston. Arthur B. Wilkes                                10.00
    Sherbrooke. Thomas S. Morey                               10.00


  IRELAND, 60 cts.

    Cork. R. D.                                                0.60


  SCOTLAND, $100.00.

    Kilmarnock. Mrs. Janet Stewart, _for a
      Teacher, Fisk U._                                      100.00
                                                          —————————
    Total for November                                   $12,989.85
    Total from Oct. 1st. to Nov. 30th.                    29,258.57

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

  _From July 17th, 1880, to October 13th, 1880._

    I. From our Auxiliaries, viz.:
        Petaluma Chinese Mission:
          Ten Annual Memberships                     $20.00
            Collection, $6.30, Mrs. G., $1                    27.30
        Sacramento Chinese Mission:
           Chinese monthly offerings                  13.60
          Eleven Annual Memberships                   22.00—  35.60
        Santa Barbara Chinese Mission:
          Chinese monthly offering                     5.00
          Rev. S. R. Wildon                            5.00
          C. A. Menafee                                1.75
          Mrs. P.                                      0.50—  12.25
        Stockton Chinese Mission:
          Twenty-one Annual Memberships               42.00
          Mrs. Lane                                    1.00—  43.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                           $118.15

    II. From Churches:
          Benicia: Cong. Ch., Rev. S. H. Willey,
            D.D., (Ann. Mem.)                         $2.00
          Oakland: First Cong. Ch., Collection        29.65
          Nine Annual Memberships                     18.00
          Lee Haim                                     5.00
          Chan Fong                                    0.50
          “A Friend in Heaven”                        20.00—  73.15
          Riverside: Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                          1.00
          San Francisco: First Cong. Ch. collection   10.90
          One Annual Member                            2.00—  12.90
          Bethany Church: Chinese monthly offerings    3.00
          Forty-one Ann. Mem.                         82.00
          William Johnston, Esq.                       5.00
          Collection                                   3.00—  93.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                           $182.05

    III. From Individuals:
        Marysville:
          Chinese (two Ann. Mem.)                              4.80
        San Francisco:
          O. W. Merriam, Esq.                                 25.00
          Hon. F. F. Low                                      20.00
          Charles Holbrook, Esq.                              10.00
          Cash                                                10.00
        At Annual Meeting, Oakland:
          Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D.                             10.00
          Rev. George Mooar, D.D.                             10.00
          S. S. Smith, Esq.                                   10.00
          Rev. C. M. Blake                                     5.00
          Rev. J. T. Ford                                      5.00
          Rev. C. A. Savage                                    5.00
          Rev. J. H. Warren, D.D.                              2.50
          L. G. C.                                             2.00
          Rev. J. J. Powell                                    1.00
          Rev. A. L. Rankin                                    1.00
                                                             ——————
            Total                                            121.30
          Grand total                                       $421.50

                                E. PALACHE, _Treasurer C. C. M._

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Enfield, Mass. Edward Smith                             $200.00
    Northampton, Mass. Mrs. C. L. Williston                  100.00
    Northampton, Mass. Hon. G. W. Hubbard’s Class
      in First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                            15.00
    Bridgeport, Conn. Horace Eames                            20.00
    Clinton, Conn. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            25.00
    East Haven, Conn. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         25.00
    Hamden, Conn. Henry Monson, $10; E. D. Swift,
      M. D., $5                                               15.00
    Milford, Conn. Rev. Geo. H. Griffin                       25.00
    New Haven, Conn. Hon. Charles Farnum                     100.00
    Norfolk, Conn. Hon. Robbins Battell                       25.00
    Plainfield, Conn. Ladies                                  27.00
    Plymouth, Conn. Cong. Ch. “Friends”                       13.00
    Waterbury, Conn. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                40.00
    Watertown, Conn. Dr. John De Forest                      100.00
    West Haven, Conn. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         25.00
    Connecticut. Cash                                         10.00
    New York, N. Y. Mrs. Mary J. Morgan                      100.00
    Morristown, N. J. E. A. Graves                           500.00
    Greenville, Mich. M. Rutan                               500.00
                                                           ————————
          Total                                            1,865.00
    Previously acknowledged in October Receipts            1,036.00
                                                           ————————
          Total                                           $2,901.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Leeds, England. Robert Arthington, conditional
      pledge, £3,000.
    Richmond, Ill. Cong. Ch.                                  $1.62
    Genoa Junction, Wis. Cong. Ch.                             4.38
                                                           ————————
        Total                                                  6.00
    Previously acknowledged in October Receipts            1,601.90
                                                           ————————
        Total                                             $1,607.90

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._
                                                56 Reade St., N. Y.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—in Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 6.
_Africa_, 2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 70.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 24. Total 44.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 253;
among the Chinese, 21; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
296. STUDENTS—In Theology, 86; Law, 28; in College Course, 63;
in other studies, 7,030. Total, 7,207. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.




                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Brown Brothers & Co.

                          59 WALL STREET,

                             NEW YORK.

=Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great Britain and Ireland,
France, Germany, Belgium and Holland, =Issue Commercial and
Travelers’ Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part of the
world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and Guadaloupe.

                Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

         Between this and other countries, through London
                            and Paris.

=Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all parts of the United
States and Canada, and of =Drafts drawn in the United States= on
Foreign Countries.

=Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash deposited or
satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In Dollars for use in the
United States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use
in any part of the world. Applications for credits may be addressed
as above direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                     26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                               LIFE

                        Insurance Company,

                                OF

                             NEW YORK.

                       ORGANIZED A.D. 1850.

                        RULES OF BUSINESS.

=PREMIUMS= the lowest safe rates.

=POLICY= as little restricted in terms as possible.

=NON-FORFEITURE= secured in the policy under the recent law of New
York.

=DIVIDENDS= made annually.

=MANAGEMENT= steady, reliable, business-like.

=INVESTMENTS.= Best security sought, rather than the largest
interest.

=PRINCIPAL OBJECT.= To meet CLAIMS promptly.

=RESULT.= Nearly 3,000 families benefited when most needed.

  HENRY STOKES, President.
  C. Y. WEMPLE, Vice-President.
  J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

[Illustration]

Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

                         Founded in 1832.

                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.
                             NEW YORK,

                                AND

                         197 Lake Street,
                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._




                 *       *       *       *       *


                      THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       American Missionary.

                               1881.

Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it, and
assist in its circulation. Begin with the January number and the
new year. The price is only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 32.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                          H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are thousands of
Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors and Teachers in
Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
a specially valuable medium for advertising Books, Periodicals,
Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of Learning, Church
Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged for
space in its columns, considering the extent and character of its
circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

          THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

☞ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of
the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning,
when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious punctuation printing errors were corrected.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 1, JANUARY, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.