VOL. XXXIV.                                                   No. 7.

                                 THE

                         AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                 “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             JULY, 1880.




                             _CONTENTS:_


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                     193
    OUR GREAT NEED                                                 197
    ARTHINGTON MISSION—THE OUTLOOK                                 198
    THE GENERIC AND THE INDIVIDUAL NEGRO                           200
    THIRD STATE OF OUR EXPERIMENT                                  201
    AFRICAN NOTES—ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                             203


  THE FREEDMEN.

    MAKE HASTE SLOWLY: Rev. J. E. Roy, D. D.                        204
    HAMPTON ANNIVERSARY: Rev. A. P. Foster                          206
    FISK UNIVERSITY                                                 207
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY                                             210
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY                                             210
    HOWARD UNIVERSITY                                               211
    LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL—BEACH INSTITUTE                               212


  AFRICA.

    SUNDAY-SCHOOLS IN CENTRAL AFRICA                                213


  THE INDIANS.

    S’KOKOMISH, WASHINGTON TERRITORY                                214


  THE CHINESE.

    OUR WORK AT THE CENTRE: Rev. W. C. Pond                         216


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    ELEPHANT IN AFRICA                                              218


  RECEIPTS                                                          219


  CONSTITUTION                                                      222

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS                                            223

                  *       *       *       *       *

                              NEW YORK.

          Published by the American Missionary Association,

                        ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                   Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




                   American Missionary Association.

                         56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                  *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    ANDREW LESTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to
the Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting
fields to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of
the “American Missionary,” to Rev. C. C. PAINTER, at the New
York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices,
21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington
Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time
constitutes a Life Member.




                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  VOL. XXXIV.                 JULY, 1880.                       No. 7.

                   *       *       *       *       *


                    American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *


We are glad that we can keep silent in regard to the closing
exercises of our schools and let others praise us; strangers, and not
our own lips. Nay, better than this, we can say that in many cases
those whose praise we repeat, are no longer strangers. In place of
some of the usual reports written by our teachers, or friends who
have gone down to look into our work, having the greatest sympathy
with it, we gather up what is said by the native whites of the South,
many of whom have been most interested attendants upon all the
anniversary exercises of the schools contiguous to them. We find no
fuller or more sympathetic or enthusiastic reports in the Southern
papers of the schools for whites than of ours for the colored people.
We, therefore, ask the special attention of our readers to these
reports this year, as showing the estimate the Southern press and
people are putting upon our work.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dr. Rufus Anderson._—Seldom have nature and grace, culture and
varied discipline, combined to form a more rounded and perfect
character than that of this sainted man, so long identified with the
life of Missions, who passed to his rest on the last Sabbath of May.
He became permanently connected with the A. B. C. F. M. in 1822,
and since 1832 has largely shaped the policy of that Society. For
more than half a century, he has been in the closest sympathy with
the Divine Master in His effort to save the world, and it has often
seemed to us that his face reflected much of the sweet longings of
the Master for its accomplishment.

It were sad to be forever on a journey, and never reach home, and so,
while the church feels a sense of loss and bereavement because of
his removal from its councils, we yet rejoice over his beautiful and
useful life, and in the assurance that to him has been administered
an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Deacon Isler._—The Church at Wilmington, N. C., has been greatly
afflicted, and much weakened, by the death of Deacon Isler, a
Christian of rare development in all that graces Christian character.
It is only five years since he came to Christ, and it now seems
to his associates that these five years have been spent under a
premonition that what he did must be done quickly. His consecration
was without reserve; nothing was too hard for him to undertake; no
obstacle turned him aside from the duty which lay before him. With
no patience for those who would accept help they did not need, he
combined the purpose and constant effort to bear in his strong arms
those who did need it.

While, as he said, he “had his rathers,” and would like to work for
others, yet he was willingly and joyfully in the hands of Jesus. Much
comforted by his wife’s reply to his question whether she could give
him up, “Yes, all I want is Jesus,” he passed gently and sweetly
away; a man of rare strength, whose death is a great loss, but, being
dead, he yet speaketh, and his works follow after him.

       *       *       *       *       *

“_No Charge On My Books Against You._”—The above sketch of a worthy
and noble man, for which we had no room in our last number, is
supplemented by an incident which must find place for brief mention.

When it became evident that disease was fastening upon him, the best
physician of the city was called in and put in charge of the case. He
became acquainted with the noble life of his humble patient, took the
deepest interest in him, and attended him as faithfully as if he had
been a wealthy and influential white man.

When one of the teachers, who had made herself responsible for the
bill, called upon the doctor for it, he said: “I have no charge
against you. I only wish I could have done more for so worthy a
man; I shall be glad to give my professional aid to as many such
beneficiaries as I can.” Straws are small things, but they indicate
the _set_ of the tide. Facts multiply which abundantly prove that
mutually helpful relations are being established between the two
races on the basis of recognized equal civil liberty. The _ignis
fatuus_ of social equality between them might with profit be remitted
to the realm of dreams and fantasms, and wait the establishment of
such between members of the same race.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Dallas_ (Texas) _Times_ relates an unparalleled instance which
occurred at the last term of the Ellis Co. District Court. A negro
was tried and found guilty of conspiracy to murder. His defence had
been strong but unavailing. The judge overruled a motion for a new
trial, as no error of law could be alleged and the evidence seemed
strong. When asked what he had to say, the prisoner answered that he
could say nothing which would change the sentence the court was about
to pronounce upon him, but he would like to speak a few words to his
own people in the court-room. Leave being given, he began in a slow,
quiet way to review the case. He dissected the evidence in a most
masterly way, showing its inconsistencies and contradictions; and
gradually warmed up until he burst forth into a strain of impassioned
eloquence which carried audience and court with him. When he
finished, the judge said, “Sam, I thought you guilty; I don’t believe
so now, and will set aside the judgment overruling your motion for
a new trial, and give you another chance.” The attorney for the
prosecution then dismissed the case. He was an uneducated, common
field hand; and yet there are some who think the negro incapable
of doing anything higher than hoeing cotton under a white man’s
supervision.

When Gen. Howard was in Andover, Mass., the other week, visiting his
son in Phillips Academy, he was introduced to a colored man, who
asked him if he remembered an answer given by a colored boy at the
Storr’s School, in Atlanta, some years since, to his question, “What
shall I tell the people of the North?” “O, yes,” said the General.
“A little boy in a white jacket said, ‘Tell them we are rising.’”
“Well,”said the young man, “that boy has kept his promise. He has
risen and is doing noble, manly work for his people.” He has become
editor of the _Journal of Progress_, one of the fifty-four papers now
edited by colored men in this country.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Then and Now._—Nineteen years ago, John G. Fee was waited upon by
sixty-two citizens of Bracken Co., Ky., with a peremptory demand that
he should leave the county. One of these, an influential and wealthy
man, has recently called on him and requested him to give an address
on education for the benefit of an institution which the citizens
of that county have built. This building is used as an academy. The
school is flourishing, having a large number of pupils and three
teachers.

The door is opening wider and wider, while the number of adversaries
grows smaller: many of them deserting, and becoming co-laborers with
us in this work.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Savannah, Ga._, has one grog-shop for each 110 of its 33,000
inhabitants, and one Protestant church, white or black, for each
1,223; and until recently, it is said, the churches had no particular
fault to find with the grog-shops, and it may be inferred the latter
had no complaint to make of the churches. But there has been a
disturbance. Some 4,000 of the whites have enlisted to fight this
greatest curse and nuisance of our day, while the blacks are also
700 strong in the same army. The labors of Rev. H. E. Brown, in
connection with his revival work in that city, have greatly aided
Mr. Markham’s efforts in this direction; and so the blacks and the
whites are making common cause against the common enemy, just as if
their interests were identical in whatever concerns the temporal or
spiritual welfare of the city. We shall some time talk more of common
interests, and less of different colors.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Preaching, but no Instruction._—In our last number, one of the
missionaries in Alabama said that many of the colored people “declare
plainly they do not believe in Bible religion.” They believe in
visions and dreams. Another missionary, writing from a section still
under the spiritual guidance of the old preachers, says:

“These people have had preaching, but no instruction. The heart and
conscience have not been touched. The older people will come out of a
religious meeting and steal a hog for their supper. A white man said
to me, ‘When these darkies are going to have a camp-meeting barbecue,
I am pretty sure to lose two or three heads of cattle from my herd.’
One very _pious_ brother, engaged in prayer at a camp-meeting, heard
some one in the crowd say, ‘Here comes a United States marshal,’ when
the brother rose from his knees, leaving his petition unfinished, and
ran with all speed for the brush.” Surely, such need truly religions
teachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Missionary Studies._—The plan of study adopted by the church
at Dorset, Vt., is so comprehensive and practical, that we must
give room to it. The reports and papers are offered on the first
Sabbath of each month, as follows: Races for whom Christ died.
1st. Characteristics, Homes, Histories; 2d. What is being done for
their evangelization? 1. White men, Caucasian race; 2. Yellow men,
Mongolian race; 3. Black men, Ethiopian race; 4. Brown men, Malayan
race; 5. Red men, American or Indian race.

A most valuable course of instruction is mapped out here, combining
the advantages of a literary club, with the spiritual aims of a
missionary concert.

       *       *       *       *       *

_What Does It Mean?_—The venerable Dr. Moffat, father-in-law of
Livingstone, says: “More has been learned regarding Africa since the
Proclamation of President Lincoln, declaring the slaves of the United
States free, than in all the past.” Who can be so blind that he does
not see the relation of these two facts?

Today, eight European governments have from one to three exploring
parties penetrating that vast continent for various purposes. The
negro slave of America has become a free man, has the ballot in his
hand, and the nation is under bonds to fit him for citizenship. He is
restive in his present position. He has an instinct for home which
does not find its full satisfaction either on the cotton lands of
Mississippi, nor on the corn fields of Kansas or Indiana. What it all
means, God in His own time will fully unfold. Meantime, the pressure
of necessity is upon us to save ourselves from being trampled to
death under the feet of these ignorant voters, led to the polls by
unscrupulous demagogues. When we have done this, we shall have fitted
an instrument for God’s own right hand; whether for use in America or
in Africa chiefly, we know not, and it matters not.

       *       *       *       *       *

_John Sykes._—The editor of the _Independent_, on a recent excursion
into Virginia, met with, what we may begin to call, a representative
negro, for John Sykes is not so much alone today as James’ celebrated
solitary horseman of thirty years ago. He is the owner of 171 acres
of land near Lake Drummond, all paid for, and stocked with horse,
mule, several cows, pigs, sheep, and fowl. He was on his way to
Hampton to hear the valedictory address of his son, with great
expectations as to what he should see and learn as to new methods of
farming practiced on the great farm connected with the school.

His daughter is to take her turn at the school next year, to be
followed by another son. Since he bought his land, eight years ago,
twenty-five other colored men, his neighbors, have purchased, and
paid for, land in lots of from 5 to 50 acres each, while some thirty
others have contracts for similar lots. All this within eight years,
and along with it has been a progress in education and general thrift
which is most hopeful. The editor met four graduates on the same boat
with Mr. Sykes, on their way back to Hampton to attend the graduating
exercises, “whose intelligence and gentlemanliness were most marked.”
He adds as the result of his observations, what a recent excursion
into the South enables us to confirm, “In Virginia, the colored
people are rapidly rising in intelligence, in comfort, and in wealth;
and the feeling of the whites toward them is quite as kindly as could
be expected.”

And the contrast suggested is one that it would be well for those
who are impatient of the negroes’ slow progress to follow out to
the minutest detail. He writes: “It is impossible for a visitor
from the North not to compare their position as a race with that
of our ancestors two hundred years ago, when starting an American
civilization. The Southern negroes have probably as much comfort
about them as most of our early forefathers, as good houses, as good
furniture, as many cattle: but they have not the intelligent educated
upper class, which founded our great colleges and which molded our
whole population. This influence they must get from abroad. They
need it, and they appreciate and want it; and no more needed and
fruitful work can be done by our benevolent people than to provide
the Southern negroes with Christian education.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Memphis Avalanche_ says that a most interesting and entertaining
feature of the evening exercises, connected with the close of the Le
Moyne School, was the address to the graduating class by Judge J. O.
Pierce, which was scholarly, thoughtful and eloquent. And it adds of
the school that “it is an honor to the educational institutions of
Memphis. It has done much to forward the cause of education among the
colored population, and the good results of its labors are apparent
in every direction. Institutions of this class cannot be too much
encouraged.”

It is proof that we have entered upon a new era when the principal
of one of our schools is constrained to say, what Prof. Steele, of
Le Moyne Institute, does in a card to the editors of the _Memphis
Appeal_:

“I cannot leave the city for the summer without first thanking you,
and, through the _Appeal_, also the other eminent gentlemen, who
have, during the year past, given us so much aid and encouragement
in our work among the colored people of this city and vicinity. The
course of lectures which these gentlemen have provided has, I am
certain, accomplished much good in many ways. * * * In this, as in
every other respect, a better day is near at hand. * * * It has been
our aim, in quietly doing our work here, to hasten forward this day
of better feeling, and after years of patient toil, and amid many
discouragements, we hope that at last a day is not far distant when
our work shall gain the approval and aid of all good people, or even
when we may relinquish our efforts and hand over our work to those
here who should be, and who are, I am convinced, becoming greatly
interested in it. Again, in behalf of the faculty and students of
this school, and in behalf of the American Missionary Association,
which has, in the past sixteen years, expended millions of dollars
in education at the South, I thank the _Appeal_ and other papers and
gentlemen for their interest and encouragement in our work.”

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR GREAT NEED.

We have vast opportunities. Our schools are overflowing with the
best selected material we have ever had. The fields are white for the
harvest, much of which must rot ungathered, unless a large number
of laborers are sent into the field; and these are not wanting. The
day of romance in negro teaching is past, and there is nothing in it
that appeals to the mere sentimentalist. The day of danger is past,
and martyrs are not called for; but there is a demand for honest,
earnest Christian educators, who find ample field for all their best
gifts, and there is no difficulty in procuring these of the very
first order. There is, also, much intelligent appreciation of the
vital importance of this work, in its relations both to the life of
our nation and the kingdom of Christ. What is needed now, and most
pressingly, is a clear apprehension on the part of churches and
individuals of the relation which their _gifts_ bear to these civil
and spiritual results. It is largely a question of money given, or
money withheld. “Prayers are needed?” Certainly! Prayer, not to move
the Lord so that _He_ shall favor the work, and prosper the efforts
of those engaged in it, but prayer that shall shake selfish plans of
expenditure which are so large that nothing is left over for this
work; prayer that shall confirm, and give definite shape to vague
desires that the means shall be provided; prayer that selfishness may
not throttle benevolence. When _this_ prayer has become fervent and
effectual, the result will be _money_, which, we assert again, is our
present great need.

The Association was urged forward, by the zeal of the churches at
the last Annual Meeting, to enlarged plans for the year, requiring
enlarged gifts from the churches. This enlargement on our part has
been made; it is necessary that yours shall now correspond, or
disaster will follow.

Owing to the fact that our schools close in the month of June, and
our accounts with our workers must be settled, our need is specially
great at this time. The long spell of dry weather has affected our
collections in the country churches; and there is danger that we
shall suffer, as our benevolent societies do in the presidential
year, from absorption of public interest in political affairs; and so
we must urge again upon our friends the fact that our great and most
pressing need is “money.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ARTHINGTON MISSION—THE OUTLOOK.

To those who are acquainted with the fact, that there is not a single
Protestant missionary in the Nile Basin proper, from the Albert
Lake to the Lybian Desert, the subject of this article will be of
profound interest. Is Ethiopia stretching out her hands to God, or
will she do so soon? For a reply to these questions, the eye turns,
just now, to this Association and the progress of the proposed
Arthington Mission. We have considered Mr. Arthington’s proffered
aid, and have sounded the call for men and means. Expectations
have been raised, money has been contributed, and the service of
experienced missionaries tendered. There have been so many disasters
in connection with Central African Missions, so much delay has
been caused by unexpected obstacles, and such sacrifices of health
and life have been experienced, that we have felt constrained to
proceed with the greatest caution. The courage and faith of God’s
people may be sustained for a time by displays of enterprise,
daring, and readiness to give one’s life for a good cause. Indeed,
such exhibitions are essential; but a time comes when nothing will
satisfy but solid success. Our earnest prayer from the beginning has
been, that we might be led to enter upon work in the Nile Basin, if
at all, in a manner that would give promise of great and permanent
usefulness. We have, therefore, endeavored during the past year to
gather information from every available source, and, especially,
from persons who have been engaged in the service of the Egyptian
Government. In this, we have been fortunate.

Col. C. C. Long, of New York, who visited Mtesa’s kingdom on the
Nile, has kindly responded to our calls upon him, whenever questions
of interest about which he was informed, have arisen. More than
a year ago, we submitted to him in writing a list of thirty-nine
questions for the purpose of obtaining information on every matter
of interest in connection with the Mission. To these questions, he
responded fully in writing.

Last autumn, Col. H. G. Prout, who had served for two years and
a half on Gordon Pasha’s staff in ancient Ethiopia, established
himself in New York. At our request, he gave us several interviews
of great interest and profit. During his stay in Central Africa,
he had carefully surveyed the route from Souakim to Berber, of
which we have a full report. He had also surveyed the countries of
Kordofan and Darfur, after which, with a view to the acceptance of
the governorship of the Upper Nile Basin, he proceeded to Mrooli, by
way of the White Nile and the Albert Lake, traversing the country we
propose to occupy. He kindly reviewed with us the responses given by
Colonel Long, and added valuable information.

Prof. Chase, on his return from Africa to London, submitted the
information, received from Col. Prout and Col. Long, to Gordon Pasha,
who at that time was in England, and from him gathered in writing
additional and valuable knowledge of the country, and the methods
of procedure necessary for entering it. Prof. Chase also obtained
an interview with Dr. Felkin, of the Church Missionary Society, who
had just returned from Mtesa’s kingdom, by the way of the Nile and
Souakim. From these gentlemen, and the current literature of the
year pertaining to the Nile Basin, we are prepared to re-affirm and
supplement the statements made by us a year ago:—

1.—The country is accessible. Col. Prout’s survey from Souakim on the
Red Sea to Berber on the Nile, a distance of 240 miles, is reported
with such fullness of detail as to familiarize the reader with almost
every mile of the journey, impressing him with the feeling that a
trip over the road at the right season would prove a pleasurable
pastime. From Berber to the mouth of the Sobat, the northern border
of the territory selected for the Mission, steamers with suitable
accommodations ply with more or less regularity. To this it may be
added that abundant supplies, except medicines, can be purchased
along the route.

2.—The negroes from the Sobat to the Equator have not been
Mohammedanized. They are real heathen, in very needy circumstances,
and would, doubtless, welcome missionary endeavors, especially if
trade and industries were promoted in connection with religious
teachings.

3.—The efforts of the missionaries would have a very wholesome
influence upon the Egyptian officials, and serve to check the
slave-trade and to ameliorate the condition of slaves.

4.—It would be the part of wisdom to locate our first stations where
the people are already protected by the Egyptian Government, as
their flag would be sure to follow if new fields were opened, and
with it, temporary disturbance. Pressure should be brought to bear
upon the Khedive for obtaining permission to navigate the Nile with
steam-boats, and for freedom and protection while pursuing missionary
work at the points selected.

5.—While it would be desirable to commence at once, for many
reasons, among the Obbo and Latooka, south-east of Gondokoro,
yet it would probably be the part of prudence to plant our first
station near the mouth of the Sobat, where the country is rolling
and well-wooded, and the people of the Nouer tribe are friendly to
missionary endeavors. From this point, there is frequent and not
difficult communication with Khartum, which is a sufficient base
of supplies. From the mouth of the Sobat, mission stations may be
extended throughout the region we hope to occupy.

6.—A rendezvous might wisely be established at Berber, where a
fruitful oasis affords supplies. This locality is said to be healthy,
and, being situated on the Nile in the southern portion of the
desert, free from African fever. If a steamer is secured for the
Mission, the missionaries, in case of sickness or need of changes,
could easily resort to Berber, spending a portion of the more
unhealthy season; and possibly, meanwhile, developing a Mission at
that point.

7.—The aid rendered by the Egyptian authorities to the United
Presbyterian, of America, who have established 35 mission stations
in Lower Egypt, gives promise of a good measure of protection and
co-operation. Although the Mohammedans as such, and, especially,
the slave-dealers, are sure to look with disfavor upon Protestant
missions in the Nile Basin; yet, American and English influence is
sufficient to assure such toleration as is needful, while the real
heathen, to whom we hope to minister, have no political or other
reasons for discouraging our efforts.

From the information gained during the year, we are encouraged to
believe that as soon as the means, now being gathered in Great
Britain and America, is sufficient to warrant us in inaugurating the
Arthington Mission, we can safely and wisely enter upon the work.
The amount to be made up is a little less than $15,000. May the Lord
hasten His work in His own good time.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GENERIC AND THE INDIVIDUAL NEGRO.

In commenting upon the evidence in the Whittaker case, one of
our most fair-minded weeklies says: “Should his guilt be finally
established, the act will be a blunder no less than a crime. Whatever
his purpose, the _necessary_ result of his conduct will be injurious
to ‘his people.’”

This is ambiguous. Whittaker is three-fourths part Caucasian, and
we are unwilling to take, as being a part of _his people_, even
1/46,000,000 part of his crime if he is guilty, and do utterly refuse
to be hurt by it. If, on the other hand, his one-fourth part negro
blood so dominates these three-fourths, that he must be accounted a
negro, then grave apprehensions are excited. That he has, as we go to
press, passed so many of his examinations successfully under all the
difficulties of his position, we must conclude is due to the modicum
of negro blood in his composite nature; a fact which foreshadows the
supremacy of _his people_ in our land.

But, seriously, we do most earnestly and decidedly protest against
this idea that the negro is not an individual but a fraction of
an unit. We believe the _certain_ result will be injurious to his
people, but this will not be a _necessary_ result. Were a white
student guilty of such a crime and blunder, it would be simply
ridiculous to say that the _necessary_ result was injurious to
“his people,” meaning the white race. There are reported cases of
self-inflicted injuries of this kind. Who believes for a moment that,
because a wife mutilates herself, as in a case reported, she has
brought discredit upon all our wives?

We treat Indians and Negroes in classes as if it inhered, by
eternal necessity, in the nature of things, that their individuality
should be ignored, disregarded, or trampled upon. We are a great
ways off from the true and right basis of action when we pass
by the personality of any one with all his inherent rights and
responsibilities, and think of him and treat him only as belonging to
a general class.

It may be, that until his rights are respected by the public at
large, the negro must receive special attention as the case of
Whittaker has received; but, so long as his treatment is special
because he belongs to a class, it is evident that the treatment of
the class to which he belongs is all wrong. Whittaker’s innocence
or guilt pertains to himself alone, and should in no way affect the
question as to the standing or character of his people. The feeling
that it must necessarily affect them is one phase of the sentiment
which has isolated and made intolerable the life of this poor fellow
at West Point. Personally he appears to be a very fine fellow, but
the condition of “his people” has necessarily—so these young cadets
think, and evidently many others who are not in the callow softness
of their cadetship agree with them—affected him, rendering him unfit
for comradeship, or even decent treatment. The questions, (any one of
which is deemed a final and conclusive estoppel to all argument as
to the right of the negro to Christian courtesy), “Would you sleep
with a negro?” “Would you associate with a negro?” “Would you marry a
negro?”—these are simply absurd. Whether we would do any, or all of
these, should be answered as in the case of any person of whatever
race, in view of considerations and qualifications that are purely
individual, with no reference whatever to Ham, or to his or her
people. We associate with friends because of personal qualities, not
because they are white or yellow.

We apprehend that in some schools for the education of colored
people, the treatment of the pupil is special because of his color.
He is made to feel that he is a special case, whatever the advantage
or disadvantage of the fact, its honor or dishonor. He is a negro,
and not simply a human being. He is to stand or fall as a part of
“his people” rather than by his own individuality and personal
character. We say again, with great emphasis, that we protest against
the whole so-called necessity of the case as false and absurd; as
indicative of abnormal sentiments which must be eradicated before
right results can be even sought, much less reached.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE THIRD STAGE OF OUR EXPERIMENT.

We have reached, and, in some of the States, have distinctly
entered upon, the third stage of our experiment of negro suffrage.
In glancing at these, we shall be simply historical, not critical;
shall set down naught in malice, but with simple truth as we have
understood it. The fragments of the late Confederacy resumed their
autonomy as parts of this nation almost wholly under direction of the
negro voter. There seemed to be a double necessity that he should be
armed with the ballot, that he might defend himself against his old
master who showed unmistakable evidence of his purpose virtually to
re-enslave him, and that he might maintain the political ascendency
of his friends over his master’s old friends. In this first stage
we had, as the political representative of the South, what is
historically known as the carpet-bagger—an immigrant elected by the
Freedman, hated and opposed by the native white; and legislation
which burdened some of the States to the verge of endurance was the
result.

The second stage was reached when the influence of the general
Government was withdrawn from the South, and control passed again
into the hands of the native whites. The alien was remanded to
obscurity, or found the climate of the North more congenial, and the
negro was mightily prevailed upon to forego his right to vote. This
gave us what is generally regarded as the reign of Bourbonism. The
white vote of the South became solid, and the opposition was almost
silenced. We state the fact without commenting upon it or arguing
from it. This result we might easily have inferred from what had gone
before. The instinct of self-preservation, it would seem, must have
compelled such a united front against the outrageous robbery to which
the South had been subjected by ignorant and dishonest legislators.

But now we have entered upon the third stage of this experiment. The
solid South is broken, not by federal assaults, or through the ambition
of carpet-baggers, but by native greed of power. The irrepressible
conflict between the “ins” and the “outs” hurls to the ground the
fabric which seemed to the South so fair and so strong. The hero of a
hundred battles leads the ignorant negro to the polls, deluded by lies
and false promises, displaces one-armed Confederates who had fought
under him, to make room for a low grade of negro politicians, trails
the honor of a once proud old commonwealth in the dust, and dissipates
forever the fond delusion of a solid white South. We have had the negro
placed in authority for a brief day by federal power; then by a certain
reaction driven from the legislative hall, and in many cases from the
ballot box, by the outraged white restored to power. Now we are to
see him debauched and led to the polls by political demagogues, in a
desperate and most demoralizing struggle for office.

Which stage has been, or promises to be the worst? Concerning this
there would doubtless be difference of opinion, according to the
latitude of those who express it. To the Southern white, nothing
could seem more terrible than exposure to the insult and burden of
_negro_ legislation; not simply because it is ignorant, but chiefly
because it is negro legislation. To the average citizen of the
North, the stories told of wrongs and cruelties perpetrated by the
Southerners in their efforts to deliver themselves from this, to
them, intolerable degradation, have seldom been eclipsed in horror
and utter fiendishness, and nothing could be worse than that a solid
South be maintained. But to us who have been trying to grasp, in
order that we may solve, the great problem involved in the negro’s
relation to our national life, and the kingdom of our Lord, it seems
evident that we are just beginning to get a glimpse of the danger
we are called to face, and with which we must grapple. Hitherto we
have chased the bear, and the chase has had its dangers; but now the
bear has turned to chase us. We can no longer calmly discuss the
question, “What shall we do with the negro?” but it becomes one of
vital interest, “What will he do with us?” We have put a bludgeon
into a giant’s hands, with which he will beat out our brains, unless
we soothe and exorcise the devil that is in him.

There is this one way out of our danger, and there is none other.
We have been bold enough to attempt the experiment, staking the life
of our Republic upon the issue; let us be wise enough to supply,
with all promptness and fidelity, the conditions which shall ensure
its success. While the statesmanship which thrust the problem upon
us has given itself no concern whatever as to the issue, Christian
charity has shown that a blessed solution is possible. Our schools
have proved that of the ignorant slave a wise and useful citizen can
be made. The path of safety has been clearly pointed out; now let the
means for achieving this safety be supplied. We believe the nation
ought to do it. We know the patriot and Christian must do it, or this
third will prove to be the final stage in this experiment, not only
of equal negro citizenship in a free Republic, but of Republican
government itself.

AFRICAN NOTES.

—Africa is the most profoundly interesting of missionary lands,
because it is God’s greatest providential mystery. Great in
antiquity, great in its ancient curse, great in its colossal
wickedness, great in its hideous wrongs, great in its tremendous
difficulties as a mission field, great in its costly missionary
sacrifices, great in its future possibilities for Christ and the
world. The eyes, the efforts, the progress of the Church of God,
must ever be more and more directed to this grand Satansburg, as Dr.
Schlier would call this great citadel of sin.—“_Bible in all Lands._”

—Africa is the white man’s grave; to him the sentinel of death stands
five miles out at sea; pass beyond that line and sleep on shore,
and death is almost certain. “The story of all past mission work
on that Dark Continent,” says Dr. Blyden, “is one of the saddest
of our missionary stories, and three hundred years of European
intercourse with West Africa has left the people worse than it found
them.” With these facts before me, I do not hesitate to assert my
honest conviction that Africa is to be redeemed by, and through the
instrumentality of, her own sons. If we will now do our duty to
bleeding Africa, and not debauch her people with intoxicants, then
we, of the Anglo-Saxon race, may yet sit as a grand jury over that
Continent, introducing all the arts of civilization, and all the pure
influences of Christianity. I am encouraged in this belief from the
fact that no tribe in the immediate rear of Liberia is considered
perfect, unless it has a man who can speak English, and this may be
the language of Africa in less time than many of us think.—_Edward S.
Morris._

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

MCLEANSVILLE, N. C.—Bible temperance meetings at McLeansville, N.
C., seem to tone up the sentiments of the people. One young man,
who at considerable trouble and expense had procured a situation in
a grocery store where whiskey is sold, has thrown up his position
and gone to work on a farm, because he was convinced that the Bible
condemned liquor-selling, and he could not ask God’s blessing upon
his daily work.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLESTON, S. C.—Prof. S. D. Gaylord, principal of Avery Institute
and licentiate of the Central Association of Iowa, was ordained in
Plymouth Church, Charleston, S. C., by a Council convened on the
29th and 30th of May last. Several members of the Council preached
in various churches of the city, which fact indicates a growing
ministerial fellowship with our missionaries and pastors.

The Avery Institute for the year has numbered 476 pupils, with an
average of 376—its most prosperous year.

The “renewal of the Church Covenant,” introduced and recommended by
Pastor Cutler, is proving a great spiritual blessing to the church,
and conduces to greater watchfulness on the part of the members.

       *       *       *       *       *

ATLANTA, GA.—On the 28th of March, the pastor of the First
Congregational Church of Atlanta proposed that the debt of that
church should be paid off. $26, from two Sunday-schools in the North,
were handed in by the pastor as a _starter_. The Professors of the
University gave $30 more, and the people nobly came forward and have
now paid off all the debt, making some $563 they have raised, aside
from current expenses, since last October. They have since raised
money, which, with special gifts for that purpose, has procured a
fine 800 lbs. bell, which will greet our Secretary, when he reaches
Atlanta on the 24th of June.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARIETTA, GA.—A gem of a church school-house, 24×40 feet, with a
gallery, and furnished with wardrobes and Sherwood’s crown double
desks, was dedicated at Marietta, Ga., on the 6th of June. The people
raised $300 for it; two young men in Illinois gave $50, and the A. M.
A. furnished the remainder, and owns the property.

C. P. Jordon, a graduate of Atlanta University, takes the school; and
Rev. E. J. Penney, also a graduate of Atlanta University, and more
recently of Andover Seminary, will have charge of the church-work.
Our Field Superintendent preached the sermon. A promising enterprise,
strongly manned.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOBILE, ALA.—The _Daily News_, in giving notice of the examinations
at Emerson Institute, says: “Prof. Crawford deserves great credit
for the successful manner in which he has conducted and built up
this colored institution, which today has no superior in our State.”
And Miss Stevenson, of that school, from whom we have had a pleasant
call, speaks of a great change in the feelings of the citizens of
that city toward the school, its work and teachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

FLORENCE, ALA.—The _Florence Gazette_ says of the pastor of the
Colored Congregational Church of that town: “Mr. Ash has gained
the respect and goodwill of all classes in this community, and has
accomplished a most praiseworthy educational and religious work among
the people of his race.”

       *       *       *       *       *

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.—During the absence of the Rev. Jos. E. Smith in
Africa, a retired Presbyterian clergyman of Chattanooga, the Rev.
T. H. McCallie, offered to preach for his church three Sabbaths
for three months, and to extend the time if necessary. He took
the greatest interest in the work, hunted up and looked after the
members, and, either in person or by substitute, attended the Sabbath
services and buried the dead, as if he were the pastor of the church.
The Rev. J. W. Bachman, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of
this city, also preached one Sabbath, and has expressed the deepest
interest in the church, and invited the pastor to call on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEREA, KY.—There were four accessions to the church at Berea on
profession of faith on the first Sabbath of May.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


MAKE HASTE SLOWLY.

At one of our Southern conferences last spring, the brethren,
colored and white, were bemoaning the small numbers and slow progress
of our churches. A Baptist minister who was present, and who is
engaged in this educational work, turned the tide by stating that
there were advantages, for the present, in that state of things,
and that his denomination suffered somewhat from the embarrassment
of numbers. He said that he had been a farmer’s boy, and that when
at the tail end of a steam threshing machine for shoving away the
straw, if for only a short time his associate stepped away, he found
himself unable to keep up with the thresher, and covered down by the
accumulation. So they were sometimes bothered in handling their great
numbers by way of discipline and effort at moral elevation.

There is no room in the South for our church system if its work be
simply to transfer the people in bulk from other communions, with
all their prevalent views and practices. Our brethren of the Baptist
and Methodist churches are to be congratulated upon their large
membership, and so upon their opportunity for doing good. They have
the responsibility of purifying from within. Many are struggling
nobly, as exhorted by the _Christian Recorder_, “to thin out the
ministry of the church until there shall not be found an ignorant
man, nor a bad man in the ranks. Thin out the church itself. Expel
the vicious. Drive out the notoriously bad. Have a clean church.”
Starting as a new church-life, we have no call, no excuse for
sweeping in such material. It would be no gain to the kingdom to
effect such a transfer in bulk. Our mission is, through our blended
educational and Christianizing process, to help raise the standard of
Christian and church character. By the stimulus of such example, we
are doing more to help the old churches in their eliminating process
than we could in any other way. That same article in the _Recorder_,
from which I have quoted, shows this.

The editor also sets down the A. M. A. as the greatest rival of
the A. M. E., and no doubt rejoices in this provoking of his
church to love and to good works. But our churches, if they would
attain to much of this helpfulness, must gain it upon the standard
of intelligence and of Christian character, without the risks of
wildness and superstition. And so, if God be with us, if we be humble
and spiritually minded in our work, by and by we may expect large
accessions of members. The president of a Baptist Colored University,
himself a New England educator, remarked to me, a while ago, that he
could see that in twenty-five years the Congregationalists would have
a large church-work among the Freedmen, simply as the result of their
educational process.

Our young pastors, who have not as yet the stimulus of the large
congregations of some other communions, must remember that the
influence of their churches is not measured by numbers, and that if
they secure quality, this may go further than quantity.

But, as it is, our church-work is not destitute of encouragement
now in regard to numbers. Fifteen years ago there was not a colored
Congregationalist in all the South, except in the two ancient white
Congregational churches of Charleston, S. C., and of Liberty Co., Ga.
The system itself was utterly unknown, as it is to this day, except
where it has crept in since the war. The experiment, in one single
locality, of swallowing down the old-time churches, proved a failure,
and taught us a lesson. The only gain has been by the slow process
of enlightenment and of assimilation, mainly by the Christian-school
process. A high official in the M. E. Church said of us: “You can
afford to wait for the youth; we cannot.” He was right. That great
Church, which is doing so grand a work for the Freedmen, had already
on its hands hundreds of thousands of adult members, who must be
cared for at once. By our policy of waiting, the last Annual Report
set down sixty-seven churches, and 4,300 church members, an average
of 69 members to each. As this is all new work, let us compare it
with new work at the West. Alas, for the lack of church statistics
in our last Year Book! By that of the former year, we find that the
churches of Missouri and Nebraska had an average in each State of
27 members; Kansas had 34; Iowa had exactly our average of 69; and
Illinois, which has been under Home Missionary culture for sixty
years, has an average of only 25 members more than that of the
churches of this Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HAMPTON ANNIVERSARY.

Distinguished Visitors—Speeches by Pres. Hayes, Sec. Schurz, and
Others—Natural Development—Three Questions Settled.

REV. ADDISON P. FOSTER.

The graduating exercises at the Hampton Normal and Agricultural
Institute, on May 20, were of even unusual interest. A large and
distinguished company was in attendance, including Governors and
other notabilities from Massachusetts, and President Hayes and
Secretary Schurz from Washington. A military parade by the students
under the inspection of the President, recitations, and an exhibition
of the various industries of the school, occupied the morning. The
work of the Indian boys excited special interest. A farm-cart,
complete in all its parts, tin-ware, tables and large silicate
globes, were among the articles which they had made.

Whitin Hall was crowded in the afternoon. The students, 300 in
number, seated on benches rising toward the rear in front of the
audience, were a picture of neatness, intelligence and content. Those
who remembered the squalor and ignorance of the colored people as
they sought refuge in the Union lines during the war, could not fail
to recognize the value of the work done by the noble educational
institutions which the American Missionary Association has brought
into existence through the South. This thankful feeling was deepened
as the students took up the parts assigned them. Their addresses were
not mere essays, but the expression of their opinions on practical,
vital themes, concerning the welfare of their race. These utterances
were marked with rare good sense, a freedom from bitterness for past
or present ill-treatment, and a hopeful courage for the future. More
than once some expression unexpectedly pathetic, or forgiving, or
consecrated, brought tears to the eyes of those who heard.

The exercises of the students were followed by admirable addresses
from some of the dignitaries present. President Hayes showed how the
relation of the different races and nationalities in the land was one
of our most vital problems, and how Hampton was solving it. Secretary
Schurz considered at length the experiment of Indian education, which
is being tried at Hampton, and showed why it might succeed now when
it had not in the past. Governor Long, of Massachusetts, referred
to the presence of these educational institutions in the South as
one of the most important results of the war. Ex-Governor Rice, of
Massachusetts, regarded the Institution at Hampton as the natural
development of advancing civilization, which is breaking down the
barriers of the races and bringing all nationalities together as
brethren.

The concurrent testimony of these speakers, and the manifest
conviction of the visitors present, was that Hampton is doing a grand
work.

Its diversified departments are conducted with such careful attention
to detail, with such consecrated, self-denying enthusiasm, with
such genius in teaching, and with such faith in God, on the part of
its principal, Gen. Armstrong, and his corps of teachers, gathered
from the best families of the North, that the school could not be
otherwise than successful. This language may seem extravagant, but,
if any one is inclined to regard it so, let him visit the school next
May, and he will appreciate the self-restraint of one who says no
more than what has just been said.

The Hampton Institute has settled two or three questions very
satisfactorily.

From the experience of this Institution, it is plain that it is
quite possible to combine industrial with intellectual and religious
education without injury to any one of these branches of knowledge.
Nothing is more prominent to a superficial observation than the
industrial side of Hampton.

The saw-mill, which since September last has cut over a million feet
of lumber, the knitting-room, which has produced this year 12,000
dozen mittens for a Boston firm, the market-garden, from which have
been sent this spring thirty barrels of peas a day to Baltimore, and
from which have been raised peas and asparagus, together amounting
in value to $1,500, the ice house, in which are stored 180 tons of
ice, the industrial room, where are made the students’ uniforms,
the cooking school, in which the girls are taught the culinary art,
the printing office, from which is issued monthly “The Southern
Workman,” the shoe shop, the blacksmith’s shop, the wheelwright’s
shop, the carpenter’s shop, the repair shop, the brick-yard, which
has supplied all the bricks used on the buildings of the Institution,
the $6,000 barn, where fine blooded stock is kept, the farm of 330
acres—these departments of activity, wonderful for their variety and
completeness, are steadily training the students and the inhabitants
of the surrounding region in ways of industry. But this is not all,
nor the principal benefit, the students receive. If we may judge from
a hasty inspection of classes, from the scope and skillful expression
of thought in the graduating exercises, and from the testimony of
teachers, a thorough and sufficiently extended education in all
mental departments is given. Best of all, as the crown no less than
the beginning of wisdom, the students, entering the school without
special religious impressions, seldom leave it without becoming
devoted Christians. The result of the combination of industrial
with other forms of training, is seen in the evident union in
Hampton students of hard good sense with scholarly intelligence and
unostentatious piety.

Another question is most satisfactorily settled, whether it is
possible to educate the Negro and the Indian together. On graduation
day, in sight of the audience, was a stand on which rested a fragment
from the building recently burned. It was a mass of red and black
bricks cemented together, and prettily draped with vines. If this
was designed to be emblematic, it was truthfully so. The red and
the black races do harmonize most happily at Hampton, and cultivate
together the graces of character. They are a mutual help to each
other, especially the Negro, as farther advanced in civilization,
to the Indian. Their dispositions supplement each other. The Negro
is enthusiastic, demonstrative and dependent, the Indian reserved,
bashful and self-contained. Each finds in the other, qualities that
he needs and that attract him. As a consequence, there is great
friendliness between the two races. When the colored boys were asked
if any of their number were willing to room with the Indians, that
the latter might learn to speak English more readily, there was no
lack of volunteers. And no one can doubt the kindly feeling pervading
the school, who has seen, as we have, Indian and Negro boys walking
together, or chatting on the green with arms lovingly about each
others’ necks.

Other questions, such as the wisdom of educating the Indians away
from their tribes, or of the coeducation of the sexes, we have no
time to discuss. It is sufficient to say that the experience of
Hampton is thus far entirely satisfactory in these regards.

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY.

Examinations—Ode to Jubilee Bell—Dr. Willcox’ Address—Prosperous Year.

The Nashville _Daily American_, whose proprietor is the Honorable
Secretary of the U. S. Senate, gives a full report of all the
commencement exercises of this school, from the Sabbath morning
sermon by Prof. Bennett, the baccalaureate by Pres. Cravath in the
afternoon, and the missionary sermon by Dr. Twichell, of Cleveland,
Ohio, in the evening, to the doxology with which the Alumni dinner
closed on Thursday afternoon, making in all at least five full
columns.

Monday was given to examinations. The _American_ says: “These
examinations were held in different recitation-rooms of Jubilee Hall
and were attended by interested visitors.

“We stopped a while in the room where the Senior Class was being
examined in Geology by Prof. Chase. One student was giving the names
of sixty or seventy specimens of minerals, ores, rocks and fossils.
Another was determining the nature of certain minerals by means of
the blow-pipe, while another gave the classification of the mineral
kingdom as he had written it on the board. Prof. Morgan was hearing
a class in Cicero as we entered the library, and one of the students
was reading in a sonorous tone the impeachment of Cataline by Cicero.

“In another room, Prof. Spence was hearing a class in Phædon. Prof.
Bennett conducted a class through the United States History within
the hour and a half allotted to him. Other classes were examined in
Astronomy, Virgil, and the Greek Testament. In Normal School, under
the care of Miss H. Matson, assisted by Misses E. M. Barnes and S.
M. Stevens, classes were examined in Arithmetic, Grammar, Physical
Geography, and Reading. A person passing from one room to another
would be impressed with the thought that hard and conscientious work
had been done, and that the examinations were impartially conducted
in order to draw out the exact knowledge of the pupil upon the
subject under consideration.

“In the evening came the Common School Normal Exhibition, beginning
promptly at 8.30 o’clock. The beautiful song, “The Morning Freshly
Breaking,” was sung by a well-trained chorus. The music of the entire
week, consisting of thirty pieces or more, was under the charge of
Miss Mary O. Swift, who combines with great ability as an instructor,
a voice of rare sweetness and power.

“Those who took part in this exhibition had finished the normal
course, which is adapted to the demands of the State schools, and
received a certificate in which their standing in the studies of the
Common School Normal Course is given. Most of these will continue to
pursue their studies further. The examination of the day, together
with the exercises of the exhibition, promise well for the remainder
of commencement week.

“On Tuesday, examinations were continued. We spent a good deal of
time in the Model School, an important attachment of the Normal
Department of the University. The presiding genius of this school
is Miss Irene Gilbert, a lady who seems to have been born for the
position she holds in the Model School.

“She has had upwards of a hundred children from the city under her
charge during the past year, and has carried them forward with an
unflagging enthusiasm, which has secured the best results. The
Normal Class, which received certificates on Monday night, have
paid daily visits to her school to witness the drill which she
gives her juveniles in the mysteries of reading, spelling, and
rudimentary mathematics. Details of students from the Normal School
have been made daily, who instructed the Model School pupils, under
the critical eye of Miss Gilbert. When it is remembered that Fisk
University contributes one hundred and fifty teachers to the schools
of the South, it will be seen that the drill thus received is
especially valuable to those who receive it.

“In the evening came the Union Literary Society Exhibition.

“Wednesday afternoon, at 3 o’clock, occurred the presentation of
the great Bell given to the University by the Jubilee Singers and
Mrs. Gen. C. B. Fisk, of New York. These were of an exceedingly
interesting character. Speeches were made by Prof. White and Mr.
Loudin, on the part of the singers, and by Pres. Cravath, Prof.
Willcox, and others; after which a poem by Prof. Spence of the
University was read. A number of pieces were sung by the Jubilee
Singers, who furnished much of the music for all the exercises.


ODE TO THE JUBILEE BELL.

BY PROF. A. K. SPENCE.

  I.

    Ring the bell! Let it swing and swell,
    Peal on peal, with a joyous knell,
    Till it thrills and throes and quivering goes,
    Like a thing of life, that feels and knows!
    To and fro, with a surging tide,
    Let it send its greetings far and wide!

  II.

    Ring the bell, with thy swing and swell,
    For thou hast a joyous tale to tell,
    And gladder yet than the chime of old
    That once the birth of our nation told:
    For thou dost tell of a race set free.
    Thou dost tell of the Jubilee!

  III.

    Ring, ring, and thy music fling,
    As thou dost sway, and quiver, and swing!
    Peal o’er the town with its din of men,
    Wake the echoes in lonely glen!
    Ring by Cumberland’s classic tide,
    Scatter thy melody far and wide!

  IV.

    Knell, knell, with thy swing and swell,
    Oh, glorious, liberty-loving bell!
    In tones prophetic, sepulchral, slow,
    In dirge of warning, in dirge of woe.
    Solemn and deep let thy tones be cast
    Over the grave of oppression, past!

  V.

    Well, well, dost thou swing and swell,
    Oh, welcome and well-beloved bell!
    Thou comest to greet us with loving hands!
    Thou comest to bind us with loving bands!
    When hearts are weak and our fears oppress,
    Thou comest to cheer, thou comest to bless!

  VI.

    When the time shall come, as come it must,
    And we shall crumble away in dust,
    Thy voice shall ring on and on, for aye,
    As it peals out on the air today!
    And ancient sire to child shall tell
    Tales of yore of the Jubilee Bell!

“The evening was given to the

  SENIOR PREPARATORY EXHIBITION.

The programme was a full one, and well carried out.

“In some respects the Senior Preparatory Exhibition of Fisk
University is _the_ night occasion of commencement week. The interest
rises from the first, and culminates with Wednesday night. This was
specially true of this year. The knowledge of the fact that the
Jubilee Singers were to sing contributed to crowd the chapel with
such an audience as has not been assembled in it for months. Every
inch of available space was occupied, and many were compelled to
stand at the entrance unable to find seats. The Jubilee Singers
opened the exercises by a song, “Sweet Music”—Beethoven.

“Thursday, commencement proper:

CLOSE OF THE MOST PROSPEROUS YEAR IN THE HISTORY OF THE INSTITUTION.

“According to announcement, the commencement exercises took place
Thursday morning at 10 o’clock, in the presence of a crowded house.
In addition to the decorations of the previous day, the wall back
of the platform was tastefully set off with the folds of the Dutch
and English flags, the American flag being on duty on the border.
Upon the folds of the flags were arranged in letters of cedar the
words, ‘The Class of 1880.’ Six young men then gave their graduating
addresses. These are kindly and appreciatively spoken of, as able and
well delivered.

“Prof. G. B. Willcox, D. D., of Chicago, was introduced and spoke to
the graduates in reference to those things which scholars hold in
common. The ideal of a college graduate is that he has come to the
possession of his manhood. It is impossible to give the spirit of
this most able address. It abounded in wit, humor, and pathos. These
kept the audience on the alert for an hour, after they had sat two
hours during the previous exercises.

“Then came, what is now a feature of Fisk commencement day, the
Alumni dinner, with its post-prandial wit and wisdom. And thus closed
the most successful and prosperous year in the history of Fisk
University. The catalogue shows an aggregate of 350 students. The
work done in the class-room has been unusually satisfactory. There
have been abundant evidences of growth in character and mind on the
part of all the students.”

       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

Why No Graduating Class—Threatened Suspension of Public Schools.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, NEW ORLEANS.

The anniversary of Straight University was observed at Central
Church. The audience, both in numbers and intelligent appreciation,
was one of the best ever gathered for such a purpose in the city. The
literary exercises were exceptionally fine. The original orations,
one on “Charles Sumner” and the other on “Our Glorious Union,”
were, both in composition and delivery, worthy of high praise. All
who heard them were proud of the young and promising orators. A
cultivated lady in the audience said to me, at the close of the
evening, “You don’t tell me that those orations were written by the
young men?” “Certainly; why not?” “Why,” she replied, “I have never
heard better.”

There was no graduating class this year. Those who in order would
this year have finished their course, were persuaded to remain
another year that their graduation might signify a higher grade of
scholarship.

The year has been crowned with the Divine favor. Three hundred
students have been in attendance, real progress has been made in all
departments of study, and the Institution stands higher today in
the estimation and affection of the New Orleans public than in any
previous year.

Unless all signs fail, the ensuing year will bring to our doors a
greatly increased throng of eager and earnest students. The public
schools of New Orleans, and of Louisiana, are threatened with the
evils of indefinite suspension. The doors will be closed June 30th,
and the wisest friends of education cannot predict the time of their
re-opening.

So far as adequate support is concerned, the public school system
in this State has been an uncertain quantity for many months. Its
fate trembles in the balance today. A subscription list is now in
circulation among the merchants and bankers to raise money to pay the
public school teachers the monthly salaries long since due. The most
plaintive appeals are made to public sympathy in their behalf. It is
a time to press forward our work.

Applicable to the impoverished State of Louisiana, so far as her
public schools are concerned, are the words: “The fields are white
already to the harvest,” and “The laborers are few.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

More than a Thousand Visitors. Promise of the Coming Year.

The commencement exercises of this growing and popular University
were held on Thursday, June 3d, and drew together an unusually large
company of visitors within its wide grove of moss-draped oaks.

Many parents were present on this day, and also at the annual
examinations, which continued from Monday till Wednesday evening. Two
old men came from the northeastern corner of the State, a distance of
200 miles or more, to see their sons graduate.

The pains and thoroughness with which the examinations were
conducted, aiming to exhibit the pupil’s real knowledge of his
studies, the evidence throughout all of great care and constant drill
in the use of clear, simple and correct English, and the plain
indication of independence on the part of the students in their
studying and in their own thinking, made these class exercises of
unusual interest. The Senior Class passed creditable examinations in
Natural History, Science of Government, The Theory and Practice of
Teaching, and Natural Philosophy. There followed on Wednesday evening
the exhibition of the Primary and Intermediate Departments, combined
with that of the strong Temperance Society—an organization extending
through the whole school, and representing a work of great importance
yet to be done in this State, where nearly all people are in the
habit of drinking, and that to excess.

On Thursday, a class of seven young men presented orations, and
received certificates of graduation from the Normal Department
of the Institution. These orations were highly commended by the
prominent gentlemen who were present from Jackson. In the afternoon,
a stirring address was delivered by President De Forest, of Talladega
College, upon the topic of “Work.” This was followed by speeches
from Capt. Wolf, of Jackson, from Dr. Watkins, the venerable pastor
of the Methodist Church at Jackson, and from Dr. Hunter, pastor of
the Presbyterian Church of the same city, all of whom expressed
appreciation of the good work this Institution is doing. More
than a thousand visitors were present at these closing exercises
on Thursday, an excursion train running from a point fifty miles
distant for their accommodation. The location of the University on
this great railroad which passes north and south through the centre
of the State, these beautiful groves being only about half a mile
from the depot, furnishes rare facility for such a gathering of the
friends and patrons of the school. The ignorance among the people
in this State is fearful, but it is a very hopeful sign when the
colored people are themselves showing an interest in such a school as
this one now is, and when they are beginning to appreciate the sort
of training given here to their young men and women. Much of this
has been brought about through the wise, energetic and progressive
management of the President, Rev. G. S. Pope.

The promise for the coming year is flattering. The school will
probably be crowded even more than during the year just past. The
buildings must be in some way enlarged, or new ones provided, in
order to have room for all who will doubtless desire to come. There
has been little or no complaining by the students on account of
very rough, cold and crowded rooms—the only temporary places which
hitherto could be provided. Another year, however, ought to bring
better accommodations. Here is a place second to none in our country
for the doing of great and far-reaching good.

A. H.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Theological Department—Sixteen Graduates.

REV. W. W. PATTON, D. D., WASHINGTON

The anniversary exercises of the Theological Department of Howard
University, (which is largely aided by the American Missionary
Association), occurred on the 7th inst., in Washington. The spacious
and beautiful edifice of the New York Avenue Presbyterian Church was
freely offered for the purpose, and was filled with a large audience
of white and colored people. Such an event could not have taken place
at any former time, and it marks the rapid and healthful progress of
public opinion. Six of the graduating class made addresses, which
were a credit to themselves and to their race, and elicited the
commendation of many intelligent gentlemen and ladies who heard them.
Sixteen students were sent forth to preach, all of whom go to the
South, to the Freedmen. Five of these had pursued a full course of
study, including Hebrew and Greek: the others had received training
in English studies only. Fifty theological students have been under
instruction in this department the present year. Each graduate
received a handsome Bible from the Washington Bible Society, and an
address was delivered by Rev. W. R. Harrison, D. D., chaplain of the
House of Representatives, and pastor of the South Methodist Church
in this city—a fact which marks the progress of good feeling. Never
before was the promise of usefulness in this work so great.

       *       *       *       *       *


LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL.

(_From the Macon, Ga., Telegraph and Messenger._)

As announced, the closing exercises of the Lewis High School took
place yesterday, May 27th, and reflected credit alike upon teachers
and pupils. The latter, embracing both sexes, number 110; and a
more intelligent and well-behaved body of colored youth cannot
be found anywhere. The singing and music were especially good,
indicating great aptitude on the part of the scholars, and very
careful training. This Institution is under the care of the American
Missionary Association, whose headquarters are at New York. It
appoints the teachers, and supplies all the funds that may be needed
annually for its support.

The school is under the general supervision of the pastor of the
Colored Congregational Church, Rev. Mr. Lathrop, who also teaches
chemistry, philosophy and book-keeping. In all of these branches, the
pupils exhibited commendable proficiency.

Among those who attended the examinations were Rev. Geo. McDonald,
D. D., and Rev. Joseph Key, D. D. Both of these gentlemen expressed
themselves highly gratified with all that they saw and heard, and
when called upon, responded with neat and appropriate addresses, to
the great encouragement and delight of their auditors.

The Lewis High School, under the judicious management of Mr. Lathrop,
Miss Christine H. Gilbert, principal, and her efficient assistant,
Miss Belle M. Haskins, is doing a good work for the colored people of
Macon, and should receive the countenance and support of our citizens.

The college building is a neat brick structure, which was erected at
a cost of $5,000 upon the site of the edifice which was destroyed by
fire. The school will open again on the first of October next.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE.

(_From the Savannah Morning News._)

The scholastic year of the Beach Institute, which closed yesterday,
was made the occasion of interesting school exercises in the
examination of the several classes of the Institute, and an
exhibition of the scholars in recitation, declamation, reading and
singing.

The Beach Institute is one of the educational institutions under the
control of the American Missionary Association, whose headquarters
are at New York, and whose operations in the South have been directed
to the moral and educational advancement of the colored people.
The Southern work is under the superintendence of Dr. J. E. Roy,
whose headquarters are at Atlanta, and who was present yesterday,
a gratified spectator of the progress made at the Institute in the
education of the colored race.

The school here is, as we learn from the Superintendent, Prof. J.
K. Cole, in a prosperous condition, nearly 300 scholars having been
registered during the scholastic year.

The Institution is divided into five grades, under competent
teachers, as follows: The first grade, or normal class, under
Professor Cole, the Superintendent; the second grade, Miss Partridge,
teacher: the third grade. Miss Bailey, teacher; the fourth grade,
Miss Burgh, teacher; and the fifth grade, under the supervision of
Miss Willey.

The examination yesterday evinced the faithfulness of the instructors
in their departments and the aptitude of the pupils, and we were
particularly struck with the examination of the normal class in
introductory Latin exercises, the pupils showing a remarkable
proficiency in their recitations from Harkness’ Introductory Latin
Lessons.

At 12 o’clock, the whole school assembled in the chapel, when the
programme was successfully carried out, to the pleasure of the large
number of friends and parents of the pupils present.

The school will re-open on the first Monday in October.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUNDAY-SCHOOLS IN CENTRAL AFRICA.

A Paper read at the State Sunday-school Convention, at New Britain,
Ct., May 26, 1880, by Albert Burton Jowett a native of the Mendi
Country, West Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *

I represent the Sunday-schools in the Mendi country of Western
Africa. These are located in the interior, about a hundred and
fifty miles north of Monrovia, the capital of Liberia. The first
Sunday-school among the Mendi was established at Kaw Mendi. This
place was the site selected for a mission by Messrs. Raymond and
Steele, who accompanied the Amistad captives to Africa, when they
left Farmington in 1841.

At this school, my mother was a pupil, and had for her instructor,
Mar-groo, one of the Amistad captives who had been hopefully
converted.

There was a good day-school at this place, and also one at Freetown,
a hundred and fifty miles north, which had been kept up for
twenty-five years by the Church Missionary Society of England.

My mother has often told me that the missionaries were very much
pleased because the Mendi boys passed a better examination than the
boys at Freetown, who had had all the advantages of that sea-port
city.

Mr. Burton, a missionary who went to Africa from Connecticut, while
traveling up the Bar-groo river noticed a fall of water in a wooded
country, and determined to establish an industrial mission at that
point.

There was no saw-mill on the coast, so Mr. Burton put up buildings
for a mill; some one gave him the necessary machinery, and he opened
a station and named it “Avery.” A church and some dwelling houses
were built, and a community of people gathered who bought logs,
converted them into lumber, and conveyed it to the coast for sale. A
school was opened in the basement of the church, and a Sunday-school
was convened on Sundays. My father is a teacher and interpreter
at this station. This Sunday-school and the one at Kaw Mendi are
the only ones in the Mendi country proper, where there are about
2,000,000 people. There are Sunday-schools on the Sherbro Island, but
the people there belong mostly to the Sherbro tribe.

Our Sunday-schools constitute one of the means by which our young
African friends acquire the simple truths taught by our blessed
Saviour. I do not know how it is, if I am in the wrong, pardon me,
but I do believe it is much more difficult to teach in Africa than
in America, because we have no books in the Mendi language and the
children know but little English. Our Sunday-schools in comparison
with those in America are very small. The bell for school rings at
2 o’clock, and the teachers go round to the houses where they fear
the children do not care to come, and bring them to the school.
Before bringing them in to the Sunday-school, a shirt is given to
each scholar, as many of them wear no garments at home. This is made
of English cloth and supplied by the missionaries; when they return
from school, it is laid aside to be worn the next time the school
assembles. The instruction is mostly oral—the teacher asking the
pupils questions and then requiring them to repeat the answer until
they are able to say it.

A good deal of time is spent in singing, as the children readily
learn the words and music of the Gospel songs, even though they do
not understand the meaning of the English words. They are very fond
of singing indeed, and the missionaries listen to their songs with
much delight, and give them a great deal of credit for them. As some
of the children never attend day-school, the alphabet is taught in
the Sunday-school.

We have a portion of the Bible, and a few hymns, translated into the
Mendi, and hope some time to have books in the language, so that
greater progress can be made.

We have some active members who go about into the small villages and
act as home missionaries among the people. These frequently bring
in new scholars to the mission: and what do you think causes the
increase of our members, more than most any other circumstance? Some
kind friends in America and England have been sending us illustrated
papers, nice little books, and small cards with letters of nearly
every color and size.

Such things are very attractive to the little natives. I wish
you could know the good you can do, by sending your missionaries
in Africa such attractive papers and cards, for those whom the
missionaries cannot reach will be instructed and influenced by them
in their homes. The children who are brought in, take these papers
and fasten them up in their houses for ornaments. The books and cards
are offered as prizes to those who commit portions of the Scripture
accurately.

We have no Sunday-school Conventions like this one, but sometimes we
have Concerts.

Within the past few years, all our missionaries have been Freedmen
from America, and one of them was for a time connected with the
Jubilee Singers of Fisk University. They taught us some of the
Jubilee Songs, such as “Steal Away to Jesus,” “Mary and Martha,” and
“The Hocks and the Mountains Shall All Flee Away.” The people had
never heard the like, and were very much delighted with them.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


S’KOKOMISH, WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

REV. MYRON EELLS.

On the first Sabbath in April, we had the privilege of receiving
three more into our church, all on profession of faith, two of them
Indians from the school, and the other a young lady who has been
assistant-matron in the boarding department. The Twanas and Clallams
were formerly at war with each other, and even now there is not
always the best of feeling between the two tribes: a like unpleasant
feeling has often been shown between the whites and Indians: yet, on
that Sabbath, representatives of the three classes received baptism,
there being one Twana, one Clallam, and one white person.

Another noticeable fact was the motive which induced them to
become Christians. In reply to my question on this point, each one
unknown to the other said, that it was because he had noticed that
Christians were so much happier than other people. Two of them
had tried the wrong road very earnestly, and had found to their
great sorrow that “the way of the transgressor is hard.” I was
led then to think of two or three others who had united with the
church on profession of faith within about a year, employees on the
Reservation, who had made similar statements. “If the Bible were not
true, and yet I could only believe it to be true, I would gladly do
so, if it would bring me the happiness that Christians profess to
have,” said one. Since becoming a Christian, he has often spoken of
his happiness, and has great pity for those who are skeptical, for
he knows how they feel, even if they do argue against Christianity.
Another of the number, who was for three years very skeptical, a
talented writer, and who used her talents against Christianity so
strongly that her companions feared to enter the lists against her,
and who was supposed to be thoroughly contented in her unbelief,
became a Christian, and now speaks of those years, as “three years of
horrible darkness.”

On the third Sabbath of April, I was at Dunginess, where I received
four more into our church, three on profession of faith. Two Indians
and two whites stood side by side to enter the church. The communion
season was very pleasant. One white lady, who had not been to the
Lord’s table for a year, and who was just recovering from sickness,
was so anxious to be present, that as she was unable to walk the
distance, a little more than a quarter of a mile, she was carried
by her husband more than half the way in a wheelbarrow. Another
lady, seventy-six years old, walked three miles to be present, then
another mile to where I should preach to the whites in the afternoon,
and home again in the evening, about eight miles in all. Ten of the
whites sat down there with the four Indians in the Indian church to
celebrate Christ’s love.

One person, who lives half a mile from the Indian village, said
to me, as we came away, “It is a shame, _it is a shame_, that the
Indians here are going ahead of the whites in religious affairs. It
is a wonder how they are making advancement, considering the examples
around them.” Two marriages, one infant and three adult baptisms,
four received to the church, one communion service, one funeral,
three prayer-meetings, and other services to the amount of fourteen
in all, were the result of the eighteen days I was away from home.

I had been at home but a few days when I was sent for by an Indian
on the Reservation who has been an invalid for some time, and who
asked to be received as a member of the church. After considerable
consultation, he was so received week ago last Sabbath.

Last Sabbath, my work at Seabeck culminated in a small church
organization among the whites. I have written you that I have
preached at that place, thirty miles distant, about once a month,
when not called on some distant trip. The work has amounted to about
eight visits a year.

Some six weeks ago, I felt that it was best for the few Christians
there to be banded together. I immediately tried to obtain some
assistance in organizing, but after three efforts failed entirely,
and hence, armed with authority from this church, I proceeded with
the organization. Nine entered it, two on profession of faith.
The heterogeneousness of the population may be seen from the fact
that of the seven who joined from other churches, one came from a
Congregational church and two from a Protestant Methodist church
in this Territory, one from a Congregational church in California,
one from a Presbyterian church in British Columbia, one from the
Episcopal church in England, and one from the Lutheran church in
Norway, who, however, does not believe that he was a Christian until
after he left Norway. “It is the Lord’s doings and it is marvellous
in our eyes.”

In the civilization of the Indians we feel somewhat encouraged. One
fact has appeared quite plainly during the past winter. It has been
the most severe winter known here for twenty-five years—the snow at
one time lying five feet deep—and although it was nearly gone on the
tide flats in six weeks, yet on most of the Reservation it lay for
more than three months from six inches to two feet deep. As late as
four or five years ago, the Indians generally lost a large number of
cattle or horses every winter for want of feed, even when there were
only two or three weeks of snow, selling altogether too much of their
hay in the fall; but during the past winter not one of their animals
has died for want of food, as far as I have been able to learn.
Experience and observation have taught them to secure sufficient food
and to keep it until all danger is over.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

=Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.=

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H.
Willey, D. D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D., Jacob
S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
E. P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR WORK AT THE CENTER.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

I find that for many months I have had little to say about our work
in San Francisco and Oakland. I invite the readers of the Missionary
to take a look, with me, at these central points.

Oakland is more to San Francisco, than Brooklyn is to New York. The
ocean breezes are so tempered in crossing San Francisco Bay, that a
very perceptible change of climate takes place, and Oakland is able
to boast of a genial air and a clear sky on many days in summer,
when San Francisco is shrouded in fog or swept by heavy, dust-laden
winds. It has the aspect, to a very good degree, of a large inland
city in New England—Springfield or Hartford, for example. There is a
good deal about it not yet very heavenly, but, when compared with the
bustle and drive of affairs, both climatic and human, on this side of
the Bay, it seems, like Auburndale, Mass., to be a sort of “Saint’s
rest.” It is constantly skimming the cream off our San Francisco
churches, so that when a brother and sister have fairly come to their
places as pillars here in the metropolis, we expect soon to hear that
“they are thinking of moving to Oakland.”

These considerations have led to a more abundant provision for
missionary work among the Chinese in that city, than anywhere else.
Persons, coming to California to labor in this missionary work, are
quite apt to become impressed with the necessities of the _Oakland_
Chinese. And so, if our mission had not been, by many years, the
first in that field; and if there had not gathered about it a large
number of Christian Chinese for whom it is a spiritual home; and,
if it were not possible—thanks to the generous provision made for
us by the First Congregational Church—to do more work there now,
in proportion to expense, than almost anywhere else, I should feel
like abandoning the field to those who have crowded in to help us.
In the new, spacious and elegant church edifice, rooms much more
commodious and much better furnished than those of any other school,
have been prepared and assigned to our Chinese work. On the Sabbath,
they are occupied by the Chinese Sunday-school, superintended so
many years by our dear brother, the late Dea. Edmund P. Sanford,
and now in charge of one like-minded, A. L. Van Blarcom, Esq. On
week-day evenings, they are opened for our mission school, at which
about the same pupils gather who are present on the Sabbath, and
every session of which is, in large part, a religious service. About
eighty Chinese account themselves members of this school, attend it
when they can, and are under its gospel influence; but there are so
many interruptions through the pressure of their daily work, that
the average attendance is about thirty. Two teachers are employed,
Mrs. B. C. Hawes and Miss L. Duncan, who, by years of service in
this field, have won a warm place in the affection and respect of
the Chinese. The expense is $40 per month. As fruits of this labor,
we have 17 who are members of the First Congregational Church in
Oakland, nearly as many more in other churches, and a goodly number
who have professed Christ in the Association, but have not yet been
baptized.

In San Francisco there are 4 schools; Central, Barnes, Bethany, and
West. The Central school is taught in our Central Mission house,
the headquarters of our work for the whole State. This is, I regret
to say, a _rented_ building, the cost of which absorbs more than
a sixth of the utmost amount we can hope to command for our whole
work. We have occupied it now almost six years, have spent in rents
nearly enough to have paid for as good a building, if only we could
have seized our opportunity; and I cannot even yet get sufficiently
hardened to this expenditure, to meet it without a throbbing heart.
“If only I could use this sum for teaching and preaching the Gospel
of Christ!” is my thought and my longing; when will the time come?
The building is a very plain one, but pleasantly located, just on
the edge of the Chinese quarter, and overlooking an acre or two of
greenness in the heart of our city which we call “the Plaza.” It has
two stories and a basement, the latter occupied by our Association of
Christian Chinese as a hall and reading room, with some facilities
in the rear for hospitality. The first floor is the school room
(18 x 50), in which at times no less than 145 Chinese have crowded
themselves. The average attendance now is about 60; it is increasing,
and I hope will again reach 100. In the upper story are the rooms of
our Chinese helpers, with a little office, also, for the Secretary
of the Association above named. A great deal of work is done here
besides the mere teaching; a great deal of correspondence carried on;
a great deal of what may be called pastoral care exercised; a good
deal, also, of honest study of God’s word.

But I am making my story too long. About two miles south of this, on
Ridley Street, is the Barnes Mission house, a substantial two-story
structure of wood, with a smaller building on the rear of the lot,
occupied by our Chinese brethren as a “Home.” This is owned by
the Mission, but has a debt upon it of $3,300. The upper story is
occupied by the family furnishing the teachers for the school in the
room below. The mother and daughter, Mrs. C. A. Sheldon and Miss
Jennie Sheldon, are the ones whose names appear upon our lists, but
father and brothers all share lovingly and zealously in the work. The
rent derived from this upper story and from the “Home” in the rear,
pays the interest on the debt, and the cost of insurance and taxes.
When we were erecting this building, we expected to gather in it a
school of 150 members with an average attendance of about 100; but,
the very evening of its dedication, the riots of July 1877 occurred,
and, for the time, our work in almost all the city seemed to be
knocked prostrate. Other changes, the closing of some large shoe
factories, from which many of our pupils came, and the restrictions
laid upon the operatives in the Mission Woolen Mills, among whom we
hoped to win some souls, have prevented the realization of all that
we hoped, though the results at which all was aimed, have not been
denied. There are many of whom—looking at our Barnes Mission house—we
may say, “This man was born there.”

A mile and a half further south is the Bethany school, taught in the
chapel of Bethany church, and through the faithfulness and tact of
its teacher well sustained, although the Chinese are not specially
numerous in that locality. And about two miles west of the Central
Mission is the “West” school, taught in a little back-room, behind
a small store—a room most unpromising, and rented for only $5 per
month, but, by the taste and care of teachers and pupils, rendered
quite neat and inviting. The average attendance in each of these
schools is a little less than 20, ranging between 12 and 19.

In the aggregate, about 175 Chinese now belong to these four schools;
not as many by nearly one-half as were enrolled in them three years
ago. Sandlotism, especially after it invaded our pulpits, has been a
sore hindrance to missionary success. But we have tried to get closer
to those whom we could bring within our reach, and to do better
work among them, and God has graciously owned it in saving power.
Sixty-six have been received to Bethany church, and of at least as
many more the hope is cherished that they have passed from death unto
life. The present outlook seems to me to be especially cheering, not
only here but in almost all our fields.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ELEPHANT IN AFRICA.

We have seen many pictures of elephants in Africa, and they were all
in hunting scenes.

This noble, wise, and magnificent animal is hunted in every part of
Africa; shot by the Englishman’s rifle in South Africa and on the
White Nile, speared by the natives, pursued with the sword by the
Abyssinian tribes, as if he were the most deadly enemy of the human
race.

It is all for ivory, for the tusks which have taken perhaps fifty
years to grow, that the huge beast is slain.

This hunting has been going on for many years, and now in parts of
Africa there are no more elephants left.

Some good people, who are also trying to open up the “Dark
Continent,” resolved to try some Indian elephants. They were sent
from Bombay in a ship to Zanzibar, and after much trouble were landed
on the coast. Then away they marched, and after a little time this
new procession reached our station at Mpwapwa, and our missionary,
Mr. Last, writes to say how successful the elephants have been. The
dreaded fly could not harm them; indeed, they kill the flies by
catching them in the folds of their thick skin, if the old African
travellers are to be believed.

Our missionary, Mr. Stokes, writes from Uyuvi that these elephants
had reached Unyamwezi. He says:—

“They can bear a thirty-six miles’ march without food or water. They
can carry from twenty-five to thirty men’s loads; and the natives
here very soon pick up the management of them. I think these
elephants have done more towards the civilization of Central Africa
than anything else I have seen. The natives think the white man a
most wonderful fellow when these big creatures on which they look
with terror obey him. It was quite a picture to view the astonishment
depicted on the faces of these poor blacks, as they watched these
huge beasts kneeling down at the word of command to let us get on
their backs, or elevating their trunks to bid salaam to an Arab.”

The Church Missionary Society would be very glad if it could send
two or three of these wise beasts to their Mission at Mpwapwa, to
help carry the missionaries up and down with the stores they must
have from time to time; and then, when our missionaries can speak
freely in the language, think what a help the elephant would be on a
missionary tour.

Besides, when the natives see how useful the elephants are, they will
soon learn to catch and tame them, as did the Carthaginians, 600
years before Christ.

Turn to the fortieth chapter of Job, and read about the behemoth. You
will see in the marginal reference, “The Elephant.” “He is the chief
of the ways of God.” What a blessed time that will be, if, instead of
being destroyed by man, this, the most wonderful of God’s creatures,
is used to carry about the messengers of the Gospel of Peace!—_Church
Missionary Juvenile Instructor._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *


FOR MAY, 1880.

  MAINE, $158.52.

    Andover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               $5.00
    Bangor. First Cong. Ch.                                   16.27
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Blanchard. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Castine. Mrs. Lucy S. Adams, to const. WM. H.
      SARGENT, L. M.                                          30.00
    Limerick. Miss E. P. Hayes, Box of C., _for Raleigh,
      N. C._ Portland. Abby A. Steele                         50.00
    Saco. Cong. Sab. Sch., $14; Ladies’ Circle, Cong.
      Ch., $10.00;—Val. Box of Bedding and Table Linen,
     _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                            24.00
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., ($1.74, _for
      Indian M._)                                             19.25


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $266.34.

    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20, bal. to const.
      MISS MARY E. KELLEY, L. M.; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      Bundle of C.                                            20.00
    Concord. “A Friend”                                        1.00
    Epping. Hannah Pierson                                     5.00
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.                                  82.71
    Fitzwilliam. A. J. B.                                      1.00
    Hancock. W. P. H.                                          1.00
    Haverhill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             26.11
    Hillsborough Bridge. Cong. Ch.                             6.25
    Hudson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Mason. Cong. Ch.                                           5.50
    Nelson. Dea. A. E. W.                                      1.00
    Piermont. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $5, and Sab. Sch.,
      $18.56.                                                 23.56
    Plaistow and North Haverhill, Mass.                       25.00
    Portsmouth. North Ch. and Soc.                            34.70
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.32
    Short Falls. J. W. Chandler                                2.00
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.69
    West Concord. Cong. Ch.                                   16.00
    Wilton. A. B. C.                                           0.50


  VERMONT, $250.01.

    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             25.00
    Chester Depot. J. L. Fisher                               10.00
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.00
    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              19.18
    Burlington. First. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $50; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., (ad’l), $9                          59.00
    Danby. Cong. S. S., $1.63; Rev. L. D. M., 50c.             2.13
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.50
    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.00
    Kirby. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                                6.65
    North Cambridge. Miss Maria Kinsley, Box, _for
      Cuthbert, Ga._
    North Londonderry. Dea. G. S. Hobart                       2.00
    Peru. Cong. Ch.                                            2.36
    Plainfield. Mrs. Hannah Stevens, to const. BENJAMIN
      S. GAGE, L. M.                                          30.00
    Royalton. Rev. J. C.                                       1.00
    Saint Albans. Mrs. H. B. T.                                1.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           52.97
    Westminster West. Mrs. A. S. G.                            1.00
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.09
    Weston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 3.75
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.38


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,671.10.

    Abington. “Mrs. H. P.”                                     5.00
    Andover. Chapel Cong. Ch. and Soc., $141; Old South
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $100; Free Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      ($100 of which from F. H. Johnson), $187.45, to
      const. JAMES SPENCE, MILO H. GOULD, MISS FLORENCE
      A. PARKER, JAMES WATSON, MISS LIZZIE A. PARKER and
      MRS. BLYTHE J. TOUGH, L. M’s;—By Miss A. Park,
      $25, _for Student Aid, Straight U._; ——$20, _for
      Talladega C._                                          473.45
    Andover. West Parish Sab. Sch.                            10.00
    Berkley. Ladies, Box of C., _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Boston. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $434.44; Mrs. E.
      P. Eayrs, $5                                           439.44
    Boston. Highlands. Miss E. Davis                          25.00
    Boylston Centre. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., bbl. of C.,
      _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Cambridge. North Av. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   67.60
    Cambridgeport. G. F. Kendall                               5.00
    Charlestown. Ivory Littlefield, $50; “A Friend,” $2       52.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $79.64; Third
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $8.95; A. J. S., 50c.; T. E.
      G., 50c.                                                89.59
    Chicopee. Third Cong. Ch., ($5 of which _for a
      Teacher, Hampton N. and A. Inst._)                      25.00
    Danvers. Maple St. Leaf Mission Circle, $60; Maple
      St. Ch., $25.72; Infant Class Maple St. Sab. Sch.,
      $5 _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                      90.72
    East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch.                         16.50
    East Somerville. A. R.                                     0.50
    Essex. Cong. Ch. $15.75, and Sab. Sch., $14.25,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         30.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.57
    Fitchburg. W. L. Bullock                                   2.00
    Framingham. Young People’s Circle, box of C., _for
      Atlanta, Ga._
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        11.24
    Georgetown. Memorial Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          18.40
    Hubbardston. Miss Emma Cutler                              2.00
    Hyde Park. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._       5.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.00
    Lawrence. Eliot Cong. Ch.                                 25.25
    Lincoln. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     20.00
    Lowell. John St. Ch., ($31.29 of which _for Chinese
      M._)                                                    41.29
    Lynn. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $17.32;
      North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $4.87                         22.19
    Middleborough. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                      12.15
    New Bedford. H. M. L.                                      1.00
    Newburyport. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     17.33
    Newton. Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc., Trunk of C.,
      _for Talladega, Ala._
    Northampton. “A Friend”                                  100.00
    Peru. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      5.50
    Salem. “Friends,” $6, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._; G. D., $1                                           7.00
    Sandwich. Miss H. H. N.                                    1.00
    Springfield. North Ch.                                    30.00
    Somerville. Broadway Orthodox Cong. Ch., $14; “A
      Friend,” $1                                             15.00
    South Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        21.24
    South Attleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               6.68
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. C. B.
      TILTON, L. M.                                           30.00
    South Dennis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.60
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.               173.50
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    14.00
    Ware. East Cong. Ch. and Soc., $363.50, to const.
      ROLLIE D. NEWTON, MISS HATTIE G. RICHARDSON, MISS
      SUSIE B. HYDE and MRS. GEO. A. ROOT, L. M’s; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20                                383.50
    Warwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $6, and Sab. Sch., $4        10.00
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers,” $20; and Bbl. of
      C., _for Atlanta, Ga._                                  20.00
    West Roxbury. South Evan Ch. and Soc.                    117.13
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch.                         15.50
    Williamsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    Wilmington. C. W. C.                                       1.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      77.63
    Woburn. Mrs. A. W. Dimick, _for Atlanta U._                3.00
    Worcester. Union Ch.                                      38.60


  RHODE ISLAND, $150.05.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                 125.05
    Pawtucket. “Friend”                                        5.00
    State Farms. Rev. Marcus Ames                             20.00


  CONNECTICUT, $688.28.

    Branford. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Broad Brook. Geo. E. Taylor                                3.50
    Clinton. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_                      7.73
    Colebrook. Miss E. R., $1; Mr. S., 50c.                    1.50
    Collinsville. “A Friend”                                   2.00
    Columbia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              17.42
    Durham Centre. Horace Newton                               3.00
    East Haddam. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., ($30 of which
      from Eugene W. Chaffee, to const. MRS. EUGENE W.
      CHAFFEE, L. M.)                                         86.15
    Ellsworth. Miss E. C. D.                                   1.00
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch.                              41.58
    Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                         12.35
    Greenwich. First Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Hartford. Benj. De Forest, _for Talladega C._             70.00
    Middletown. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      29.59
    Millbrook. Mrs. E. P., $1; Individuals, 50c.               1.50
    Millington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             2.00
    New Haven. North Ch., $95.35;—Wells Southworth, $50,
      _for Fisk U._;—Howard Av. Sab. Sch., $1, _for
      Student Aid_;—Rev. D. J. O., 50c., _for Mag._; C.
      A. Williams, Pkg. of Books                             146.85
    Putnam. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian Boy,
      Hampton Inst._                                          15.00
    Redding. Cong. Ch.                                        17.20
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                              127.91
    Scotland. ESTATE of Caroline Barrows, by Geo.
      Lincoln, Ex.                                            15.00
    South Manchester. First Cong. Ch. ($19 of which _for
      Student Aid_, and $30, to const. EDWARD TAYLOR, L.
      M.)                                                     57.00
    Stafford Springs. “A Friend,” $2; Individuals, _for
      Mag._, $2                                                4.00
    Torrington. Rev. C. H. B.                                  0.50
    Windsor. Mrs. M. C. W.                                     0.50
    Woodstock. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta, Ga._


  NEW YORK, $522.02.

    Amsterdam. Chandler Bartlett                              10.00
    Binghamton. H. F. L.                                       0.50
    Brooklyn. Sab. Sch., Church of the Pilgrims, $100,
      _for ed. of Indians, Hampton N. and A. Inst._;
      —“A Friend,” $60, to const. REV. THOMAS B. MCLEOD
      and MRS. M. J. C. MCLEOD, L. M’s;—Central Cong.
      Sab. Sch., Geo. A. Ball, Supt., $30, _for Lady
      Missionary_, and to const. HENRY MARTYN SCUDDER,
      JR., M. D., Arcot, Madras Presidency, Southern
      India, L. M.;—Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, $20;
      East Cong. Ch., $7.04; J. C. Howard, Box of
      Books                                                  217.04
    Crown Point. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     37.37
    Elma. Mrs. E. S. A. B.                                     1.00
    Lockport. H. W. Nicolas, Box of Books.
    Morrisania. Cong. Ch., $6.50, and Sab. Sch., $2            8.50
    Newark. Mrs. Phebe Parks, $10 and Communion Set           10.00
    New York. Ladies’ Association of Presb. Memorial
      Ch., $105, _for a Teacher, Talladega C._;—S. T.
      Gordon, Box of Singing Books                           105.00
    North Pitcher. Cong. Ch.                                   3.25
    Patchogue. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             22.21
    Pitcher. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                          18.00
    Pompey. Mrs. J. H. Childs, ($4.50 of which _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._)                                   5.00
    Spencerport. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              20.00
    Syracuse. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_                    14.15
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                     50.00


  NEW JERSEY, $78.19.

    Bound Brook. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. JAMES D.
      EATON, L. M.                                            30.00
    Montclair. Mrs. Pratt’s S. S. Class, $5, and Box of
      C., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                      5.00
    Newark. Miss M. E. Sears, $30;—Miss H. Miller, Box
      of C., _for Raleigh, N. C._                             30.00
    Paterson. Cong. Ch., $12.19; Mrs. A. C. W., $1            13.19
    Raritan. Miss Sarah Provost, Box of Papers.


  PENNSYLVANIA, $6.50.

    Candor. Isabella Connelly                                  3.00
    Canton. H. Sheldon, _for Freight, for Talladega C._        2.50
    Terrytown. G. F. H.                                        1.00


  OHIO, $1,262.90.

    Brownhelm. ESTATE of John Locke                          613.59
    Cleveland. Plymouth Ch., (ad’l)                            5.00
    East Cleveland. Mrs. Mary Walkden, _for Mendi M._          4.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch.                                  103.20
    Freedom. Cong. Ch., Coll. $7; “J. C. B.,” $5              12.00
    Hambden. A. C., 50c.; “A Friend,” 50c.                     1.00
    Hudson. “A Friend”                                        10.00
    Lennox. A. J. Holman                                       10.00
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch.                                10.00
    Mechanicsburg. Mrs. M. K. H.                               1.00
    Newark. “A Thank Offering, _for ‘Leah and Frank,’
      Tougaloo U._”                                           50.00
    North Benton. Simon Hartzel                               10.00
    Oberlin. Ladies, $20, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._;
      Ladies, $7, and 5 bbls. of C., _for Atlanta, Ga._;
      Mrs. William Kimball, $2; Mrs. J. F. B., 60c.           29.60
      Steuben. L. P.                                           1.00
    Wakeman. Mrs. G. V. F.                                     0.51
    Wellington. ESTATE of N. D. Billings, by J. H.
      Dickson, Ex.                                           400.00
    Zanesville. Mrs. M. A. Dunlap                              2.00


  MICHIGAN, $912.45.

    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Calumet. Prof. E. T. Curtis, $1.75, and Box of
      Books, _for Talladega C._                                1.75
    East Saginaw. ESTATE of Chas. W. Wilder, by N. H.
      Culver, Adm’r                                           82.23
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H. H.
      Sengstacke_                                             20.00
    Hancock. First Cong. Ch., to const. DR. I. M.
      RHODES and J. H. CARAH, L. M’s                          65.67
    Northport. Cong. Ch.                                       5.35
    Pontiac. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   1.10
      Portland. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                            15.00
    Romeo. Mrs. H. O. S., $1, Mrs. J. S. R., $1, Mrs.
      Reed’s S. S. Class, 35c., _for Lady Missionary,
      Memphis, Tenn._                                          2.35
    Union City. “A Friend”                                   700.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                         9.00


  INDIANA, $8.00.

    Elkhart. First Cong. Ch.                                   8.00


  ILLINOIS, $521.96.

    Belvidere. ESTATE of Olney Nichols, by H. W. Pier,
      Ex.                                                     26.00
    Chesterfield. ESTATE of Miss Matilda M. Williams,
      by E. G. Duckles, Adm’s                                 50.00
    Chicago. Plymouth Ch., $78.31; Leavitt St. Cong.
      Ch., $21.77; South Cong. Ch., $18.45; Ladies’
      Miss. Soc. of N. E. Ch., $2.13                         120.66
    Earlville. Cong. Ch., ($30 of which to const. MISS
      EMMA HATHAWAY, L. M.)                                   40.00
    Galesburg. “A Friend”                                     25.00
    Kewanee. Gleaners of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            35.00
    Lewiston. Mrs. Phelps                                     50.00
    Mattoon. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Morris. Cong. Ch., $27.39, and Sab. Sch., $1.61           29.00
    Odell. Mrs. H. E. Dana                                    10.00
    Olney. Cong. Ch.                                          12.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Ch.                                         21.73
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         22.00
    Princeville. Wm. C. Stevens                               20.00
    Quincy. Mrs. E. T. Parker                                 20.00
    Roseville. Rev. A. L. Pennoyer and Wife                    5.00
    Wheaton. Cong. Ch.                                        22.00
    Winnebago. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 8.57


  WISCONSIN, $95.26.

    Beloit. Dr. A.                                             1.00
    Eau Claire. Cong. Ch.                                     25.60
    Walworth. Mrs. D. R. S. Colton                             5.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                       9.16
    Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch., ($30 of which to const. JOHN
      M. WHEELER, L. M.)                                      54.50


  IOWA, $239.70.

    Alden. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                                  2.60
    Belle Plain. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Cedar Falls. Cong. Ch., _for Freight, for Talladega
      C._                                                      5.75
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        30.00
    Des Moines. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                 24.85
    Dubuque. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       15.00
    Garwin. Talmon Dewey                                       2.50
    Hampton. Ladies’ Cent. Soc.                                5.25
    Keokuk. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       20.00
    McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                       30.00
    Mitchellville. Cong. Ch.                                   3.00
    Oskaloosa. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       10.00
    Prairie City. Cong. Ch.                                    5.75
    Stacyville. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                             4.00
    Tabor. Cong. Ch. (in part)                                50.00
    Waltham. ESTATE of Miss Emmeline Williams, $25, by
      Wm. Mason; W. M., $1                                    26.00


  KANSAS, $9.35.

    Onaga. Cong. Ch.                                           6.50
    Washara. Cong. Ch.                                         2.85


  MINNESOTA, $47.44.

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $23.44; Second Cong. Ch.,
      $6.50                                                   29.94
    Montivedo. Rev. D. G.                                      0.60
    Owatonna. Isaac W. Burch                                   9.90
    Wabasha. Cong. Cong. Ch.                                   7.00


  NEBRASKA, $4.00.

    Clarksville. Cong. Ch.                                     4.00


  TENNESSEE, $324.70.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          195.70
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              129.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $101.95.

    Raleigh. Washington Sch., Tuition, $19.75; S. F. H.,
      $1                                                      20.75
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                          81.20


  GEORGIA, $686.22.

    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition, $103; Rent, $13;
      Storr’s Sch., Tuition, $229.20                         345.20
    Byron. By C. R. K., _for Mendi M._                         0.50
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           41.25
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $208.70; Rent, $30;
      Sales, $50.07;—“A Friend,” $10, _for Beach Inst._      298.77
    Warrior. E. F. M.                                          0.50


  ALABAMA, $400.77.

    Childersburg. Rev. A. J.                                   1.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    167.75
    Montgomery. Pub. Sch. Fund.                              175.00
    Talladega. Talladega C.                                   57.02


  MISSISSIPPI, $101.90.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $79.90; Rent, $22        101.90


  LOUISIANA, $109.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition, $108;
      Individuals, _for Mag._, $1.50                           109.50


  JAPAN, $20.00.

    Kobe. Rev. R. H. Davis, ($5 of which, _for
      Chinese M. in Cal._)                                    20.00
                                                           ————————
                  Total                                   $9,637.11
                  Total from Oct. 1st to May 31st       $115,471.75

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Norwich, Conn. “A Friend”                                400.00
    —— Conn. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    Galesburg, Ill. “A Friend”                                10.00
                                                             ——————
                  Total                                     $420.00
    Previously acknowledged in April Receipts              3,887.00
                                                           ————————
                  Total                                   $4,307.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR SCHOOL BUILDING, ATHENS, ALA.

    Portland, Mich. Woman’s Miss. Soc., by Mrs. Wm.
      White                                                   10.00
    Previously acknowledged in April Receipts                660.59
                                                             ——————
                  Total                                     $670.59

       *       *       *       *       *

                  Receipts for May                       $10,067.11
                  Total from Oct. 1st to May 31st.      $125,602.90
                                                        ===========
                      H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                 56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




          Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

                     INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

                   *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct Christian
missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries which are destitute of
them, or which present open and urgent fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slave-holder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without the
privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of September,
October or November, for the election of officers and the transaction
of other business, at such time and place as shall be designated by
the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting, and
of delegates from churches, local missionary societies, and other
co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory, and
the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually chosen,
always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or missionary;
and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call, in
all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and general
conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the diffusion
of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous promotion of
the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing officers,
agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor, and
conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold
their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular annual
meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been submitted to
a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in season to be
published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if so submitted)
in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

    [Footnote A: By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among
    others, a belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men
    without a Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning
    Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the
    necessity of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and
    holy obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul;
    and the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of
    the wicked, and salvation of the righteous.]




                  The American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane and
Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 6.
_Africa_, 2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 70.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 24. Total 44.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 253; among
the Chinese, 21; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total, 296.
STUDENTS—In Theology, 86; Law, 28; in College Course, 63; in other
studies, 7,030. Total, 7,207. Scholars taught by former pupils of
our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care of the
Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

NEW YORK H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street. BOSTON Rev. C. L.
Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House. CHICAGO Rev. Jas. Powell,
112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries; to
Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does not
prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year not less
than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States three
are required—in other States only two], who should write against
their names, their places of residence [if in cities, their street
and number]. The following form of attestation will answer for every
State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published and declared by the
said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament, in presence of us,
who, at the request of the said A. B., and in his presence, and in
the presence of each other, have hereunto subscribed our names as
witnesses.” In some States it is required that the Will should be
made at least two months before the death of the testator.


       *       *       *       *       *


                                  THE

                             CHRISTIAN UNION.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                     HENRY WARD BEECHER,}
                     LYMAN ABBOTT,      } Editors.

  “In my own family, every one of us, from the eldest to the
  youngest, finds something in every weekly issue to be read with
  interest and to yield instruction.”— LEONARD BACON.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                      _SPECIAL FEATURES FOR 1880._

  =PICTURES OF TRAVEL=, by BLANCHE WILLIS HOWARD, CHARLES
   DUDLEY WARNER, CURTIS GUILD, ADELINE TRAFTON, _J. Leonard
   Corning_, G. W. W. HOUGHTON, and others.

  =SUMMER STORIES=, by E. P. ROE, CONSTANCE FENIMORE WOOLSON,
  ROSE TERRY COOKE, LOUISE STOCKTON, SUSAN COOLIDGE, ELIOT
  MCCORMICK, JOSEPHINE R. BAKER, EMILY HUNTINGTON MILLER, HELEN
  CAMPBELL, SARAH O. JEWETT, and others.

  =THE POET’S HOME=, by HORACE E. SCUDDER.

  =A SUMMER JOURNAL=, by ELAINE GOODALE.

                   *       *       *       *       *


       _Book Reviews, Mr. Beecher’s Sermons, Mr. Abbott’s and
             Mrs. W. F. Crafts’ Sunday-school Papers._

THE OUTLOOK. NEWS OF THE CHURCHES. SCIENCE AND ART. FACT AND RUMOR.

                   *       *       *       *       *

      The following persons have contributed to the columns of the
                 CHRISTIAN UNION during the past year:

                       John Hall, D.D.,
                       Phillips Brooks,
                       John G. Whittier,
                       Judge Noah Davis,
                       Judge C. A. Peabody,
                       E. P. Roe,
                       Frank H. Converse,
                       Susan Coolidge,
                       Hezekiah Butterworth,
                       John James Piatt,
                       Willard Parker, M.D.,
                       Constance F. Woolson,
                       Charles Dudley Warner,
                       Alice Wellington Rollins,
                       Geo. S. Merriam,
                       John Jay,
                       Julius H. Ward,
                       Leonard Bacon, D.D.,
                       Frances E. Willard,
                       S. W. Duffield, D.D.,
                       Wayland Hoyt, D.D.,
                       Mrs. D. H. R. Goodale,
                       Elaine Goodale,
                       Dora Read Goodale,
                       Gail Hamilton,
                       Leonard Woolsey Bacon,
                       Mary Ainge De Vere,
                       Mrs. S. W. Weitzel,
                       Helen Campbell,
                       Mrs. M. E C. Wyeth,
                       R. W. Raymond, Ph.D.,
                       Charles L. Norton,
                       Prof. W. S. Tyler, D.D.,
                       John Burroughs,
                       Lizzie W. Champney,
                       Rose Terry Cooke.


     _TERMS: Per Annum, $3. To Clergymen, $2.50. Four Months, $1._

  Address,
                        =THE CHRISTIAN UNION=,
                                   22 Washington Square, N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


                                PAYSON’S

                             Indelible Ink,

                      FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                          COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                              PREPARATION.

                   *       *       *       *       *

            It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                         _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

                   Sales now greater than ever before.

                    This Ink received the Diploma and
                   Medal at Centennial over all rivals.

                   Report of Judges: “For simplicity of
                      application and indelibility.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

                              INQUIRE FOR

                         PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

                  Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and
                  News Agents, and by many Fancy Goods
                         and Furnishing Houses.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          Brown Brothers & Co.

                             59 WALL STREET,

                                NEW YORK.

          =Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great
          Britain and Ireland, France, Germany, Belgium and
          Holland, =Issue Commercial and Travelers’
          Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part of the
          world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and
          Guadaloupe.

                   Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

            Between this and other countries, through London
                                 and Paris.

          =Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad=
          on all parts of the United States and Canada, and of
          =Drafts drawn in the United States= on Foreign
          Countries.

          =Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash
          deposited or satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In
          Dollars for use in the United States and adjacent
          countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use in any part of the
          world. Applications for credits may be addressed as
          above direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                       26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                   Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


       *       *       *       *       *


                     1850.                    1880.

                                 THE

                              MANHATTAN

                                 LIFE

                          _Insurance Company_,

                                  OF

                               NEW YORK.

                    *       *       *       *       *

         An entire generation of successful business management.

     _One Thousand Dollars paid out_ EACH BUSINESS DAY _for thirty
     years to families of deceased members_.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                         Policies Incontestable.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                   Accumulation, – – – – $10,000,000
                   Surplus, over – – – – – 1,750,000

                   *       *       *       *       *

                        SEND FOR RATES AND TERMS.

                 _New form of Policy, comprehensive and
                       very liberal to insurers._

                             AGENTS WANTED.

                        HENRY STOKES, President.

                        J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           BUY THE BEST GOODS

                   *       *       *       *       *

                             BOGLE & LYLES,

                Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place,.......NEW YORK.

                               Dealers in
                          CHOICE CANNED FRUITS
                     VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,
                             Sole Agents for
                          RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’
                          Extra Yellow Peaches.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            J. & R. LAMB,
                        59 Carmine St., N. Y.
                          CHURCH FURNISHERS

                             [Illustration]

                  Memorial Windows, Memorial Tablets,
                  Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                           SEND FOR CIRCULAR.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       Every Man His Own Printer.

                     Excelsior =$3= Printing Press.

                             [Illustration]

                  Prints cards, labels, envelopes, &c.;
                    larger sizes for larger work. For
                   business or pleasure, young or old.
              Catalogue of Presses, Type, Cards, &c., sent
                             for two stamps.

                   KELSEY & CO., M’f’rs, Meriden, Conn.


       *       *       *       *       *




                          THE THIRTY-FOURTH VOLUME

                                 OF THE

                          American Missionary,

                                  1880.


  We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the
  increasing appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the past year,
  and purpose to spare no effort to make its pages of still
  greater value to those interested in the work which it records.

  Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for
  1880?

  A little effort on the part of our friends, when making
  their own remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in
  forming Clubs, will easily double our list, and thus widen the
  influence of our Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our
  work.

  Under the editorial supervision of Rev. C. C. PAINTER, aided
  by the steady contributions of our intelligent Missionaries
  and teachers in all parts of the field, and with occasional
  communications from careful observers and thinkers elsewhere,
  the AMERICAN MISSIONARY furnishes a vivid and reliable picture
  of the work going forward among the Indians, the Chinamen on
  the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in the South
  and as Missionaries in Africa.

  It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters
  affecting the races among which it labors, and will give a
  monthly summary of current events relating to their welfare and
  progress.

  Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
  Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it,
  and assist in its circulation. Begin with the next number and
  the new year. The price is only Fifty Cents per annum.

  The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
  persons indicated on page 223.

  Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                                  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

                   *       *       *       *       *


                             TO ADVERTISERS.

  Special attention is invited to the advertising department
  of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are
  thousands of Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors
  and Teachers in Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools;
  it is, therefore, a specially valuable medium for advertising
  Books, Periodicals, Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of
  Learning, Church Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

  Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged
  for space in its columns, considering the extent and character
  of its circulation.

  Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month,
  in order to secure insertion in the following number. All
  communications in relation to advertising should be addressed to

  THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  ☛ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department
  of the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by
  mentioning, when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised
  in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.


  1. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by =equal
       signs=.

  2. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors have been
       silently corrected.

  3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 34, NO. 7, JULY, 1880 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.