VOL. XXXV.                                              No. 4.


                                  THE

                         AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                 “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

                             APRIL, 1881.




                              _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                              97
    THE INAUGURAL AND THE SOUTH                             98
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY                                     99
    ARTHINGTON MISSION                                     100
    GROWTH OF NEGRO POPULATION IN THE SOUTH                101
    TONIC SOL-FA SYSTEM OF TEACHING MUSIC                  102
    SUCCESS, REAL AND APPARENT                             103
    BENEFACTIONS                                           104
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indiana, Chinese                 105
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                   107


  THE FREEDMEN.

    VIRGINIA, HAMPTON—Pastor’s Testimony                   108
    GEORGIA, ATLANTA—Revival Interest                      109
    GEORGIA, SAVANNAH—John the Baptist of the
      Church—Genius for Piety                              109
    GEORGIA, MACON—Southern Winter of 1880-81              110
    ALABAMA, TALLADEGA—Accessions to the Church            111
    MISSISSIPPI, TOUGALOO—Burning of Boys’ Dormitory       112
    TENNESSEE, NASHVILLE—Statistics of Teaching by
      Students in Fisk University                          114


  THE CHINESE.

    HOW SPEEDS THE WORK? Rev. W. C. Pond                   115


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N

    MONTHLY REPORT                                         118


  RECEIPTS                                                 120


  CONSTITUTION                                             126


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                             127

                   *       *       *       *       *

                               NEW YORK:
           Published by the American Missionary Association,
                        ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Mass.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas;
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, D. D., _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    J. A. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D. D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                  THE

                         AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXV.       APRIL, 1881.         NO. 4.

                   *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.


We call special attention to our appeal for the funds needful for
re-building the dormitory recently destroyed by fire at Tougaloo
University. The demand is immediate and imperative, as will be seen
by the account of the fire given by Mr. Hatch in this number of the
MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mayor Hall, of Cambridge, Mass., who has made an extended tour in the
South, recently stated in an address at Dr. McKenzie’s church that he
considered the moral and religious character of the schools of the A.
M. A. a model of missionary work, and that he believed certainly for
the next ten years the work of the Association was the great work of
the churches, and that no cause has a higher claim on their charity and
prayers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The communication found elsewhere concerning our Chinese work on the
Pacific Coast is timely and pertinent. Mr. Pond’s efficiency, economy
and success will leave no doubt in the minds of those who know of
him and his work that his request is reasonable. While we cannot ask
that money intended for our treasury, and which we need to meet our
appropriation for Bro. Pond’s work, be diverted, we commend his appeal
to the prayerful attention of the friends of the Chinese, and assure
them that whatever may be sent to him will be properly applied, and
meet an urgent necessity.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Missionary Herald” for March contains a map of that portion of
Africa selected for the new mission of the American Board on the west
coast. It also gives an account of the arrival of Messrs. Bagster,
Sanders and Miller at Benguela. These brethren write very cheerfully,
and anticipate an easy and early journey to Bihe, the point of their
destination. The sadness caused by the death of Mr. Pinkerton while on
his way to Umzila’s kingdom, of which a full account is given in the
same number of the “Herald,” is somewhat relieved by the hopeful aspect
of affairs on the west coast.

A benevolent gentleman offers to duplicate any excess of $50 or
more over last year’s contribution by any churches to the American
Missionary Association, up to the aggregate amount of $2,500.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Gospel in all Lands” for March, published by Eugene R. Smith,
at the Bible House, is devoted to Africa and the Africans. It gives
a resumé of the missionary endeavors prosecuted in Africa by the
different denominations of Christians, covering a period of about 150
years. It also contains four maps and numerous illustrations. We know
of no one pamphlet likely to be so helpful to any one who may wish to
possess himself of the present attitude of missionary affairs in the
Dark Continent as this.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is gratifying to have testimony to the progress of the colored race
at the South from witnesses outside of our missionaries, confirmatory
of their evidence.

One of the missionaries of the American Sunday-school Union writes
from South-western Virginia: “In Pulaski County I attended the best
Sunday-school Association I was ever in. It was among the colored
people. They are intensely in earnest in Sunday-school work, and
anxious to learn. They are very poor, yet buy more books than their
white neighbors. Some of them are quite intelligent. They take hold of
the International Lesson System well. Most of the Sunday-schools which
are kept up during the winter here are colored schools. They ought to
have a Sunday-school missionary of their own color.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CLASS OF ’80, FISK UNIVERSITY.

Ernest H. Anderson has been elected Principal of the State Normal
School for the training of colored teachers, located near Hempstead,
Texas. This is the most important position open to a colored teacher in
the State. It gives a large field of usefulness for which Mr. Anderson
is well qualified. Laurine C. Anderson is in charge of a school in
Chapel Hill, Texas. Joseph Anderson is at the head of a school in
Leesburg, Camp county, Texas. J. J. Durham is studying medicine at the
Meharry Medical College, Nashville. J. E. Porter is teaching in one of
the public schools of Jeffersonville, Ind. R. P. Neal is in charge of
the school at Humboldt, Tenn. Here is a practical answer to the inquiry
that is often raised by our friends, “What do your students do after
graduating from college?”—_Fisk Expositor._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INAUGURAL AND THE SOUTH.

President Garfield’s inaugural has very properly given special
attention to America’s great problem, the condition of the colored
people in the South. His fitly-chosen words may well be repeated:

“Bad local Government is certainly a great evil which ought to be
prevented; but to violate the freedom and sanctity of the suffrage is
more than an evil—it is a crime which if persisted in will destroy the
Government itself. Suicide is not a remedy.”

As to the remedy, the President says:

“For the North and South alike, there is but one remedy. All the
constitutional powers of the Nation and of the States, and all the
volunteer forces of the people, should be summoned to meet this danger
by the saving influence of universal education.”

A sounder utterance could not be expressed if the word “_education_” be
made sufficiently broad. The training of the common school, reaching
only the intellect, is not enough. There must be the awakening of the
conscience and the purification of the heart as well. _Character_ is
the foundation of manhood, and hence of a worthy citizenship.

The A. M. A. has from the first acted on the necessity of this broader
basis, and hence its school and church work have been blended—the
school has been religious and the church intelligent.

The President’s remedy of “universal education” has been criticised as
requiring too long a time. Perhaps somebody can find a legislative or
legal remedy that will work the cure more speedily. The past does not
make us hopeful in this respect, and hence we, as one of the “volunteer
forces,” which the inaugural mentions, will push on as vigorously as
possible. This is the great work of the age for this nation, and we
hope the strong and clear language of President Garfield will give a
new impulse to it.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

The recent burning of the boys’ dormitory at Tougaloo, Miss., compels
us to build anew, and the over-crowding of students compels us to build
larger.

We must rebuild or abandon the school. The latter we dare not do. The
colored population in the State exceeds the white, numbering 652,221,
and has increased over 46 per cent. in the last ten years. Tougaloo
University is seven miles north of Jackson, the capital, and there is
no similar school of higher grade admitting colored students nearer
than about 200 miles south, east, or north, and none much nearer west.
The Institution has 500 acres of land attached to it, giving employment
to the students, and it has the good-will of the State Legislature,
which makes an annual grant to support teachers.

The school at Tougaloo has long been over-crowded. It has comfortable
rooms for 32 young women, but 60 are in attendance, three being put
in the small rooms, and sitting-rooms being converted into sleeping
apartments. One room needed for the accommodation of teachers was
taken and ten young women put into it. Some applications were refused.
There were, before the fire, accommodations for 28 young men, with 50
in attendance, the overflow being crowded into most unsuitable and
inconvenient quarters.

The students, in summer vacations, teach about 4,000 pupils in day
schools and Sunday-schools, and secure from 1,000 to 1,500 names to the
temperance pledge.

The Executive Committee, a few months since, authorized the gradual
enlargement of the girls’ dormitory as funds would permit. For a
new boys’ dormitory it was hoped that $10,000 might be spared from
the generous gift of Mrs. Stone, but the definite pledges to other
institutions and the increased price of labor and materials forbid
it. We had scarcely more than realized this disappointment when the
boys’ dormitory was destroyed by fire. The best temporary arrangements
possible have been made, including the use of the barn, which the boys
have occupied cheerfully, calling it “Ayrshire Hall,” but they have
suffered much from cold in inclement weather.

Fourteen thousand dollars is the lowest sum for which a boys’ dormitory
and chapel can be erected. Three thousand dollars will be required for
the enlargement of the girls’ dormitory. Two thousand dollars will be
necessary for furnishing; making a total of $19,000. Three thousand
dollars, the insurance on the burned building, will reduce the sum
needed to $16,000.

The building and improvements should begin at once, to get them ready
for use in the fall. The Executive Committee, feeling the call to be
imperative, will go forward immediately, relying upon our friends to
furnish the means _as a special contribution_: for our ordinary income
will be taxed to the utmost to carry on our current work.

We make an earnest appeal to the friends whom we believe to be both
able and willing to aid us effectually and promptly in this pressing
emergency.

Funds may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARTHINGTON MISSION.

Extracts From Recent Correspondence.

We trust it will be of interest to the friends of African Missions to
learn that Mr. Robert Arthington, of Leeds, England, has paid over the
£3,000 pledged by him to this Association, for a new mission on the
Upper Nile.

The following extracts from letters give a comprehensive view of the
present attitude of affairs relating to the mission:

                                 “Leeds, England, December 14, 1880.

  “Dear Brethren in our Lord Jesus, our Saviour: For some time I have had
  it in my mind and heart to write to you and say I thought it time—I
  do trust the Lord’s time—we should begin the mission. If, therefore,
  your faith is fully with my faith, I propose to send you the £3,000 at
  once. How does it seem with you in the Lord’s sight? Without Him we
  can do nothing, and we must have Him with us from the beginning to the
  end of this enterprise.

  “Let all the true people of God in the United States understand
  this, our view and feeling. We are all one family—they who are ‘the
  children of God scattered abroad.’ So I ask them all throughout the
  States, yea, and the world, to go with us heart and soul and prayer
  always in this undertaking. Surely in the mighty God of Jacob we shall
  overcome. We shall win many for Christ, and they shall stand amidst
  the multitude of the redeemed with palms in their hands, out of every
  kindred and nation and tongue and people.

  “With my Christian sentiments to your committee, and asking the
  blessing of God on all their deliberations, yours and theirs, ever
  in Him, whom not having seen we love, in whom believing we have joy
  unspeakable and full of glory,

                                                “ROBERT ARTHINGTON.”


                                “56 Reade Street, January 14, 1881.

  “Robert Arthington, Esq., Leeds, England. Dear Brother: * * * *
  Further information about the requirements of the mission and the
  territory to be occupied have been gathered, so that on the receipt
  of your letter, we felt called of God to take definite action. Our
  Executive Committee, with prayerful gratitude to God, interpreted your
  communication as an indication from Him that the time had come for us
  to go forward. Accordingly they voted to accept your bountiful gift
  and to undertake the preliminary work needful during the coming year.
  Among the persons with whom we had been in communication was Rev.
  Henry M. Ladd, the son of a missionary, who had spent 17 years of his
  early life at Smyrna and other localities in the East, before coming
  to this country to study for the ministry, and who was presumed to
  have peculiar fitness as the leader of the new mission. On receiving
  your letter, we obtained an interview with Mr. Ladd, and after a full
  and prayerful deliberation, we tendered him the superintendency of our
  African Missions, and this week he writes us as follows: ‘I hereby
  accept the position, praying the great Head of the church for His
  blessing on the arduous work undertaken in His name.’

  “We learned last spring from Gordon Pacha, the late Governor-general
  of the Soudan, that it would be necessary to secure certain privileges
  from the Egyptian Government, assuring protection to the missionaries,
  the privilege of navigating the Upper Nile, etc. This we trust may be
  accomplished in part, at least, by correspondence, upon which we can
  enter directly. Meanwhile, inasmuch as the best season for starting
  from Cairo and the mouth of the Sobat commences about the first of
  October, we desire Mr. Ladd and a physician to be on the ground at
  that time, to take advantage of the favorable weather of the latter
  part of autumn and the early winter, to visit the territory it is
  proposed to occupy, and determine about the location, and the men and
  facilities needful in order to insure the success of our new work.

  “We are seeking prayerfully and most earnestly under God, to lay
  enduring foundations, and to build up a work which may extend over
  the utterly destitute region of country, included in the boundaries,
  marked out, we believe, so wisely and prayerfully by yourself. We
  now most cheerfully, and relying upon God hopefully, are ready to
  undertake the great work you have suggested to us.”

       *       *       *       *       *


GROWTH OF NEGRO POPULATION IN THE SOUTH.

The negro most perversely and persistently refuses to do what has been
prophesied of him, or to conform to the general rules enumerated as
applicable to him.

The census reports for 1880 reveal the last and most striking phase of
this, perversity, as may be seen in the following table taken from the
_New York Herald_, comparing the colored population of the old slave
States, except Texas, in 1870, with that of 1880:

    STATES.           1870.        1880.
  Alabama            475,510      600,141
  Arkansas           122,169      210,622
  Delaware            22,794       26,456
  Florida             91,689      125,262
  Georgia            545,142      724,654
  Kentucky           222,210      271,462
  Louisiana          364,210      483,898
  Maryland           175,391      209,896
  Mississippi        444,201      652,221
  Missouri           118,071      145,046
  North Carolina     391,650      531,316
  South Carolina     415,814      604,325
  Tennessee          322,331      402,991
  Virginia           512,841      631,756
  West Virginia       17,980       25,729

The increase in these States during this decade has been more than 33
per cent., and at the same rate will give us at the beginning of the
next century more than ten millions of negroes in these States alone.
During the same time, the per cent. of increase in the white population
has been less than 28 per cent., which will give something over
eighteen millions as their total white population in 1900.

It is manifest that the negro has come to stay, and must be taken into
our calculations in all estimates for the future of our national life.
He need not fade away before us despite heroic efforts to save him.
He does not perish even under our discouraging frowns. He will not be
suppressed by a somewhat rigorous repressive policy. He has withstood
all this, and flourished under it, as did the Israelites under the
discouragements of Egyptian legislation.

It is not for us humanely to consider, therefore, how we can make
comfortable in their decline the lingering remnants of this perishing
people. The more momentous question is how this vast and rapidly
increasing mass of humanity is best to be fitted for the large part
it is to play in our national life. It is not a question whether we
shall have it with us or not, but whether we shall allow it to remain
a festering, death-exhaling corruption, or whether it can be converted
into a much needed element of strength. It could not be a matter of
indifference to the most despotic government what is the condition of
such a vast body of its citizens. Even when they were slaves, wholly
under control of their masters, with no rights to claim and no duties
to perform, their very presence as an ignorant and licentious mass of
chattles gave great cause for anxiety to the intelligent lover of his
country. But now they are citizens and voters, and whether exercising
their rights as such or deprived of them, are equally, almost, a source
of dangerous power which cannot but fill us with grave apprehensions,
if we but think of it.

The census tables proclaim loudly that death nor destiny will mitigate
this danger; is it not time for a wise statesmanship to undertake
seriously the task of dissipating it by a good and ample system of
education which will qualify the negro for the duties thrust upon him?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TONIC SOL-FA SYSTEM OF TEACHING MUSIC.

BY THEODORE F. SEWARD.

That music is one of the special gifts of the colored people has long
been known and recognized. How to develop that gift in the wisest manner
and to the best advantage of the race, is a question which ought to
receive a practical answer, and as speedily as possible. If they are
peculiarly susceptible to the refining and elevating influences of such
an art as music, it is very desirable that these influences be brought
to bear upon them just now, while in the formative stage of their
history.

Fortunately, or as I like better to say, providentially, the way is
now opened for that result. A system has been devised and perfected
in England, and is now beginning to be generally adopted in this
country, which so simplifies the study of music as to bring it within
the comprehension of a little child. That system bears the name which
stands at the head of this article. A technical description of the
system would be out of place here. It is enough to say that the result
is accomplished and the study of music now is made easy and delightful
where it was formerly perplexing and confusing. How much this means
for the colored people, with their musical gifts and inspirations, it
is impossible to imagine. It is not to be supposed that such special
powers were bestowed upon a whole race without some very important and
far-reaching purpose. The unfolding of that purpose was begun in a very
wonderful way by the Jubilee Singers. But their mission was among the
Caucasian races rather than among their own people. The Tonic Sol-fa
system comes to fill a widely different sphere, viz.: to give to the
masses an intelligent possession of the world of music.

The A. M. A. has done a very wise thing in taking steps to test at once
the value of this system for its constituents. They have commissioned a
teacher to go to the Fisk University and teach it during the remainder
of the school year. The method is so easy and natural that a thorough
knowledge of its fundamental principles can be imparted in that time,
and not only that, but _all who learn it can teach it intelligently in
their schools during the coming summer_. Its advantages will thus begin
to be felt in remote country districts, and the reform will be carried
on just where such reforms should always begin, among the masses of the
common people.

The teacher who has been appointed to this important post, Mr. J. W.
Adams, is one who is singularly fitted by his history and antecedents
to engage in this special work. Born in England, he was taken by his
parents to the island of St. Helena at the age of three. When nine
years old he accompanied his father, a sea captain, on one of his
voyages. The vessel was wrecked on the coast of South Africa, and the
young lad remained there for eighteen years. He traveled extensively
throughout the country on trading expeditions, and thus became
thoroughly acquainted with the manners and usages of the native tribes
as well as of the British and Dutch settlers. He learned the Tonic
Sol-fa system there and became so interested in it that at length he
resolved to qualify himself as a teacher. It is certainly a singular
and interesting fact, that the person who is first to introduce the
system among the Freedmen of America should have learned it in Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUCCESS, REAL AND APPARENT.

It is often difficult, not to say impossible, to know just what success
has been achieved by any special missionary effort. After years of
faithful labor the missionary, if challenged to do so, may not be able
to adduce a single satisfactory proof that he has not labored wholly in
vain, so far as the results he has been seeking are concerned.

On the other hand, changes so remarkable, so exactly in the line of
what is sought and hoped for, follow the very first proclamation of the
Gospel, which we gladly attribute to Divine grace; we grow confident
that at last the promise is nearing its fulfilment when “a nation shall
be born in a day.”

Now, it should be understood that we are in danger of mistake as to the
real condition of things in each case; a mistake which breeds despair
where there may be good reason for rejoicing, or excites hopes that are
fatally false on the other hand.

Doubtless many a faithful toiler has spent his whole life in laying
foundations, deep and broad, but out of the sight of ordinary
observers, upon which shall rise, in magnificent proportions, a temple
to our God after he has gone to his reward—to the reward of one who has
been faithful, rather than of one who has been observed. The merest
accident may place another in such relation to this man’s toils that he
shall seem to be the creator of all the results for which he labored,
while he bears no other relation to them than the minnow does to the
swell and roar and irresistible rush of the wave by which it has been
caught and upon which it rides.

Again, men possessed of certain gifts, but devoid of needed restraints
in their use, may arouse the enthusiasm of their fellows, sway their
passions, play upon their imaginations, excite their emotions and
propel them along certain lines of activity until confidence is created
that now, at last, the kingdom is coming with millennial celerity and
power. But a reaction from all this is certain, and the Gospel ship
which just now was riding with grace and beauty upon the crest of
the wave lies half buried in mud and sea-weed to await the rising of
another tide. The whole movement has been that of an anchored boat,
without the possibility of advance, and worse than useless, for in this
case it has been with the waste of spiritual force.

There are two facts which all who are laboring for the coming of the
kingdom of our Lord should regard as fixed, and being fixed some good
degree of fixedness will be secured for their hopes with reference to
its progress. One of these is the amazing ignorance and wickedness of
those over whom this kingdom of light and love is to be established;
and the other is the Divine power of that kingdom and the Divine
purpose to establish it, and hence the certainty of its establishment.

The Gospel will never gain its conquests in such way as to relieve the
Church of the duty and labor and self-denial and discipline of carrying
it and proclaiming it to the heathen, who will find it, as all people
have, opposed to all their habits and pleasures and traditions, and
will, therefore, when they understand it, resist it before accepting
it. The cheering news which so often comes to us from Central Africa
and other lands will doubtless be followed by most discouraging news of
disappointment and seeming disaster.

On the other hand, it must be remembered that in all really substantial
buildings, especially if erected on doubtful ground, a large proportion
of the cost and of the most valuable material, and also of the time,
must be expended out of sight before it becomes a feature of the
landscape.

In all religious movements it is especially true that much of the best
material, and much of the cost, is utterly lost to sight before the
world sees any result. In the South, for the past fifteen years, the
foundations have been laid for a superstructure which is to arise in
grand and glorious proportions, the joy of our land and the praise
of all people. We are just reaching the surface, and others than the
workmen themselves are now able to see that something has been going on
during all these years.

If structures, however beautiful, which have no foundations, must
topple, and we should feel no disappointment when they do, we would yet
understand that much has been done when a foundation broad enough and
strong enough has been laid.

The work will go on now with apparently tenfold rapidity, for, since it
attracts attention it will also attract helpers, and those who doubted
and sneered will co-operate in carrying it forward.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

It is reported that John I. Blair has recently given $40,000 to
Lafayette College.

Hon. Levi Parsons has given $50,000 to Union College for the benefit of
worthy students.

Mrs. Orra Bolles, of Hartford, Conn., has given $15,000 to different
benevolent enterprises, mostly under the auspices of the Baptist
denomination.

Ex-Secretary Delano has given $10,000 to Kenyon College.

The Botanical Department of the Cornell University has recently
received a donation of $10,000 from the Hon. H. W. Sage, of Ithaca, N.
Y.

Mr. Spurgeon is reported to have recently received $200,000 for his
Pastors’ College, and $125,000 for his Orphanage.

Mr. Amasa Stone, of Cleveland, Ohio, has offered $500,000 to the
Western Reserve College, conditioned on its removal to Cleveland.

James Mackey, of California, has signified his intention of giving
$50,000 to Bowdoin College. It is said his example is likely to be
followed by a gentleman in Philadelphia.

The will of Mrs. Maggie Embry, of Eleton, Ky., which has been admitted
to probate, gives $200,000 in Louisville and Nashville Railroad Stock
to the Vanderbilt University at Nashville.

Judge Forbes, of Northampton, Mass., has left $300,000 to found a
second free library in that town.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


Africa.

—King Meneleck, who rules in Southern Abyssinia, has recently abolished
the slave-trade in his dominions.

—Tunis and Algeria are now united by a daily postal service, and
letters are transmitted at a cost of fifteen cents each.

—M. Lombard, corresponding member of the Norman Society of Geography,
has been charged with a scientific mission in Abyssinia. He has arrived
at Massoua.

—The caravan of the missionaries from Algeria, bound for Lake
Tanganyika, has arrived safely at Karéma, near the Lake. Those that
started, however, for the Victoria Nyanza, have been pillaged on the
route.

—The Chamber at Paris has approved the grant made to a company for a
railroad from St. Louis to Dakar and voted a credit of 1,700,000 francs
for laying a cable from Dakar to St. Vincent. This last line will place
Senegal in direct communication with Europe.

—The Church Missionary Society has received an offer from Mr.
Arthington, of Leeds, of $25,000, the income of which they will be at
liberty to use towards maintaining a steamer and staff of agents on the
Upper Binué and Lake Tchad. In returning thanks to Mr. Arthington, the
Society was obliged to inform him that the amount would be insufficient
for the purposes mentioned.

—Mr. J. M. Cnouwer, a Hollander, has undertaken a journey from
Alexandria to the Cape of Good Hope. It is announced that he will
be joined on his way by a Frenchman who has lived a long while
in Abyssinia. He possesses considerable fortune and has had much
experience as a traveler. It is not his purpose to take with him more
than a single servant and a small amount of luggage. If he succeeds in
his endeavors, his name will be placed by the side of the most renowned
African explorers.

—Stanley continues his travels towards the interior without allowing
himself to be stopped by the difficulties of his enterprise. The 7th
of November he was rejoiced to meet H. Savorgnan de Brazza, who, after
ascending two tributaries of the Congo and establishing a station,
traversed the territory of Apfourous and reached by land the shores
of the Congo. Resuming navigation he descended the course of the
river half way to Stanley Pool, where he founded a new station. Then,
continuing to follow it, he rejoined Stanley. It appears that the
journey made by Brazza, which traversed a territory north of the lower
Congo towards the interior of Africa, is a much more practicable route
than the one up the river itself.

—Praggia, who is engaged in exploring the Soudan south of Khartoum,
between the Blue and White Nile, is said to have met a large caravan
with thousands of oxen, cows, goats and sheep. The children held
in their arms the lambs and kids and even the little calves. The
chiefs were mounted upon mules and asses, while their commander,
upon a beautiful dromedary, ran hither and thither and superintended
everything. These troops of quadrupeds were accompanied by bands of
birds, which flew over their backs. Praggia estimated that the caravan
would count 50,000 living beings. He also met other and smaller
caravans of the same character. The object of the emigrants seems to
have been a purpose to escape from the flies and particularly the
tsetse. The region from whence they came lies a little northeast of the
territory where it is proposed to establish the Arthington Mission.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—A small congregation of full-blooded Chickasaw Indians lately gave
$400 for the Foreign Missions of the Cumberland Presbyterian Church.

—The largest tribe of Indians in the United States is the Sioux, or as
they call themselves, the Dakota. Since the Sioux were first known,
they have occupied a large portion of the center of the American
continent, including the head waters of the Mississippi River.

—In the last Annual Report of the educational work of the Friends among
the Indians, it is stated that at the Osage agency there are 2,745
Indians. Of these, 205, on the average, are in attendance at the two
boarding-schools sustained at that point.

—The American Sunday-school Union has planted 121 Sunday-schools in
the Indian territory. Next year they are to have a Sunday-school
camp-meeting of ten days in August, at Atoka, in the Cherokee Nation,
where a large gathering of full-bloods, who are averse to meeting in
houses and among strangers, is anticipated.

—The laws of the Indian Colony at Metlakahtla, British Columbia, under
the auspices of the English Church Missionary Society, are fifteen in
number, and worthy to be imitated by those laboring for the Indians
everywhere. These have been summarized as follows:—1. To give up their
Indian magic. 2. To cease calling in conjurers when sick. 3. To cease
gambling. 4. To cease squandering their property. 5. To cease painting
their faces. 6. To cease using intoxicating drinks. 7. To rest on
the Sabbath. 8. To attend to religious instruction. 9. To send their
children to school. 10. To be clean. 11. To be industrious. 12. To be
peaceable. 13. To be honest. 14. To build neat houses. 15. To pay their
village tax.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—In one district in Japan seventy-one Buddhist temples have been
diverted to secular uses since 1873, and over 700 in the whole empire
since 1871.

—Mr. D. Smith, of the Presbyterian church of England mission at
Formosa, has lately been privileged to baptize nine natives, making in
all thirty-two members of the Peh-tsui-Khan Church. There has besides
been a considerable amount of inquiry here, so that the congregation of
hearers has greatly increased. Other places in this island have also
had blessing and additions to the churches.

—Dr. Happer thinks that Prof. S. Wells Williams over-estimates the
population of China at the present time. The loss of life in recent
years, caused by wars and famines, has been considerable, and the
recuperative power of the Chinese people has greatly decreased
on account of the use of opium. Mr. Happer estimates the present
population as 300,000,000.

—The singular idea prevails among some in China that the reason why
Chinese become Christians on reading the Bible is, that they are
stupified by the ink used, in consequence of which they lose their
reason and are thus ready to believe what is false. People are warned,
therefore, against buying or reading foreign books.

—The students sent by the Chinese government for study in this country
live in American families, and visit the headquarters at Hartford at
certain times for inspection, and for drill in their own language.
The number is distributed at present as follows: Boston Institute of
Technology, 8; Troy Polytechnic Institute, 5; Lafayette College, 2;
Lehigh University, 5; Bethlehem, Pa., 2; Institute of Technology,
Hoboken, 2; Yale College, Classical, 9; Scientific, 5; Amherst, 1;
Harvard, 1; Columbia, 1. The greater number are in Hartford and
vicinity.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

FLORENCE, ALA.—Rev. W. H. Ash, with aid from this Association, is
putting up a neat parsonage by the side of the new and tasteful
church-edifice.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—The new enthusiasm in Fisk, at present, is over the
novel “Tonic-sol-fa system” of vocal music. By means of this excellent
voice culture, Mr. Adams is bringing out the strength and beauty of
voices for which nature has already done so much. The first interest
does not abate, and very perceptible improvement daily increases.

Livingstone Missionary Hall is now building, and over this is much
rejoicing.

LOUISVILLE, KY.—On the Sabbath, Feb. 20th, Superintendent Roy preached
for the Congregational Methodist Church of this city, as well as on the
two preceding nights. The church, which has 95 members, a Sunday-school
and a class-meeting along with the prayer-meeting, and which worships
in a hall, owning its own organ, voted to unite with the Kentucky
Association, and invited the A. M. A. to furnish them with a pastor. A
similar church at Junction City, Ky., is moving in the same direction,
having its own modest church property.

LITTLE ROCK, ARK.—On the 28th of February, after preaching on the
Sabbath previous, in the “Sons of Ham” Hall, the Superintendent
organized the First Congregational Church of that Capital and of the
State, with forty-six members and ten more educated and influential
persons ready to come, and “more to follow.” Rev. B. F. Foster, a
former student of Fisk University and a licentiate of the Central South
Conference, was invited to serve the church for three months. The
people are moving at once to purchase a house of worship. As would be
the right of any Congregational Church, this one incorporated the class
meeting into the constitution found in Roy’s Manual. A Sabbath-school,
thoroughly organized, with one hundred scholars and seventeen officers
and teachers, started off at the first.

MARION, ALA.—Our large room is filled every Monday afternoon at the
ladies meeting, and all hearts are full; and the dark faces look
beautiful to me, shining through smiles and tears, as we talk of the
dear Saviour. The same room is filled to overflowing with young people
and children Saturday afternoon. The interest has been so evident
that Mr. Curtis has held a few extra meetings. Twelve children have
been forward for prayer, and we believe they have given their hearts
to Jesus. Mr. C. will hold meetings next week also, and we hope for a
great blessing.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGINIA.

Pastor’s Testimony.

REV. H. B. FRISSELL, HAMPTON.

I have very pleasant meetings with the Indians here. I let them read
the verses from the English Bible and then explain them. When I first
came I used to read myself, but I found that they liked better to take
a part in the services. Then we sing together from Dr. Robinson’s Songs
of the Sanctuary. After that I give the meeting into their hands. They
suggest their favorite hymns and lead in prayer, usually in their own
language. They all seem attentive and devout. It is very pleasant to
see their faces light up as they get some new thought from God’s word.
I have seldom seen men more earnest in the study of the Scriptures.
One of those who united with the church at the last communion has
been confined to the house with sickness. The nurse tells me that he
often sits for two or three hours at a time patiently spelling out the
words of the English Bible, and asking her the meaning of that which
he cannot understand. I am pleased to see that they are interested
to work for one another. I found the other day that one of the older
boys, Jas. Murrie, had been accustomed to get a number of the others
who were not Christians together, and read the Bible and pray with
them. Excellent work, isn’t it, for a young chief who will soon go back
to take charge of his own tribe? They have a meeting of their own on
Wednesday evening, of which they take charge themselves. I could give
you instances of how these Indian boys have resisted temptation in a
way which seems to me really remarkable.

My work among the colored students progresses very pleasantly. It is
hard to get out of their minds wrong conceptions as to what a Christian
life is. They expect to see visions and dream dreams when they enter
upon it, and seem to look upon the entering as the all important part.
They haven’t been used to thinking of the Christian life as a struggle
against sin. It is a real pleasure to preach to them, and they are
earnest to know the truth.

I am trying to make the Christian boys and girls feel their
responsibility more. I am trying to make them work for others. We
have started a Missionary Association for work in the country about.
On Sunday afternoon twenty-five go out into the cottages to read
the Bible and pray with the poor families. Many of them work in the
Sunday-schools in Hampton. One goes out to the poor-house, another
to the prison. They all make the reports of their work to me. We are
talking of starting a Sunday-school in the Butler School House. We
think we could get in many who do not now attend, and it would give
our students a chance for work. I am anxious to make them feel that
they are not merely to be recipients. There is a good interest in our
meetings, and although I don’t feel at all contented with what is being
done, and look for much greater things, yet I am thankful for the
evidences of God’s favor which I see.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Revival Interest.

REV. C. W. FRANCIS, ATLANTA.

We have great reason to rejoice in all the good things the Lord has
done for us in this school. Since the day of prayer for Colleges on
the last Thursday of January, we have had a very marked and general
interest in religious things, and we have reason to believe that very
many have become reconciled to God and taken up the service of Christ.
Nearly every one in the family, numbering about two hundred students,
who was not already a follower of Christ, has been affected and
confessed an interest in the subject, and not many have drawn back thus
far. About sixty have attended inquiry meetings, and we hope a large
proportion of them will hold on their way.

There has been a great quickening of those who bore the Christian name,
and many of them have taken up the work as though for the first time.
We have held meetings every night for five weeks, and there has been
the steady presentation of the truth and much personal effort, and so a
great harvest gathered, which fills our hearts with gladness.

Regular school work has not been broken in upon to any great extent
and there has been no tendency toward undue excitement but a deep and
solemn attention to the claims of God has characterized the experience
of most.

We cannot tell how many have become decided Christians, certainly more
than twenty, and perhaps twice that will upon trial be found steadfast.
Some have already gone away to distant places to open schools, and
will, we trust, carry the light with them, and others will go soon. If
they had not been reached just at this time we should probably never
have had opportunity to lead them again. Next month we hope quite a
number will unite with our church, and many more will in due time unite
with other churches. We are aware of the tendency to over-estimate
immediate results and to be mistaken in regard to the permanent effects
of such a work here; but it is the testimony of all that this is the
most thorough and general work for years in this school. It has been
blessed to be here and to have a share in it. “It is the Lord’s doing
and marvelous in our eyes.”

       *       *       *       *       *


The John the Baptist of the Church—Genius for Piety.

REV. B. D. CONKLING, SAVANNAH.

Having some friends who read the MISSIONARY—when sufficiently urged to
do so by their pastors—I would like a little space to give them, not
some conclusions, perhaps, but some impressions of the A. M. A. work.

I remember hearing a zealous brother, at the Chicago Annual Meeting,
earnestly urge that the A. M. A. push more vigorously the “Church
work,” that the conversion of the Freedmen was the thing to be aimed at
rather than their education, etc.

A few months of experience impress me with the conviction that the
school is the “John the Baptist” of the church. We cannot do without
each of them. But we are still in the “school” state; and if either is
to suffer, it must be the church work. Each, in fact, bears the same
message to the masses. The church is doubtless to “increase” greatly;
but it will yet be many days (years) before the school will “decrease,”
if we are wise.

It has sometimes been said that the colored people have what has
been called, “a genius for piety.” How much this means can only be
understood by one who has been with them in their religious assemblies
of the better sort. They have a faculty for getting hold of, and being
interested in and by, the things which are most elaborate and profound
and spiritually significant in thought, which continually surprises
one. They know “meat” from “milk,” and are ready every time for the
former. They might not follow one who gave them Rowland Hill’s fine
“river of words, and only a spoonful of thought,” but if any man can
speak thoughts in words which accurately mate each other, I invite
him to my pulpit, assuring him that he will have an attentive and
appreciative hearing such as delights the heart of the messenger who
has something to say. My impression is that the Negro is to have a
decided and beneficent influence upon the Christianity of America, if
not upon that of the whole world:—but in precisely what direction I am
not clear.

I have a truly noble little band of co-pastors in these churches
scattered here-abouts. They do not know what they are doing—nor do any
of us, I think—in planting the seeds of a decorous and an intelligent
church life, and one which insists upon honesty, sobriety, “whatsoever
is of good report,” etc., as fundamental therein, among these people
who are slowly but surely getting into a secure and respectable place
in the body politic.

In view of their position and its opportunities one cannot help
feeling—and no one can feel it as keenly as they themselves do—that
it is a pity that their early advantages had not been greater.
Nevertheless it is my impression that the next fifteen years of A. M.
A. work will be more important, if possible, than the last fifteen
years have been; and this, whether we consider negro or white, State or
Nation, America or Africa.

Conclusion: Prayers and gifts were never more needed, or more likely to
do lasting good than just now.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Southern Winter of 1880-81.

REV. S. E. LATHROP, MACON.

For this season, at least, the name of “Sunny South” is a misnomer.
Beginning in November last, there have been almost four solid months of
cold, sour, dismal, cloudy, stormy weather.

For ten days the thermometer stood constantly below the freezing point.
One night it touched zero. Everybody kept roaring fires, and cowered
over them in their loosely-built houses. Soon the coal-yards gave out,
and the wood market was empty. The smooth-shod Southern horses could
not climb the icy hills to bring supplies. Fuel became steadily scarcer
and higher—wood going up from four dollars (the usual price) to fifteen
dollars per cord, and very scarce at that.

Rich and poor alike suffered. Many burned the fences, fruit trees and
shade trees. Poor people burned their board partitions, bedsteads,
tables, even chairs and trunks, and some, after all, had to go to bed
as the only means of keeping warm.

The “fuel famine” lasted ten or twelve days, the like of which was
never known before. Water-pipes burst, fruits, flowers and vegetables
were frozen, and general distress ensued. The chilly rain still
continues, though ice and snow have disappeared. I doubt if the
“blizzards” and “Arctic waves” of the North cause much more real
suffering than this chilly, damp, freezing winter here brings to the
inhabitants so unaccustomed to this weather.

Most Southern houses are very loosely built, generally warmed with
fire-places or coal grates, over which you may scorch one side and
freeze the other. Water froze one day within six feet of our stove.

Much suffering, sickness and death have resulted among the poor in
their wretched cabins. Fortunately for some our kind friends North
have this winter sent us an unusual amount of clothing, which has been
distributed judiciously among those most needy, and has done much to
alleviate distress. My wife has given away over 400 garments within the
past three mouths, and many shivering bodies have been warmed. From our
own good State of Wisconsin we have had no less than seventeen boxes
or barrels, containing books, clothing, magazines and newspapers. From
friends in other States there have come eleven packages of various
sizes, with the same acceptable help for our poor people. And how
helpful these timely gifts have been!

Although my wife has had no special commission as missionary, she has
done considerable in that line. During three mouths past, she has made
over two hundred and fifty visits, being confined to the house by
illness for one month of that time, and being much hindered otherwise
by the incessant stormy weather, which has also greatly interfered
with our evening meetings and Sunday services. Besides the clothing
above referred to, she has distributed hundreds of papers, tracts,
cards and texts, reading and talking with the women and children. Her
sewing-school, meeting weekly, has steadily increased, until it now
numbers ninety-three girls, of whom sixty were present at the last
meeting. Cutting and basting work for so many occupies a good deal of
time.

At our annual church meeting, the reports showed that eighteen persons
had been received on profession of faith during the year 1880, and $256
raised for church purposes. The Sunday-school reported 220 names on the
roll, of whom 175 were present at one time, and the average attendance
for the year was 115. Ten of the scholars united with the church, and
the school has raised about $60 in weekly contributions. The pastor
and wife gave away 8,500 religious and Sunday-school papers during the
year. One of the papers has a story. It was given to a little girl in
our infant class, who took it home and carefully preserved it. Her
father, not a Christian man, was soon after arrested and confined in
jail for several months for stealing. The little girl carried him her
Sunday-school papers to read. One of these told the story of Joseph and
the baker in the Egyptian prison, and suggested that every prisoner,
and every sinner, had a divine intercessor at the throne, Jesus Christ,
the Saviour, who would not forget his friends in trouble, as the baker
did. So he began to pray, and when released from jail soon after, was a
converted man.

We have received a great many papers from Northern Sunday-schools and
other friends, and shall be glad to receive many more. Much good may
be done by this means, as the above incident illustrates. From the
incessant storms, floods and cold of this winter, the people need more
help than ever by way of clothing for the destitute, and all other
aids. All kinds of business have suffered, and the high prices of
fuel and other necessaries have caused many to be perplexed as to the
wherewithal of eating and putting on. Many of the country churches have
hardly been able to keep up services at all, owing to storms and floods.

I have collected over 1,000 volumes for my “Lewis Public Library,”
and it is doing good work. I expect soon to issue a little missionary
paper. Our Lewis High School is increasing in numbers.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Accessions to the Church.

REV. G. W. ANDREWS, TALLADEGA.

Twenty-three connected themselves with our College Church yesterday
March 6th; twenty-two of them by confession, and one by letter: fruits
of a revival scarcely yet ended. All but two of them are children or
young people; twenty-one are members of the Sabbath-school and of the
College. Twelve are children of church members, now a long time with
us. Two are wives for whom faithful and godly husbands had hoped and
prayed, lo! these many years; there had been the secret hope but never
before the open confession. Two were baptized by immersion, the rest
followed the better way, choosing less of the outward and formal,
and more of the inward and spiritual. Of the thirty girls boarding
at Foster Hall, all are Christians, as are the forty boys, with two
or three exceptions. Very few of those who come under our Christian
influences so far as to be members of our family and Sabbath-school,
fail to indulge a hope in Christ.

We had meetings every night for three weeks, Pres. DeForest preaching
with great tenderness and power, while all the teachers and workers
did faithfully what they could. So far from interfering with regular
school duties, these meetings quickened to highest endeavor in study,
and led to the most careful and conscientious use of time. Never before
have our pupils been so conscientious and so well-behaved. Among the
thirty girls at the boarding hall there has been but a single case of
discipline since the present school year has begun, and that grew out
of a voluntary confession, a sign of a very tender conscience.

All the meetings have been unusually quiet; not a case of noisy
demonstration, no great “sights,” no “dreams,” but a thoughtful
surrender to Christ, very much, I think, as in the revival meetings I
have been accustomed to all my life. In them God has honored preaching,
which has been so plain, practical and tender that few could resist
it. There were not many hard hearts or dry eyes when the sermon on the
“Prodigal Son” was ended and the invitation given to all prodigals to
return to an injured Father’s house.

Through all these meetings unusual honor was put upon the Spirit, and
on prayer, and there was more than the usual amount of preaching to the
church, and with excellent results. God has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

Burning of Building at Tougaloo.

REV. A. HATCH.

Sunday, Jan. 23d, at half-past seven o’clock, the students of the
University assembled as usual in the chapel for the evening worship.
The pleasant afternoon had given place to a chilly night. In a warm
but not overheated room all were attentive to the opening exercises.
In the midst of the second hymn, which all had arisen to sing, one or
two young men near the door were seen to pass out quickly from the
room. Several others followed at their heels, when, immediately, as by
a common instinct, both divisions of the assembly turned and pressed
down the aisles toward the two front doors. Not a word of alarm was
spoken by an individual and the order, “back!” “back!” which was given
from the rostrum, checked for a minute this sudden movement, and some
at the doors hesitated whether to pass out or to return. A moment more
when a quantity of water fell from the ceiling through the thimble of
the stove pipe, simultaneously with the cry of “fire” without, all in
the room became aware of the real cause of alarm. The young men who
first passed out ran to the hall above, and, with what water was found
in three or four rooms which they burst into, attempted to put out the
fire. It was found to have broken out, however, above them, beneath
the roof and very close also to the open bell-tower. This tower, with
the long, straight hall, which, at one end, opened into it, and at the
other had an outside stair door—the only entrance—provided at the start
a powerful, furnace-like draught to the flames, which had they not been
out of reach, could have been with difficulty brought under control.

Within one hour our chapel was entirely consumed. During this time the
young men managed to save a trunk, in some cases, a handful of clothes,
a few books, or whatever else they could snatch out of their rooms the
quickest. A number lost everything except what they were wearing at the
time. In several instances what was thrown out of windows and carried
to a safe distance from the burning building was stolen by enterprising
neighbors.

No sooner was the chapel well in flames than the attention of everybody
was centered in the effort to save adjacent buildings, and especially
the mansion, the most valuable of all. This and the chapel stood
broadside toward each other, 37 yards apart. We had, however, the
advantage of a flat iron roof easily accessible to work upon. To keep
the northern side of the building thoroughly wet with water thrown from
the roof, from the ground, and from the second-story veranda, was the
work of a long half hour, each moment of which we expected to see the
building take fire. The working force of our institution was put to
its utmost strain for the whole of this time. This and all the other
buildings were saved.

The conduct of our students was truly admirable. Each young man worked
with a will, wherever he was placed, or at whatever needed to be done
at the moment, whether it was at the pumps or carrying water, guarding
a roof, or taking out furniture and books. None worked harder than some
of those who had rooms in the chapel building and were losing nearly
all they had, forgetful even of the trunk or handful of clothing that
lay somewhere scattered about in the yard—all that was left of their
possessions. Many of the young women, also, showed much presence of
mind and were of great service. One was found upon the roof of the
mansion with a bucket of water.

We received much assistance, too, from friendly neighbors both white
and colored. One old colored woman was the means of saving a great deal
from the burning building, running in and out carrying away the books
and loose furniture.

Previous to the fire every available room was occupied by our students,
and many apartments which were barely comfortable for two had to
accommodate three. At ten o’clock that Sunday night our main dormitory
for young men was in ashes. Thirty were without a place to sleep.
For that night fifteen were stowed away on the floor of one of the
teachers’ rooms in the mansion, five were put similarly in one of the
offices, and the rest managed to squeeze themselves into the ten beds
at the “Barracks.”

It shows the earnest disposition of the class of students which are
attracted to Tougaloo University that we were able the next morning,
promptly at nine o’clock, to go on with the regular school work. The
classes all recited as usual, though school books had been scattered
upon the campus and our school room and two recitation rooms had been
turned to ashes by the flames. The Monday writing-class, however, did
not meet. Pens and desks were burnt.

The fire has indeed seemed to result in a moral blessing, softening
the disposition of many, and teaching a lesson of unselfishness. It
has served, we think, to attach our better class of students to the
institution as perhaps never before.

Students have been arriving every week since the fire and we have sent
none of them away. The very week following brought us half a dozen
young men. In addition to this, about the first of March quite a number
of young men as well as young women are expected to return to us from
their winter schools.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Statistics of Teaching by Students now in Fisk University.

From reports carefully made out by students now in attendance on Fisk
University, the following facts are ascertained:

Ninety have at some time been engaged in school teaching. Of these,
sixty-two are members of the collegiate department and twenty-eight of
the normal department. The time taught in all, including the past year,
is 1,630 months, or reduced to school years of nine months each, 161
1-9 years.

It is found that during the year 1880, seventy-two have taught school,
the sum of the months being 309. This reduced to school years of nine
months each, gives 34⅓ years.

The sum total of salaries earned in 1880, is $9,129. From this must be
subtracted for cost of board and travel, $3,236, leaving a net gain of
$5,893.

The entire number of pupils taught during the year is 5,641, and the
sum of average daily attendance is 3,717.

Of the seventy-two who taught these schools, sixty-seven did labor in
Sunday-schools, forty-four as teachers, seven as superintendents and
sixteen as both teachers and superintendents. The total attendance
on these Sunday-schools was 3,963. Besides this, four did labor in
preaching, twelve held prayer-meetings and one held Bible readings. The
number of conversions reported is 151.

Thirty-two taught in Tennessee, twenty-two in Mississippi, eight in
Texas, four in Alabama, four in Arkansas, two in Georgia, one in West
Virginia, and one in Missouri.

Inferences drawn from these statistics:

1. Nearly all the students in Fisk University of sufficient age and
advancement in scholarship, teach during their courses of study. It
is found that eighty per cent. of the students in the collegiate
department have taught. Those who have not taught are too young to take
charge of a school. The per cent. of those in the Normal department who
have taught, is less, because the advancement in scholarship is less,
as is also the average age.

2. The average salary per month is $29.54. The average cost for board
and travel, not calculating other expenses, is $10.47. This leaves the
net gain per month of $19.07. This in reality is reduced somewhat by
loss of time often incurred in securing a school, or in waiting for it
to begin after it is secured.

3. It is seen that the students are making very praiseworthy efforts to
gain an education, and that they earn annually a large sum of money to
secure that end. Still, at a net gain of $19.07 a month, the student
cannot entirely support himself. Parents should consider well this
fact, not fully understood, as it would appear, by some of those able
to assist their children. Those kind friends who have given to the
Student Aid Fund of the University, will see that their benefactions
are needed and well bestowed.

4. This condition of things, if the strain is not allowed to be too
severe, has a compensating benefit to the student, who grows strong by
contending with difficulties. He learns the value of education by its
cost. He obtains that practical experience which students ordinarily
have to acquire after graduation. He is also kept in sympathy with the
people among whom his future labors are to lie.

5. These statistics show that, while in the midst of their own arduous
labors as students, these young people are accomplishing a great amount
of good in a field to which now, happily, the eyes of the nation are
turned, the education of the colored people. During the last year,
when, for reasons not necessary now to give, a less number of students
than usual were engaged in teaching, they had under their training an
army of between five and six thousand children, and performed the labor
of more than the ordinary lifetime of a man; and, including former
years, they have done the work of more than a hundred and sixty years.

6. But the whole good is not to be estimated in years. The great mass
of the teachers among the colored people, as among the white, teach
with little if any more preparation than what is gained in the common
schools. The coming into a community of one who has enjoyed superior
advantages, introduces a better idea to which others will seek to
attain. One of the most threatening obstacles in the way of colored
education has been the great lack of competent colored teachers. The
paying of incompetent teachers is almost, if not entirely, a waste of
the public money. Viewing from this standpoint, the long and expensive
journeys necessarily taken by the students of Fisk University to reach
their schools, may not be a loss but a benefit, by scattering further
the good influence of the University. In a region where one good
teacher is sent, ten schools will be made better.

7. In addition to the devotional exercises held in their schools by the
greater majority of the students, much other religious work is done.
During the last year six preached, twelve held prayer-meetings and one
Bible readings, while ninety-six per cent. of all are now engaged in
Sunday-school labor. A more accurate knowledge of the Scriptures and
better idea of Christian living must be the result of these labors.

8. From a list of institutions of learning where some of those, now
students in Fisk University, studied before coming to it, many of them
of high standing and scattered over the land, it is seen that this
University cannot claim these good results entirely as its own. It
shows also that the University, situated as it is, midway between the
gulf and the lakes, is becoming a great central school of learning.

9. No mention is made in these statistics of any students not now in
attendance on the University. The exact number of those in that class
who are now teaching, is not known. It is known, however, that many
such are devoting their entire time to teaching and some of them are
already occupying positions of honor and importance as educators.
According to estimates derived from reports given by former students
not now in connection with the University, the number of pupils taught
annually by them cannot be far from 10,000, making a total, with those
before mentioned, of more than 15,000.—_Fisk Expositor._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L. Stone,
D.D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low,
Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey, D.D.,
Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D.D., Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


II.—HOW SPEEDS THE WORK?

In the February number we gave a brief chapter of replies to this
question. We make no apology for giving a second chapter now. It is
just what our readers want to know, and what we equally wish to tell.
And—

1. _The Finances._—It was at this point our former chapter closed. I
announced that we were laying out work with reference to raising, over
and above the regular appropriation from the parent society, $5,000
this year, in place of $1,610.70 received last year. I am glad and
grateful to be able to announce that of that $5,000, fully $2,600 are
already in sight, either in cash or in reliable pledges. It has been
made easy to raise this, because all except the hundreds (_i. e._,
$2,000) has come in a single donation from the grand English house
of Balfour, Gunther & Co., in this city. That is to say, $500 from
the senior partner in Liverpool, Alfred Balfour, Esq., $500 from his
Liverpool associate, Hon. Stephen Williamson, M. P., and $1,000 from
the house as a whole, among the partners in which is a worthy son of
Chalmers’ great successor in the Free Church of Scotland—that prince
among preachers, Dr. Guthrie. This great gift is proffered in the hope
and expectation that the balance of $3,000 will not be found wanting,
and, God helping us, it _shall not_ fail. There has been a painful
sense, all along these years, that we were reaching only the outer edge
of the great necessity touching, so to speak, only the bare fringe
of our great opportunity, though we have done the utmost possible
for us, with the means at our command. I can with a clear conscience
claim that not a dime has gone forth needlessly; that every minutest
item of expense has been carefully scrutinized; and, while it would
be “too good to be true” if we said that _no_ mistakes had been made,
that every experiment had proved a success, or that no fields have
been entered from which we were compelled to retire before the harvest
came to view, still, I speak the simple truth when I say that I know
of nothing that to-day I would extract, or, so far as _our endeavor_
is concerned, essentially change. The constant prayer has been for
the Master’s guidance; is it vain or presumptuous to believe that
the prayer has been answered, his _promise_ fulfilled, his guidance
vouchsafed? It would be meanly ungrateful if I did not thus testify for
Him.

But the point is that now we must go deeper. We cannot rest on the
outer edge of the great work. We must avail ourselves to the utmost of
our opportunity, and for this we must have a marked increase of means.
Toward this, now that God has inclined these English brethren to give
so largely, I cannot believe that American Christians will fail to make
fitting response. And inasmuch as I cannot see how more than $1,500
out of the $2,400 remaining to be raised, can possibly be gathered in
California, I venture to press it on the thoughts and hearts of Eastern
friends, to furnish over and above their regular contributions to the
parent society, at least $900 for its California auxiliary. Let the
gifts be sent directly to me at 940 Copp Street, or to our treasurer,
Deacon E. Palache, 218 Front Street, San Francisco.

2. _Our Schools._—In the February MISSIONARY I spoke of 13 schools in
operation, a larger number than ever before. The first of March will
see the number 14, a school being prepared to start on that date, at
Tucson, Arizona. It will be, by far, our most distant out-post, but
gives promise of being a very useful mission. Several of the pupils who
had become Christians in connection with our Santa Barbara mission,
work failing at that place, moved on towards the front, and were
scattered among the villages of Arizona; one, at least, even crossing
the line into Mexico. We had letters from them occasionally, such as
encouraged us to believe that, though in exile from what had been to
them a very house of God, and often standing alone, as Christians,
among a crowd of ungodly and profane Americans, they were still walking
in the truth. At length, from one of them who had settled at Tucson,
came, in behalf of himself and eight or nine others, an urgent request
for a mission there. At the suggestion of some excellent Christian
ladies of that city, to whom I appealed for advice, and who kindly
pledged their personal co-operation, the school is to be placed in the
care of Rev. Mr. Messenger, once a missionary of the Episcopal Board
in Africa. He is pronounced to be “a _good_ Christian, who can sing
well, can play on the organ, and will work earnestly” in the liberty of
Christ and not in bondage to any ritual or liturgy. The pupils attest
their zeal by pledging contributions sufficient to pay the rent of
the school-room, $15 per month, and, perhaps, the incidental expenses
likewise. Pray for the success of the first Chinese mission in Arizona.

Among the new schools reported in my last was that at Oroville.
Its teacher is a daughter of Rev. Alvin Ostrom, pastor of the
Congregational Church in that place, who himself was once a missionary
in China, and has, in his enforced return to this country, been hungry
these many years for an opportunity to preach Christ again to the
Chinese. I hardly need say that with such a spirit in the work tokens
of a coming harvest begin to appear. Two or three of the pupils began
to venture in, on Sabbaths, to the half empty church, and to sit in
unoccupied pews. Whereupon an irate Caucasian vents himself in the
village newspaper in this wise:

“ED. MERCURY—‘What are our places of divine worship coming to?’ is a
question with many. Are we to give way our places in the pews to the
long-tailed Mongolians, or shall we be obliged to take sides with
them? We answer, ‘No!’ Better send them and our pretended leaders away
together to their proper places. We have no objection to his teaching
them, but for the sake of common decency and the respect due to us, let
it be a separate matter.

                                                     “CHURCH-GOER.”

The community soon began to be astir. The pillars of the church
began to tremble. Subscriptions began to be withdrawn. Families were
reported as “going over to the other church.” The croakers rose to the
ascendant, and the outlook grew dark. But silence and patience and
gentleness, and pastoral diligence, having God and the right on their
side, are winning the day; and fresh sunshine, gleaming through the
whole church-work, already “puts to silence the ignorance of foolish
men.”

Although the severe storms of the past two months have interfered with
the attendance on our schools, and even made desirable the temporary
suspension of one of them, yet there is much to encourage in the
reports received. At Marysville three during last month “joined the
Association,” professing thus their faith in Christ, and coming under
probation with reference to reception to the church. At Sacramento the
teacher writes, rejoicing over the return to the school, with heart
apparently renewed, of one pupil for whom she had labored and prayed
with great earnestness, but who first left our school for another,
and then seemed to “go to the bad” with utter recklessness. But the
Lord has brought him back, and he now applies to be received to the
Association, and to be thus recognized as a believer in Jesus. This
Sacramento school, as, also, the one in Stockton, that in Marysville,
and those in this city, are a perpetual joy to me, in the spirit which
pervades the work and the results vouchsafed. Indeed, I know not that
I need except any of our schools from this statement, and I cease to
mention them by name only because the list would be too long. The great
lack just now is Chinese helpers trained for service. To select them
wisely, to provide for their being trained, to put them into harness
at the right point, where by teaching they can learn to teach and by
preaching to preach, is the problem now before me.

       *       *       *       *       *




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_. MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONTHLY REPORT.

The Woman’s Home Missionary Association has made no new appointments
during the past month under the American Missionary Association.
From those already sent into this part of the field the reports are
encouraging and interesting.

From Baxter Springs, Kansas, where are 1,000 refugees and 1,100
white inhabitants, Miss Wilson writes that she is getting her work
systematized, and gives her plan as follows:

“A small unoccupied building, owned by the Hard Shell (colored)
Baptists, has been offered me, on condition that I will put in window
panes and a stove. To do this I shall use a sum of money now in Gov.
St. John’s hands, and I hope this will be enough also for a ton of
coal. In this building I am to open an afternoon industrial school for
women. The different arts of housekeeping will be here taught in turn.
Those who wish will learn to read, and especially mothers’ meetings
will be held. This is the central point of all my work—_the women and
their homes_. Around this will cluster several other departments, for
I have already four or five co-workers. Two of these are good Quaker
women, living in the place and already doing all they can. They will
assist in the women’s school and in visiting at the homes. Another
of the workers there will be John Smith, a colored minister, from
Iowa, educated by the Society of Friends. This man has been on the
ground three months. He is teaching a children’s school. There are
three hundred children of the age to go to school, only about half of
whom are provided for by the town schools. He will be ready to assist
me in every way necessary, and will have one of the departments in
the Sunday-school, of which we have arranged three, beside being the
superintendent of the school. For the use of the Sunday-school we have
three rooms in the public school building. The fourth assistant is Miss
E. Cabell, also colored, a graduate of Hampton. Miss C. joined us from
Virginia in October. She is proving a valuable assistant. She will open
a children’s school, mornings, in our little building, and also have
the Infant Department in our Sunday-school. One other service I desire
to hold, a Sunday morning Bible reading in our little church. And if
we can persuade the ignorant preachers around us, of whom there are
several, to come to our rooms some evening in the week for a weekly
study of the Sunday-school lesson, we shall have gained a great point
with them.”

The work of Mrs. Steele, in Almeda, S. C., proves full of interest.
This place takes its name from a daughter of Mr. Reuben G. Holmes, who
bought this tract of land, 12,000 acres, for the purpose of giving
employment to worthy colored men and enabling them to buy small
farms for themselves at $5 per acre. He now has nearly 150 families,
including more than 700 souls, on the place, and to instruct and care
for these is the work of Mrs. Steele. She writes that she has more or
less care of all, has already had more than 200 in her Sunday-school.
Her day school occupies her from 9 A.M. to 12.30 P.M.; her evening
school from 7 to 9.30 P.M.; and her afternoons she spends in “calling
on the folks.” Having mentioned some touching cases of distress and
how she was able to relieve them, she adds: “Now don’t think it is
all out-go and no income. I called on another family—the mother had
previously called on me and wanted me to cut out a calico dress for
one of her little girls—when my little girl and I came away from that
home, the mother brought me a _fresh egg_ as a present. Now that gift
for her was more than ten dollars would be for some people to give.
The good-will back of the gift made me feel _rich_.” “In my solemn
talks,” she says, “with my pupils, I’ve found some who seem to me to
be of the Lord’s noblemen, so conscientiously living up to the light
and knowledge they have, and eager for more. I’ve formed a temperance
and anti-tobacco society and have quite a number of names already.”

All who had a hand in filling or packing the barrel lately sent to Miss
Carter, in Nashville, Tenn.—as well as those whose hands are filling or
packing or are about to be filling or packing other such choice barrels
or boxes—will be glad to hear of its welcome, and also to learn what
are among the most acceptable things to send in such cases. She writes:

“The barrel arrived Saturday and delights my heart. Were I _a little
darker skinned_ I should say, ‘_it will do me so proud_,’ but as it is
I hardly know how to express my thanks and perfect satisfaction. Did I
tell you so explicitly all my needs—I can’t remember—or did you guess
them? Those test cards are gems: perhaps their value to others may be
beyond price. The papers I’m so glad of, especially the children’s
papers. The pictures cut out by some loving fingers, the picture cards,
tracts, story books, Testaments, _all_ these things meet especial
needs. The children’s clothes, especially the flannels and boys’
shirts, are most welcome. I know this moment the destination of each
article.

“Perhaps that for which I’m most truly grateful, is the quantity of
sewing materials. The Lord has not since I came here let me name
a day for help, but just now I was counting my little funds and
wondering—wondering if the time had come when I should be really
obliged to halt. This supply of materials is a true blessing. Perhaps
my Sunday-school stands highest in importance, but surely this
sewing-school work, with all the influences of good which I strive
to bring there to bear upon the girls, is next. I couldn’t willingly
give it up. Through it the girls are clothing their bodies with their
own honest efforts; are learning Christian gentleness and politeness,
and having their minds stored with good thoughts out of good books.
They let me come very close to them, tell me their needs, their
troubles, and recognize me as their friend. So in furthering this
work, you are setting many wheels in motion. I held a reception at the
‘opening’—opening of my barrel; how enthusiastic and happy we all
were.”

The Association held public meetings in Boston, Mount Vernon church,
morning and afternoon of March 3. The interest of these meetings
indicates, we believe, increasing energy and delight in forwarding the
work. The total receipts of the year, as announced there, have been
$5,077.34. This is not a great sum, but neither is it a bad beginning,
and as fast as it gives pleasure to the friends of the work to add to
our pile, the present year, so fast shall we be eager to increase it by
scattering.

Receipts from Jan. 1, 1881, to March 1, 1881:

  From auxiliaries         $818.65
  From donations            188.89
  From life members          40.00
  From annual members        14.00
                          ————————
  Total                  $1,061.54

Donations from Cong. Pub. Soc., $25 worth of S. S. papers, lesson
papers, books and cards, for Miss Julia A. Wilson, Baxter Springs,
for use among refugees. From Mrs. C. A. Johnson, for Miss Wilson’s
use, flannel, new cloth and sewing materials, valued at $25.00. Office
chair, $10.00, from friends. Three chairs for office, from a friend.

The following boxes and barrels have been sent, valued at:

  From Bradford Academy                               $180.00
  From North Ave. Church, Cambridge, box, $90.21,
    barrel, $48.90                                     139.11
  From Providence Central Ch. Aux., barrel             475.00
                                                     ————————
    Total                                              794.11

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR FEBRUARY, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $841.69.

    Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch.                                $0.75
    Belfast. Rev. W. Parker (_part for Refugees_)              5.00
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch.                               15.44
    Brownville. Hon. A. H. Merrill                           100.00
    Calais. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.00
    Deering. Mr. Bascomb                                       5.00
    Dedham. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Foxcroft. Wm. W. Clark, to const. AXCEL M.
      CAMPBELL, L. M.                                         30.00
    Gardner. Sarah M. Whitmore, _for Student Aid.
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Gilead. Rev. H. R.                                         1.00
    Hallowell. Ladies, by Annie F. Page, Bbl. of
      C., _for Refugees_
    Holden. Cong. Ch.                                          4.50
    Machias. Eliza G. Longfellow, Bbl. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N. C._
    Portland. Ladies in Maine, by Mrs. W. E.
      Gould, _for Lady Missionaries at Selma, Ala.
      and Wilmington, N. C._                                 550.75
    Portland. John M. Gould, Box of C., _for
      Talladega, Ala._
    South Freeport. Rev. H. I.                                 1.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Union. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Talladega
      C._                                                      5.00
    Waterford. “A Friend,” $4.50; Mrs. C. D., 50¢              5.00
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $9; Mrs. J. P.
      Trott, $2                                               11.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $426.92.

    Alstead. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         11.52
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch., Box S. S. Books, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                40.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Colebrook. H. A.                                           1.00
    Concord. Mrs. C. T., 50¢.; C. T. P., 50¢.                  1.00
    Dover. M. E. L.                                            1.00
    Dunbarton. W. C. Stinson                                  10.00
    Epping. Miss Hannah Pearson, $5; Mrs. John
      Billson, $5; _for School House, Athens, Ala._           10.00
    Exeter. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., $20;
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for freight_, $3; _for
      Talladega C._                                           23.00
    Exeter. “A Friend”                                         2.00
    Great Falls. Mrs. E. A. Tibbets, _for
      Talladega C._                                            3.00
    Hanover. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid. Atlanta U._                                        30.00
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. at Dartmouth College                   22.00
    Hinsdale. G. W.                                            1.00
    Keene. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $81; Mrs. J.
      A. G., 50¢.; J. P., $1; Mrs. N. R. C., 50¢              83.00
    Langdon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.00
    Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               40.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  29.20
    Monroe. S. H.                                              0.51
    Mount Vernon. J. A. S.                                     1.00
    New Ipswich. A. N. Townsend, $2; Mrs. Dr. G., $1           3.00
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. A. B.
      CHASE, L. M.                                            33.67
    Orford. Miss A. E.                                         0.51
    Peterborough. Mrs. E. H.                                   1.00
    Piermont. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           8.00
    Pittsfield. J. Merrill                                     1.51
    Plainfield. Mrs. Hannah Stevens, to const.
      MRS. SOPHIA R. BAKER, L. M.                             32.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00


  VERMONT, $201.38.

    Andover. “Baldwin Family”                                  1.00
    Bakersfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            8.25
    Bethel. Mrs. Laura F. Sparhawk                             5.00
    Brattleborough. F. W. K.                                   1.00
    Burlington. Third Cong. Ch.                               53.25
    Charlotte. Nettie A Parker                                10.00
    East Hardwick. Mrs. L. W. J. and Mrs. L. A. P.             2.00
    Essex. “A Friend”                                          1.00
    Fayetteville. M. K.                                        1.00
    Marshfield. Lyman Clark                                   10.00
    North Craftsbury. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of Bedding, val. $30, and $2 _for
      freight_, by Mrs. Mary W. Boardman, _for
      Atlanta U._                                              2.00
    Poultney. A. M. Knapp                                      2.00
    Royalton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              19.00
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    43.13
    Saint Johnsbury. “A. I. R——y”                              5.00
    Saxton’s River. E. S. S.                                   1.00
    Shelburn. “A Friend”                                      15.00
    Underhill. E. S. Whitcomb                                  5.00
    Vergennes. W. W. Pierce, $2; Mrs. H. S. and R.
      T. B., 50¢. ea.                                          3.00
    Wait’s River. J. F. W.                                     1.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of C.
      and $1 _for freight_                                     1.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       11.75


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,599.11.

    Allston. “A Friend”                                        2.00
    Amherst. G. C. Munsell                                     2.00
    Andover. Mrs. F. R. B.                                     0.50
    Athol. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      HORACE I. WHIPPLE. L. M.                                30.00
    Bedford. M. E. R.                                          0.50
    Belchertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., $7; Miss S. C.
      A., $1                                                   8.00
    Billerica. H. B. S.                                        1.00
    Boston. Mrs. Nancy B. Curtis, $200; “P.,” $1;
      Mrs. A. B., 50¢.                                       201.50
    Boston. S. D. Smith, (6 organs)                        1,000.00
    Boston. “A Friend,” _for Kansas Refugee M._                5.00
    Boston. N. Willis Bumstead, paper hangings and
      mouldings, _for guest rooms, Atlanta U._
    Boston. “Friends,” Bbl. Books and Papers and
      Bbl. of C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Ass’n Abbie W.
      Pearson, Treas. (of which from Bradford,
      Vt., $10; from Mrs. Hunnewell, Boston, _for
      Almeda, S. C._, $9.10) _for Lady
      Missionaries_                                          179.51
    Bradford. Mrs. S. C. Boyd, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             14.00
    Bradford. Ladies, Bbl. of C. _for Wilmington,
      N. C._
    Brockton. Mrs. T. C. P.                                    0.50
    Brockton. Mrs. Sanford, half Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo, Miss._
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $710; Mrs. E. K., 50c.; Mrs. J., 50c.                  711.00
    Cambridge. “F. C. S.,” _for Kansas Refugee M._             5.00
    Charlemont. “A Friend,”                                    3.00
    Chelsea. Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._
    Clinton. First Evan. Ch. and Soc.                        125.00
    Clinton. “A Friend,” _for furnishing a room,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Clinton. “A Friend” _for Kansas Refugee M._               25.00
    Colerain. Mrs. P. B. S.                                    1.00
    Conway. “Friend of Missions”                               2.00
    Danvers. Maple St. Ch. and Soc.                           39.00
    Dedham. Individuals, by E. P. B.                           2.00
    East Braintree. J. N. L., _for postage_                    0.10
    East Medway. Ladies’ Sew. Cir., 2 Bbls. of C.
    East Longmeadow. Cong. Ch.                                19.00
    Edgartown. “A Reader of the Missionary”                    1.00
    Essex Co. “Howard,” _for Talladega C._                   500.00
    Essex Co. “Howard,” _for Chapel at Wilmington,
      N. C._                                                 100.00
    Fall River. First Cong. Ch.                               66.96
    Gardner. G. A. W.                                          1.00
    Gilbertville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.15
    Grafton. Mrs. Joseph A. Dodge, $25, _for
      furnishing a room, Atlanta U._; Ladies Sew.
      Circle of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Bedding,
      _for Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Granby. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   25.40
    Granville Corners. C. Holcomb, $5; Mrs.
      Clement Holcomb, $5                                     10.00
    Haverhill. Bundle of C.
    Hopkinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Lakeville. Precinct Cong. Sab. Sch.                       20.17
    Lawrence. T. C. Whittemore, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             40.00
    Lee. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $103, _for rebuilding
      Chapel, Tougaloo, Miss._; Ladies of Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo_                        103.00
    Linden. Young People’s Mission Circle, Bbl. of
      C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Littleton. Woman’s Mission Circle, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Littleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Mobile, Ala._
    Lowell. Leonard Kimball, _for Indian M._                 100.00
    Lowell. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First Ch., Bbl.
      of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
    Medfield. F. D. Ellis                                    100.00
    Medford. “A Friend”                                        2.00
    Merrimac. Miss H. W.                                       0.50
    Middleborough. Mrs. Geo. H. Doane, Box of C.,
      $2 for freight, _for Tougaloo_                           2.00
    Natick. Rev. D. W.                                         0.10
    New Bedford. M. M.                                         0.50
    North Amherst. H. S.                                       1.00
    Northborough. Mrs. H. B. D.                                1.00
    North Brookfield. “A Friend in Union Cong. Ch.”            5.00
    Newburyport. “A Friend”                                    5.00
    Newburyport. Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc., 2
      Bbls. of C., _for Washington, D. C._
    Newburyport. H. F. Tyler, 23 Bbls. of C. _for
      Refugees_
    Newton Centre. Ladies of Mrs. Furber’s Bible
      Class, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                    50.00
    Norfolk. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of Bedding,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
    Rockland. “A Friend”                                      30.00
    Saundersville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
    South Hadley. Mt. H. Sem., “A Friend,” _for
      Kansas Refugee M._                                       2.00
    Southbridge. “A Friend”                                   50.00
    South Wellfleet. “A Friend”                                2.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. LYSANDER HEALD, L. M.                            42.00
    Springfield. “M,” $800; First Cong. Ch.,
      Coll., $83.39; “F. A. B.,” $200; South Cong.
      Ch., $81.89; Miss Lizzie Bates, $3                   1,168.28
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.63
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.28
    Tewksbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Indian M.,
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._                                  18.75
    Townsend Harbor. Mrs. Ralph Ball, Box S. S.
      Books, _for Macon, Ga._
    Upton. “A Friend,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Washington, D. C._
    Wakefield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                38.07
    Watertown. Ladies, 4 Bbls. of C., _for
      Tougaloo, Miss._
    Waverley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.04
    West Dennis. S. S. C.                                      1.00
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Mission Ass’n, Bbl. of
      C., _for Talladega, Ala._
    Westfield. Dr. H. Holland, _for Kansas Refugee
      M._                                                      2.00
    Westford. Rev. E. R. H.                                    0.50
    West Medway. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers,” _for
      furnishing a room, Atlanta U._                          25.00
    West Roxbury. Sab. Sch. of South Evan. Ch.                20.00
    West Springfield. “Mission Band,” by C. H.
      Abbott, _for Talladega C._                              60.00
    West Springfield. Park St. Ch., $30; First
      Cong. Ch., $15                                          45.00
    Wilmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Wilmington. J. Skelton                                     5.00
    Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc., “A Friend”                    25.00
    Worcester. “A Friend,” $50; Old South Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $38.17; Hiram Smith and
      Family, $30; H. W. Wheeler, $30, to const.
      MRS. SARAH H. WHEELER, L. M.; M. F. W., $1             149.17
    Wrentham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing a
      room, Atlanta U._                                        6.00
    —— “A Friend,” to const. MISS ABBIE ALLEN, L.
      M.                                                      30.00
    —— Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
                                                          —————————
                                                          $5,499.11

    LEGACY.
    Whitinsville. ESTATE of E. W. Fletcher, by
      Chas. P. Whitin, Ex.                                   100.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $5,599.11


  RHODE ISLAND, $72.60.

    Nayatt Point. R. W. S.                                     1.00
    Peace Dale. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Providence. Union Cong. Ch., $35; “A Father of
      Four,” $25; L. M. W., $1; Miss S. P. P., 60c.           61.60


  CONNECTICUT, $3,237.92.

    Ansonia. Wm. Terry, M. D.                                  5.00
    Avon. Miss L. O. T.                                        1.00
    Berlin. Rev. J. Whittlesey                                10.00
    Bloomfield. “A Friend,” to const. MRS. HARRIET
      E. FISH, LEVI TILLOTSON, and JOHN BLACKWELL,
      L. M.’s                                                 87.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., to const. R. A. POTTER, W.
      F. BRAINARD, E. B. DUNBAR, and GEORGE L.
      GOODRICH, L. M.’s                                      120.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        19.40
    Canton Center. W. G. Hallock                              10.00
    Cobalt. G. H. L.                                           0.50
    Cornwall Bridge. Geo. H. Swift                            10.00
    Coventry. Mrs. B. T. Preston                               5.00
    Derby. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., for _Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        29.50
    Durham Centre. A. P. C.                                    1.00
    East Haddam. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                        12.64
    Farmington. Cong. Ch., FREDERICK C. JONES, to
      const. himself, L. M.                                   30.00
    Greeneville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                33.44
    Greenwich. Richard B. Carpenter, $100; E. M., $1         101.00
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   11.02
    Hartford. Geo. Kellogg, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Hartford. “A Member of Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.,”
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                            4.00
    Hartford. “Member Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.”                  20.00
    Hebron. Mrs. Jasper Porter, _for Tougaloo U._             25.00
    Kensington. Mrs. M. Cowles                                 2.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               24.10
    Lyme. T. L. Gilbert                                        2.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., E. K. Breckenridge               5.00
    Middlefield. Cong. Ch., _for Kansas Refugee M._           23.50
    Middletown. First Cong. Ch., $29.94; Dea.
      Selah Goodrich. $20; Miss E. T., 50c.                   50.44
    Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                  17.63
    Morris. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   15.00
    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                      27.00
    New Hartford. Cong. Ch., Bbl. books, and
      papers, $2 _for freight, for Macon, Ga._                 2.00
    New Haven. Dr. W. B. DeForest, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     50.00
    New Haven. “A Friend,” _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                   5.00
    New London. Mr. and Mrs. J. N. Harris, _for
      Talladega C._                                          120.00
    New London. “A Friend”                                     2.00
    New Preston. Mrs. B. A.                                    1.00
    New Preston Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   44.00
    New Preston Village. “A Friend,” _for Hampton
      N. and A. Inst._                                        10.00
    North Branford. J. A. Palmer                               2.00
    North Haven. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                          10.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., $113.23; Second
      Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $65; First Cong. Ch.,
      $10                                                    188.23
    North Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                15.00
    Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                60.00
    Plymouth. Plymouth Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   95.00
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.70
    Stafford Springs. Cong. Ch.                                5.00
    South Britain. Mrs. E. M. Averill                          5.00
    South Glastonbury. Cong. Ch.                               5.26
    Terryville. A. S. Gaylord, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                70.00
    Thomaston. David S. Cables                                20.00
    Thompsonville. D. P                                        1.00
    Torrington. Cong. Sch. and Soc.                           15.00
    Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $9.64; Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $10.36                                       20.00
    Vernon Depot. Sab. Sch., by C. D. Tucker, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                18.00
    Washington. Henry S. Nettleton, _for
      school-house in Ga._                                     5.00
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $399.86;
      first Cong. Ch., $135.70                               535.56
    Waterbury. “A Friend,” _for Kansas Refugee M._             5.00
    Watertown. Dr. John De Forest, _for Talladega
      C._                                                    100.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Windsor Locks. Mrs. L. P. Dexter                           5.00
    Winsted. E. E. Gilman, $10; Mrs. E. W. C., $1;
      Mrs. C. S., 50c.                                        11.50
    Winthrop. Miss C. Rice, $1.50; Mrs. M. A.
      Jones, $1.50                                             3.00
    Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    ——“A Friend”  ($150 of which _for Kansas
      Refugee M._)                                           450.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,637.92
    LEGACIES.

    Avon. ESTATE of Maria Avent, by Oliver Gabriel           200.00
    Eastford. ESTATE of Rozel S. Warren, by J. D.
      Barrows, Ex.                                           400.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,237.92


  NEW YORK, $1,096.96.

    Albany. Mrs. Mary M. Learned                              25.00
    Arcade. Dea. P. H. Parker                                  5.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., Geo. A.
      Bell, supt., _for Missionaries at
      Fernandina, Fla., Ladies’ Island, S. C., and
      Charleston, S. C._                                     200.60
    Brooklyn. Bedford Cong. Ch.                               16.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                      3.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          16.00
    Franklin. Mrs. Isabel H. Penfield                          5.00
    Fredonia. “Friends,” _for School-house,
      Athens, Ala._                                           30.00
    Fredonia. Miss Martha L. Stevens                           5.00
    Galway. Delia C. Davis and sister, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch. (of which Alanson
      Judson, $150, Mrs. Sarah B. Place, $70, $35
      _of which for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._)              314.50
    Goshen. Miss Martha Wisner, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Jefferson. Mrs. S. Ruliffson                               4.00
    Kinderhook. W. I.                                          1.00
    Lenox. Amos S. Johnson                                     2.00
    Lockport. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., ad’l to
      const. MRS. L. B. KING, MISS NETTIE MOODY
      and GEORGE JENNINGS, L. M’s                             56.04
    Lima. Geo. Thayer, $5; G. W. Thayer, $3; Mrs.
      E. W. Beadle, $2                                        10.00
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                    10.46
    Mina. Mrs. A. T.                                           1.00
    New York. William E. Dodge, _for Tougaloo U._            100.00
    New York. Broadway Tab. Ch., Mon. Con. Coll.,
      _for Ch., McIntosh, Ga._, and to const. REV.
      WM. M. TAYLOR, D. D., L. M.                             30.00
    New York. Sab. Sch. of Broadway Tab. Ch., $25;
      Rev. H. C. Haydn, D. D., $10; Mrs. E.
      Merritt, $10                                            45.00
    New York. ——, _for Mendi M._                               5.47
    Oswego. Cong. Ch. Mon. Con. Coll.                         13.48
    Rushford. W. W.                                            0.51
    Saratoga Springs. Mrs. A. M. W., Sen., $1;
      Mrs. S. S., $1                                           2.00
    Smyrna. “A Friend”                                        10.00
    Springville. Lawrence Weber                                3.00
    Success. Sab. Sch., by J. H. Benjamin, supt.              11.00
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                     50.00
    Troy. MRS. C. H. LADD, to const. herself L. M.            30.00
    Walton. Union Miss. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      $35.44; Second Cong. Sab. Sch., $19.66; J.
      J. St. J., 50c.                                         55.60
    West Farms. Ladies and Prof. Alphonso Wood,
      Bbl. of Bedding and Books, by MRS. A. WOOD,
      _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._
    West Winfield. Cong. Ch.                                  16.00


  NEW JERSEY, $81.39.

    Bernardsville. J. L. Roberts                              25.00
    Lakewood. Ralph Tyler and G. L. Hovey, Box of
      Books, _for Tougaloo U._
    Lyons Farms. “C.”                                          5.00
    Newark. “A Friend”                                         0.39
    Orange Valley. Ladies’ Sewing Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., $26, and Bbl. of Bedding and C., by
      Mrs. Austin Adams, _for furnishing rooms,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              26.00
    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        25.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $7.00.

    Cambridgeborough. Mrs. W. G.                               1.00
    Cross Cut. W. W.                                           1.00
    Forest Grove. C. T. B.                                     1.00
    Guy’s Mills. S. O. F.                                      1.00
    Philadelphia. M. A. L.                                     1.00
    Sewickley. “A Friend,” _for Mendi M._                      2.00


  OHIO, $788.28.

    Austinburg. First Cong. Ch.                               11.00
    Belpre. Cong. Ch.                                         13.03
    Brookfield. Miss E. F.                                     0.50
    Bucyrus. “Friends,” by Rev. J. Schull, _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            17.50
    Burg Hill. Mrs. H. B., $1; J. M. J., $1; S. J.
      B., 50c.                                                 2.50
    Cleveland. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch. of the Heights,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              24.00
    Cleveland. B. A. D., 50c.; M. P., 50c.                     1.00
    Dover. L. G. P.                                            1.00
    Delaware. J. W. D.                                         0.50
    Elyria. Heman Ely, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             40.00
    Fredericktown. A. H. Royce                                10.00
    Geneva. “Cheerful Workers,” by Minnie Carter,
      sec., _for Tougaloo U._                                 15.00
    Greenfield. William Smith                                  5.00
    Harrison. John D. Bowles                                   5.00
    Hartford. Mrs. F. and M. Brockway, $5; S. C.
      B., $1; H. J., $1; Mrs. A. T., $1; H. B. T.,
      $1; Others, $1                                          10.00
    Huntington. Edward West                                   25.00
    Kingsville. M. Whiting                                    20.00
    Lorain. “Friends,” by Miss Kate Randall, _for
      Emerson Inst._                                           8.00
    Martinsburgh. J. A. McFarland and Miss Emily
      McFarland, $2.50 ea.                                     5.00
    Metamora. Mrs. M. S.                                       1.00
    Moss Run. M. B. F.                                         1.00
    Mount Vernon. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Napoleon. Mrs. N. B. P.                                    1.00
    Painesville. R. Hitchcock, _for Kansas Refugee
      M._                                                    250.00
    Painesville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                25.00
    Painesville. E. E. J.                                      1.00
    Sandusky. J. G.                                            0.50
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer, $3; Miss M. M.
      M., $1; Mrs. M. S., $1                                   5.00
    Springfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., $12.50, _for
      Tougaloo U._, and $12.50, _for Fisk U._                 25.00
    Sulphur Springs. “Friends,” by Rev. J. Schull,
      _for Tougaloo U._                                       22.50
    Toledo. Mrs. Geo. L. Weed, $10; Mrs. M. A.
      Harrington, $5                                          15.00
    Willoughby. Mrs. J. M. Page, $5; Miss C. E.
      Leonard, $5; _for Kansas Refugee M._                    10.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $621.03
    LEGACY.

    Cleveland. ESTATE of Chas. French                        167.25
                                                          —————————
                                                            $788.28


  INDIANA, $15.00.

    Indianapolis. Mrs. M. S. Pratt, _for
      School-house, Athens, Ala._                             15.00


  ILLINOIS, $585.66.

    Aurora. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                        39.49
    Belvidere. Mrs. M. C. Foote                                3.00
    Bristol. Mrs. S. J. Wheeler, $2; Mrs. H. S.
      Colton, $2                                               4.00
    Buda. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                              20.00
    Chicago. Elisha Gray, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     10.00
    Chicago. J. Fairbanks, Box books and papers,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Chicago. Dr. J. H. H., $1; Family Missionary
      Box, $1.58                                               2.58
    Lake Forest. Mrs. W. H. Ferry, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Moline. John Deere, _for Theo. Dept., Fisk U._           100.00
    Odell. Mrs. H. E. Dana                                    10.00
    Payson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   20.00
    Peoria. Mr. & Mrs. J. L. Griswold, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                  100.00
    Port Byron. A. F. Hollister                                5.00
    Princeton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.48
    Princeville. Mrs. E. R. Auten                              5.00
    Providence. Cong. Ch.                                     22.61
    Providence. Ladies’ of Cong. Ch., for _Lady
      Missionary, Liberty Co., Ga._                            5.00
    Saint Charles. Cong. Ch., Miss Abby Ward                   3.00
    Streator. Samuel Plumb, _for Kansas Refugee M._          100.00
    Tolono. Mrs. L. Haskell, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           11.00
    Tonica. “Friends”                                          8.00
    Turner. Mrs. R. C.                                         1.00
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch.                                       27.50
    Wyoming. Rev. Wm. Walters                                  3.00


  MICHIGAN, $198.62.

    Adrian. C. C. Spooner                                      5.00
    Ann Arbor. Cong. Ch.                                      46.00
    Battle Creek. Presb. and Cong. Sab. Sch’s.,
      _for Talladega C._                                       6.00
    Cooper. Cong. Ch.                                         12.93
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch., “A Friend,” $2; F.
      M., $1; S. Z., 50c.                                      3.50
    Kalamo. Mrs. S. E. B.                                      1.00
    Lowell. Mrs. E. A. Yerkes                                  5.00
    Marshall. D. H. Miller                                     5.00
    Milford. Mrs. W. O.                                        0.51
    Olivet. “Young Men’s Christian Ass’n,” _for
      Talladega C._                                           60.00
    Owosso. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Port Huron. H. W. C., 50c.; C. G. H., 50c.                 1.00
    Salem. Mrs. A. V.                                          0.51
    Saint Johns. Rev. S. S.                                    1.00
    Summit. Missionary Soc., by Mrs. F. G.
      Terrill, Treas.                                          3.17
    Traverse City. S. A.                                       1.00
    Union City. Mrs. E. J. H., 50c.; Mrs. D. B.
      W., 50c.                                                 1.00
    Vassar. J. G. Selden                                       2.50
    Whitehall. B. H.                                           1.00
    Whitehall. Mr. and Mrs. Byron Hammond, _for
      Schoolhouse, Athens, Ala._                               5.00


  WISCONSIN, $213.25.

    Appleton. Miss A. E. Hutchinson’s Sab. Sch.
      Class, Box of C., $2 _for freight, for
      Macon, Ga._                                              2.00
    Appleton. First Cong. Ch., Box Books and C.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Beloit. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._, and to const.
      MISS H. MARTINDALE, L. M.                               44.50
    Beloit. J. Bert, $10.75; Sab. Sch. of Second
      Cong. Ch., $7.30; Ladies of First Cong. Ch.,
      Bale of C., _for Talladega C._                          18.05
    Beloit. “Friends,” 3 Boxes Books and Papers
      and 1 Box C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Beloit. Rev. Thomas Gillespie                              5.00
    Evansville. Cong. Ch., $5; Cong. Sab. Sch., $20           25.00
    Milwaukee. Spring St. Cong. Ch., $95.60; Mrs.
      Samuel Brown, $5                                       100.60
    New London. First Cong. Ch., 3 Boxes Books and
      Papers, Bbl. and Box of C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Oshkosh. First Cong. Ch., Box of Books and C.,
      and $2.75 _for freight, for Macon, Ga._                  2.75
    Racine. Mrs. J. B.                                         1.00
    Rosendale. Ladies’ Soc. of First Cong. Ch., 2
      Boxes Books and Papers, 1 Box C. and
      Bedding, $9.35 _for freight, for Macon, Ga._             9.35
    Ripon. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Books and C.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Sheboygan. First Cong. Ch., Box of Books and
      C., $5 _for freight, for Macon, Ga._                     5.00


  IOWA, $366.14.

    Cedar Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                              3.75
    Cherokee. Mrs. C. E. W.                                    0.50
    Cincinnati. L. R. Holbroook                               10.00
    Council Bluffs. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           30.00
    Creston. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             7.50
    Decorah. G. C. Winship                                     5.00
    Des Moines. Mrs. Samuel Merrill, _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Dubuque. First Cong. Ch., $41.50, to const.
      DR. J. S. LEWIS, L. M.; W. C. W., 50c.                  42.00
    De Witt. Rev. J. F. T                                      1.00
    Fairfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 9.00
    Genoa Bluffs. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $5;
      Dea. H. A. Morse, $5                                    10.00
    Grinnell. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      $23.75; Miss Lewis’ S. S. Class, $2; Miss
      Morris’ S. S. Class, $2.65; G. T. Hills’ S.
      S. Class, $2.25, _for Talladega C._                     30.65
    Grinnell. Sab. Sch. Class, Cong. Ch., _for Le
      Moyne Sch._                                              3.75
    Marion. Ladies’ and Young Girls’ Miss. Soc’s,
      _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                 25.00
    Marion. Mrs. R. D. Stephens, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Miles. Cong. Ch.                                           3.75
    Monticello. Mrs. M. B. C. S.                               0.50
    Osage. Woman’s Missionary Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            5.00
    Preston. Cong. Ch.                                         4.43
    Tabor. A. C. G.                                            1.00
    Traer. Mrs. C. H. B.                                       0.51
    Sherrill’s Mount. Rev. J. R., _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                        1.00
    Stacyville. By Mrs. R. D. Stephens, _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            0.50
    Waterloo. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Eldora. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $11; Monona.
      Ladies Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch., $1; Seneca.
      Mr. and Mrs. O. Littlefield, $2; Traer.
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $12; _by Mrs. Henry L.
      Chase for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._            26.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $280.84
    LEGACY.

    Tabor. ESTATE of D. E. Woods, by Rev. John Todd           85.30
                                                          —————————
                                                            $366.14


  MINNESOTA, $52.41.

    Belle Prairie. Mrs. E. T. Ayer                             2.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 32.78
    Minneapolis. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           17.13
    Saint Paul. Rev. R. H                                      0.50


  KANSAS, $4.00.

    Baxter Springs. Mrs. M. E. H. K.                           1.00
    Burlingame. “A Friend”                                     1.00
    Leavenworth. Prof. L. A. S. ($1 of which for
      Chinese M.)                                              2.00


  NEBRASKA TER., $17.50.

    Nebraska City. “A Friend,” $15.50; L. N. B.,
      50c.; Mrs. N. K. P. 50c.                                16.50
    Green Island. Rev. C. S.                                   1.00


  CALIFORNIA, $5.50.

    Benicia. Mrs. H. A.                                        0.50
    Santa Barbara. Mrs. H. M. Van Winkle                       5.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $11.00.

    Colfax. Rev. Cushing Eells, $10; Mrs. M. R.
      S., 50c.                                                10.50
    Seattle. Mrs. W. H. R.                                     0.50


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $10.00.

    Washington. Mrs. A. N. Bailey                             10.00


  KENTUCKY, $10.00.

    Ashland. Hugh Means                                       10.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $94.50.

    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition                        94.50


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $317.00.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         317.00


  TENNESSEE, $355.30.

    Chattanooga. Mrs. J. P. P., 50c.;                          1.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne School, Tuition                        215.85
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      138.45


  GEORGIA, $599.39.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                            186.58
    Atlanta. Atlanta University, Tuition                     130.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           96.45
    Macon. Rent                                                5.50
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                     29.81
    Savannah. Beach Institute, Tuition, $121.05;
      Rent, $10                                              131.05
    Savannah. Dr. J. P. S. Houston and Dr. Wm. H.
      Elliott, _for Mendi M._                                 20.00


  ALABAMA, $659.95.

    Athens. Trinity School, Tuition                           87.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           252.10
    Mobile. Cong. Ch., _for Emerson Inst._                     1.25
    Montgomery. Swayne Sch., Tuition                         190.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch., $41.30; Rent, $4                  45.30
    Selma. “Friends,” by W. H. Lanier, _for
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition                     48.80
    Talladega. Rev. H. S. De Forest, _for
      Talladega C._, and to const. MISS JULIE C.
      ANDREWS, L. M.                                          30.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $113.25.

    Forest. “Friends,” by A. Strong, _for Tougaloo
      U._                                                      2.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                           101.75
    Tougaloo. Rev. G. S. Pope, $5; Students, $1;
      O. J., $1; D. I. M., $1; Mr. and Mrs. S.,
      $1; Etta S., 25c.; J. M. N., 25c., _for
      Tougaloo U._                                             9.50


  LOUISIANA, $141.75.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition.               141.75


  TEXAS, $61.50.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                  46.95
    Austin. G. Warren, _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._                                                  10.00
    Corpus Christi. First Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       2.55
    Helena. D. E., 50c.; A. S., 50c.                           1.00
    Whitman’s. W. B., 50c.; E. A. 50c.                         1.00


  INCOME FUND, $805.50.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               655.50
    Graves Library Fund                                      150.00


  CANADA, $5.50.

    Sherbrooke. Rev. Arch. Duff                                5.50


  ENGLAND, $101.90.

    London. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._, £21                             101.90


  WEST INDIES, $1.00.

    Jamaica. “A Lady,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              1.00
                                                          —————————
        Total for February                               $17,097.97
    Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 28th                      87,522.46


  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Washington, Conn. Mrs. Rebecca Hine                       20.00
    Washington, Conn. Cong. Ch.                               14.21
                                                          —————————
          Total                                              $34.21
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to Jan.
      31st                                                 4,076.50
                                                          —————————
          Total                                           $4,110.71


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Leeds, England. Robert Arthington, £3,000             14,535.00
    London, England. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc.,
      £379                                                 1,839.10
    Le Grand, Iowa. L. M. Craig                               10.00
                                                          —————————
          Total                                          $16,384.10
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to Jan.
      31st                                                 1,608.96
                                                          —————————
          Total                                          $17,993.96

                                        H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1848.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct Christian
missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries which are destitute of
them, or which present open and urgent fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the practice
of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds, may become a
member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty dollars, a life
member; provided that children and others who have not professed their
faith may be constituted life members without the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of September,
October or November, for the election of officers and the transaction
of other business, at such time and place as shall be designated by the
Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting, and
of delegates from churches, local missionary societies, and other
co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory, and
the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting and
disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining and
dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and agents;
the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the transaction of
all such business as usually appertains to the executive committees of
missionary and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to
be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall,
by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference shall
be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call, in
all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and general
conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the diffusion of
the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous promotion of the
missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing officers,
agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor, and
conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold their
fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular annual
meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been submitted to
a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in season to be
published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if so submitted) in
the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a belief
in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a Saviour; the
Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, the
only Saviour of the world; the necessity of regeneration by the Holy
Spirit, repentance, faith and holy obedience in order to salvation; the
immortality of the soul; and the retributions of the judgment in the
eternal punishment of the wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with the
almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its main
efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens and
Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely related
to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE in America,
and to co-operate with the Government in its humane and Christian
policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—in Va., 1; N. C., 6; S. C., 2; Ga., 13; Ky.,
6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 2. _Among
the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.—_Chartered_:
Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville,
Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and Austin, Texas, 8.
_Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington, Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston,
Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile,
Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284; among
the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total, 330.
STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75; in other
studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former pupils of
our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care of the
Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for the
new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for
these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer, 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis’t Sec., Room 21 Congregational
                House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis’t Sec., 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen who
take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of Sabbath
Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries; to Societies
of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does not prefer to
take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year not less than five
dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in their
last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States three
are required—in other States only two], who should write against their
names, their places of residence [if in cities, their street and
number]. The following form of attestation will answer for every State
in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published and declared by the said [A.
B.] as his last Will and Testament, in presence of us, who, at the
request of the said A. B., and in his presence, and in the presence of
each other, have hereunto subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some
States it is required that the Will should be made at least two months
before the death of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    THE CONGREGATIONALIST FOR 1881.

The publishers of THE CONGREGATIONALIST have never been better prepared
to make an entertaining and instructive paper for the family than now.
Our contributors embrace such names as

  Prof. AUSTIN PHELPS, D. D.,      ROSE TERRY COOKE,
  Rev. J. T. DURYEA, D. D.,        SUSAN COOLIDGE,
  President S. C. BARTLETT,        MARION HARLAND,
  Rev. L. W. BACON, D. D.,         Rev. THEO. L. CUYLER, D. D.,
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN,         Rev. W. F. CRAFTS,
  GEO. E. WARING, Jr.,             Rev. GEO. LEON WALKER, D. D.,
  Mr. C. C. COFFIN,                RAY PALMER,
                        JULIA C. R. DORR,

And many others who have attained a national reputation.

                        “HOW AND WHAT TO READ”

Is a topic on which we print several articles this year from Rev.
WASHINGTON GLADDEN, and other well-known writers.

                           “WITHOUT A HOME”

Is the name of a story by Rev. E. P. ROE, running through the columns
of THE CONGREGATIONALIST nine or ten months this season. More than
200,000 copies of Mr. Roe’s books have been sold, a fact which
indicates the great demand there is for them.

Our Sabbath-school Department for 1881 is under the charge of the
Rev. A. F. SCHAUFFLER, of New York, who is known as one of the most
suggestive writers and thinkers on this subject in the country.

Our Children’s Department is sustained by such writers as Mr. C. C.
COFFIN, ERNEST INGERSOLL (on Natural History), W. J. ROLFE, CLARA
ERSKINE CLEMENT, and others equally eminent, and it will be found
entertaining and instructive to all, both to young and old.

A series of twelve articles or more, running through our columns this
year, entitled

                           “GREAT SUBJECTS,”

And from the pens of some of the most eminent thinkers in the land, is
destined to attract wide attention. Among the writers are Ex-President
WOOLSEY, Gen. J. R. HAWLEY, Hon. DORMAN B. EATON, BENJAMIN VAUGHAN
ABBOTT, Dr. GEO. M. BEARD and Rev. NOAH PORTER, D. D. The large space
of four columns a week, on an average, is devoted to our “Literary
Department.” It is gotten up wholly in the interest of our readers, and
we receive frequent testimonies to its value.

With seven persons on our regular editorial staff, including Rev. A.
H. CLAPP, D. D., in New York, who, besides other matter, furnishes
a letter every week, the reader will find THE CONGREGATIONALIST in
all its departments fully abreast of the times. It touches subjects
of current interest to the religious public every week, not only by
its editorial articles, but by a great amount of paragraphs and short
matter such as all are glad to read. We offer no premiums, but are now
expending upon the columns of the paper itself what otherwise might be
required for that purpose. The amount of money paid out sometimes in a
single week to writers for THE CONGREGATIONALIST now exceeds the sum
expended in this way for six months or a year a quarter of a century
ago.

Specimen numbers sent free. Price, $3.00 a year.

                               W. L. GREENE & CO.,
                                      _1 Somerset St., Boston, Mass._


                   *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Brothers & Co.

                            59 WALL STREET,

                               NEW YORK.

=Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great Britain and Ireland, France,
Germany, Belgium and Holland, =Issue Commercial and Travelers’ Credits,
in Sterling=, available in any part of the world, and in =Francs= for
use in Martinique and Guadaloupe.

                  Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

      Between this and other countries, through London and Paris.

=Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all parts of the United
States and Canada, and of =Drafts drawn in the United States= on
Foreign Countries.

=Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash deposited or
satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In Dollars for use in the United
States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use in any
part of the world. Applications for credits may be addressed as above
direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                       26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                  Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                 NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

  MASON
   AND
  HAMLIN
  ORGANS

BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street, Boston;
46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                   *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                   J. & R. LAMB, 59 Carmine St.
                             NEW YORK.
                      ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS

                         MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                         MEMORIAL TABLETS.

                Sterling Silver Communion Services.
                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                       “IMPORTANT TO CLERGYMEN.”


                               PRINCE’S

                        Improved Fountain Pen.

[Illustration: CAP      THE HANDLE CONTAINS THE INK]

As now improved, saves one-third the time.

"If I were bereft of it, I should feel myself bereft of my right
hand."—REV. LYMAN ABBOTT, _Ed. Ch. Union_.

Can be sent by mail in a registered letter. Send for circulars.
Manufactured by

                            JOHN S. PURDY,
               212 Broadway, Cor. Fulton St., New York.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                               PAYSON’S

                            Indelible Ink,

                     FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                         COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                             PREPARATION.

            It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                        _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                              INQUIRE FOR

                        PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many Fancy
Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                           W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                          Middletown, Conn.,

                           MANUFACTURERS OF

                                PUMPS,

 HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS,
                  YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

                            [Illustration]

   Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
  France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.

                           Founded in 1832.

                          Branch Warehouses:

                           85 & 87 John St.
                               NEW YORK,
                                  AND
                           197 Lake Street,
                               CHICAGO.

                  _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                   *       *       *       *       *




THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

OF THE

American Missionary.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with our
friends, and to them the best source of information regarding our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs, will
easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our Magazine,
and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in all parts
of the field, and with occasional communications from careful observers
and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_ furnishes a vivid
and reliable picture of the work going forward among the Indians, the
Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in the
South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting the
races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of current
events relating to their welfare and progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and Christianizing
of these despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its
circulation. Begin with the January number and the new year. The price
is only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons
indicated on page 127.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                       H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are thousands of
Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors and Teachers in
Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
a specially valuable medium for advertising Books, Periodicals,
Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of Learning, Church Furniture,
Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged for space
in its columns, considering the extent and character of its circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

            THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                             56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

☛ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of the
“American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by mentioning, when
ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.

       *       *       *       *       *


  DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Teach-ng changed to Teaching in the table of Contents.

Obvious printer’s punctuation errors have been corrected.

Odd formatting of fraction (161 1-9 years) on page 114 has been
retained.

Inconsistent hyphenation retained, due to multiple authors.

Ditto marks replaced by the text they represent in order to facilitate
alignment in eBooks.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 4, APRIL, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.