VOL. XXXV.                                          NO. 3.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                           MARCH, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                65
    SENATOR BROWN ON THE EDUCATIONAL QUESTION—OVERTURE
      TO THE NATIONAL COUNCIL                                 67
    MIXED SCHOOLS                                             68
    EXCEPTIONS AND THE RULE—CONVERSION VERSUS EDUCATION       69
    INCONSIDERATE GIVING                                      71
    THE INDIAN PROBLEM: Gen. S. C. Armstrong                  72
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians                             74
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                      76


  THE FREEDMEN.

    NORTH CAROLINA, MCLEANSVILLE—Severe Winter, Good
      Progress, etc.                                          78
    GEORGIA, ATLANTA—Sequel to Begging Letter: Mrs.
      T. N. Chase                                             79
    ALABAMA, MOBILE—Emerson Institute                         80
    MISSISSIPPI, TOUGALOO—A Changed Home                      81
    TENNESSEE, NASHVILLE—Cabin, Frame House and Little
      Brick                                                   82
    TEXAS, PARIS—The African Congregational Church            83


  THE INDIANS.

    COMMUNION SUNDAY AT HAMPTON: Miss Isabel B. Eustis        85


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N

    ANNOUNCEMENT                                              87


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    CHILD’S LETTER—A CRUMB FOR THE BOYS                       89


  RECEIPTS                                                    89


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                96

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         Published by the American Missionary Association,
                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR. D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    H. L. CLAPP,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    A. J. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. C. C. PAINTER, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of Thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXV.       MARCH, 1881.      No. 3.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


We call attention to our new pamphlet (No. 6,) which contains
the papers read at the woman’s meeting held at Norwich, Conn.,
Oct. 13th, in connection with our Annual Meeting. This has been
published, and will be sent to those of our friends who express the
wish to have it.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Communion Sunday at Hampton,” by Miss Eustis, and Mrs. Chase’s
“Sequel to a Begging Letter,” we are confident will each be read
with very tender, almost tearful gratitude, and will thrill the
reader with most sweet hopes of the triumphant success of our
prayers and labors for the despised and wronged, but soon to be
redeemed, races. The grace that is redeeming them is also sweetly
touching the hearts of many with reference to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

In this number of the MISSIONARY, the W. H. M. Association
announces the purpose of bringing and keeping before the Christian
women of our land their relation to the great work in which this
Association is engaged.

When the claims of the colored women of the South and of the Indian
women of the West have been heard and recognized by their sisters
of New England, we are confident that the work of elevating and
saving them will receive a new and wonderful impulse. We call
attention to the announcement and suggestions made.

       *       *       *       *       *

The acceptance by Rev. Henry M. Ladd, of Walton, N. Y., of the
position of Superintendent of the African missions of the A. M. A.,
and his readiness to enter upon the work by the 1st of February,
was announced in the last number of the MISSIONARY. Mr. Ladd sailed
for the Mendi mission on the 12th of February, and was followed
on the 16th by Rev. K. M. Kemp, a native of North Carolina, and
a graduate of Lincoln University, who, with his wife, are to
re-enforce that mission.

After a visit to our missions on the western coast, Mr. Ladd
expects to enter upon an exploration of the Upper Nile basin for
the purpose of locating the Arthington mission.

We have at once an interesting fact and practical suggestions in
the action of the Ladies’ Missionary Society of Elgin, Ill. This
society is a branch of the Woman’s Board for the Interior, and is
equipped with two treasurers—one to receive contributions for the
foreign, and the other for home work.

At the meeting referred to, papers were read on the work at
Hampton, on the work at Fisk, and on the school and church work
of the A. M. A., which gave great interest to the meeting, and
awakened enthusiasm for this branch of home mission work.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. E. Blackstone, of Oak Park, Cook County, Ill., has published a
general directory of missionary societies of this and other lands,
which will be a great convenience to those who wish to communicate
with such, and a source of valuable information to those who would
get a comprehensive view of the work the church of Christ is doing
for the evangelization of the world. This pamphlet is neatly and
compactly gotten up, and is well worth the 25 cents asked for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

One who is spending his first year at the South writes as follows:
“When I listen in the prayer-meetings to remarks and prayers,
especially the latter, I cannot help wishing that the churches of
the North could be present to be ‘edified,’ for they surely would
be. I know those who have given largely to the A. M. A., both as
men count largeness and as the Lord counts it (and His way is not
always man’s way), and they would have more than felt satisfied
with their investment just to have been present for one hour in
some of the meetings at which it has been my privilege to be in the
last two months. I am satisfied that we are building wiser than we
know when we are seeking to introduce a ‘colored element’ into the
Congregationalism of the Republic; but how much wiser, I do not
profess to be able to measure even in imagination.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_The tone of Southern sentiment_ is changing toward the negro,
in all parts of the South. In his recent message, Gov. Jarvis,
of North Carolina, took occasion to speak in warm terms of the
pleasant relations existing between the races, and adds: “I am glad
to say negroes are becoming more industrious and thrifty.”

He refers, with satisfaction, to their industrial fairs held at
Raleigh, and to the encouragement shown them by the whites, and
urges it as an imperative duty that full and equal justice shall be
done the blacks, and that they shall not be left to work out their
destiny unaided. He favors greater provision for public schools,
and recommends that the school tax shall be 2.5 mills on the dollar.

       *       *       *       *       *

That was quite a love feast held in the Opera House, Lynchburg,
Va., a few weeks since, when local politicians, United States
officials and Northern business men of the city united, regardless
of party prejudices, in tendering a supper to capitalists from
Pittsburgh, and all joined in applauding the name of Blaine, from
whom a telegram was received during the evening, “until the rafters
rang again.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Whatever opinion we may form as to the justice of the charges made
by Senator Dawes or the sufficiency of Secretary Schurz’s reply,
we can and do rejoice that they seem to vie with each other in
demanding justice for the Poncas, and we would commend not alone
to the Massachusetts Senator, but to all the members of Congress,
the appeal of the Secretary of the Interior, and express the
conviction that the American people will not hold them guiltless
of a large share of the guilt incurred in that matter, if they
fail, before adjournment, to carry out the recommendations of the
President. Mr. Schurz concludes his letter to Senator Dawes as
follows:

“Permit me now to make an appeal for the Poncas to you, Senator.
Let these Indians at last have rest. Recognize their rights by
giving them the indemnity they justly asked for and which I asked
for them years ago. Let them quietly go about their farms and
improve their homes and send their children to school, undisturbed
by further agitation. That is the best service you can render them.
They would probably be in a better condition already had that
agitation never reached them.”

       *       *       *       *       *


SENATOR BROWN ON THE EDUCATIONAL QUESTION.

Hon. Joseph E. Brown, of Georgia, who has recently been elected
U. S. Senator, has for a long time manifested an interest in our
work. A short time since he gave $50,000 to an institution under
the auspices of the Baptists, for the education of the whites. On
the night before his election, in an address to the Legislature, he
expressed his appreciation of the importance of education in the
following words:

“I have the educational question very much at heart. Disguise
it as you may, the New England States, with their schools and
universities, have dictated laws to this continent. They have sent
New England ideas all over the West, and they dominate there.
Look at Prussia, that little Empire over which Napoleon rushed
and almost obliterated. Hardly a generation passed before it had
in turn humbled France and taken the power from its Empire. The
bright-eyed boys in your mountains and wire-grass may represent you
nobly before the world if you educate them. We must also educate
the colored race, and they ought to be educated for the benefit
of the Union, and by the friends of the Union. I would devote
the proceeds of the public lands to this purpose on a basis of
illiteracy. The colored people are citizens, and we must do them
justice. Let us give them every legal right. Social rights will
take care of themselves.”

       *       *       *       *       *


OVERTURE TO THE NATIONAL COUNCIL.

It is felt by many of our missionaries South that their work would
be facilitated by a creed, prepared under direction of the National
Council, suited to the average intelligence of the Freedmen who
apply for admission to our new churches. To this end, therefore,
the Central South Conference, at its recent meeting in Memphis,
drew up an overture setting forth the reasons why such creed should
be provided, and presented it to the Council at St. Louis. After
preliminary statements, the overture adds:

“Our eight colleges and our two score normal and high schools,
with their more than 8,000 students, and these, with their 150,000
pupils in primary schools, where they teach, are rapidly preparing
the material out of which churches of our faith and polity will be
developed.

“These children of nature, with their ready faith but rude
culture, coming into the inheritance of this New Testament way of
the churches, need the ‘sincere milk of the word’—a declaration
of doctrine that shall not be in the nomenclature nor in the
philosophy of a past age, but in the language and after the spirit
of our improved New England theology. They need a form of sound
words such as that when they have once learned it they will not
need to be taught over again what it does not mean in spite of its
phraseology.

“As a duty of brotherly love and of honest recompense we owe them
the best things we have to give in the way of the freshest and
ripest statement of the ideas and doctrines which have leavened the
East and the West, and are now setting the South in foment.”

We trust the Committee appointed by the Council to formulate a
statement of doctrine will meet the want.

       *       *       *       *       *


MIXED SCHOOLS.

Opposition to mixed schools in the South is not confined to the
white race. Intelligent colored people see that these mean no
opportunity for them as teachers, at least for some years to come.
Those who would be willing to wield the birchen rod over colored
children are as yet largely in excess of those who would consent to
have a colored teacher wield it over them.

Mixed schools are needed in all the sparsely settled neighborhoods,
which includes, of course, all the country outside of the larger
villages, as none other can be effectively maintained. None
others can be harmonized with the democratic ideas upon which our
institutions are based, and it is safe to say that anything which
is favored by every public and private interest, and is opposed
only by prejudice, will in the end gain the day. Victories are
being won with such rapidity that we can afford to wait patiently
for this one, which when gained will prove the Appomattox of this
war.

Almost all that can be gained for the negro by legislation has been
accomplished; to overcome prejudices which wrong and hinder him,
will now depend largely upon himself. The gratifying fact, attested
by prominent men all over the South, is that he is playing his
part with commendable manliness, and is gaining what will never be
long withheld from those who deserve it—the respect of his white
neighbors.

It would be well for those who complain of the slow progress made
for better feelings and sentiments among the Southern whites in
regard to the negroes, and their manifest unwillingness to accord
to them their rights, quietly to digest a recent letter from the
Superintendent of Schools in Cambridge, Mass., who explains that he
has not employed properly qualified colored teachers in that city,
simply because there is so much color prejudice among the people
that he deems it inexpedient to do so.

We know of a young colored woman, a graduate of the high-school
of the town in which she lives, admitted by all parties to be the
best scholar of her class, and one of the best ever graduated from
the school, who cannot find employment in the profession for which
she has so ably qualified herself, only because she has a trace of
negro blood in her veins. When Massachusetts and Rhode Island, and
we may as well include the whole of New England, have reached and
occupied sufficiently long to feel comfortable upon it, the ground
which they insist the South ought to take at one bound, the South
may be more favorably affected by their preaching of equal rights.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXCEPTIONS AND THE RULE.

There may be exceptions which, after all, confirm the rule to which
they do not wholly conform, but to say that it is by exceptions the
rule is to be proven, is to betray a blind adhesion to maxims whose
claim to credence is their antiquity alone.

A partial and hasty generalization from two or three particulars
suffices for the enunciation of a general law applicable to all
cases. The declaration of a more careful investigator that a number
of particular facts are not harmonious with the law as enunciated
is met, not with a revision of the law, but with the assertion that
exceptions do not invalidate, but prove the rule.

A naturalist in the tropics describes water as being under all
circumstances a fluid. The solid block of ice which drifts for the
first time into his field of observation he will not accept as
disproving his doctrine, but as being the exception necessary to
confirm it.

It becomes a matter of interest to know in what way exceptions do
confirm what they seemingly disprove, and how many maybe admitted
before we shall revise our classifications and re-state our general
rule, because false in its old form. Unquestionably an indisputable
exception proves at least that the rule is not universal, and
suggests that there may be a thousand more facts out of harmony
with it.

Anglo-Saxon prejudice and conceit have laid it down as a general
rule, a law of race, that the negro is only a somewhat superior
grade of monkey, incapable of any high degree of intellectual
development; that the only good Indian is a dead Indian, and the
best use he can be put to is to make a target of him for the
training of our soldiers in musket firing.

The American Missionary Association has been engaged for the past
score of years in developing exceptions to these dicta, and it is
time to raise the question seriously whether these only prove the
rule or demand its revision!

We respectfully submit that the experiments made show a large
number of exceptions; in fact, the number has been numerous exactly
in proportion to the largeness of our opportunities and facilities
for developing them. A serious doubt ought by this time to take
possession of the public mind whether $32,000,000 spent in Indian
wars during the past dozen years is not rather expensive target
practice, and whether the results shown by those who, under great
disadvantages, have been attempting to civilize and Christianize
the Indians, are not of such character as to demand most
emphatically that our method of dealing with them shall be changed.

We also challenge attention to the results of our educational
experiments in the South, as demanding in all fairness that they
shall be made on a national scale, and not simply by the private
enterprise of philanthropists.

It is time the old answer of ignorance and stupid imbecility that
exceptions only prove the rule should be thrown to the dogs, and
we should as a nation convert the dangerous elements with which we
have so wickedly and foolishly dealt into sources of national power
and safety.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONVERSION VERSUS EDUCATION.

It was a wild and weird scene that we looked down upon from the
gallery of one of the prominent colored churches in a Southern
city a few months since. The preacher had, at 10 o’clock, p. m.,
finished his part of the service, having preached an excellent
and very simple sermon, in which there was nothing calculated to
produce the violent scenes which followed, and having come down
from the pulpit, the brethren and sisters took the meeting under
their own management.

Up to this time it had been as quiet and decorous as a deacons’
meeting in New England. A stentorian “son of thunder” now led the
singing, and a general movement of the whole assembly at once
began. Soon, nearly a hundred “seekers” were kneeling at the
“mourners’ bench,” a row of seats extending across the church,
in all stages of physical and spiritual abasement. Prayer and
song followed each other in rapid and boisterous succession,
while the congregation of believers marched and counter-marched,
each one discharging at once his duty and a volley of counsel or
encouragement to the mourners as he passed along the line.

Black was the ground and prevailing color. The lights were hardly
sufficient to resolve this nebulous blackness into faces, black
sun-bonnets of the sisters, and black-coated forms of the brethren
moving to and fro through the room, while the singers sang, the
exhorters exhorted, the mourners mourned in dismal howls, and the
shouters shouted and leaped in ecstatic joy. Now and then, one
would come to the surface of all this uproar, to tell what voices
he had heard, what visions he had seen, what dreams he had dreamed,
and receive the assurance from the minister: “I have no more doubt
that he has got religion, than I have of my own existence,” which
would be the signal for a general shout of “glory to God!” that
made the preceding bedlam seem tame, and gave renewed impetus to
the marchings and songs and prayers.

These meetings had been in nightly session for weeks, and continued
for weeks afterward, prolonged often, as on this night, until 2
o’clock in the morning. As we left, about midnight, our driver, an
intelligent negro, said: “You are going away too early. Things will
get pretty warm after awhile. ’Ligion strikes a nigger first in the
foot and then works up; it is just beginning to work, it will be
lively after awhile;” of which there could not be much doubt.

One of our missionaries, some time since, was applied to by a
colored woman for admission to the church. At her examination
before the committee, she had a wonderful dream to tell as proof of
her conversion. The committee, not deeming it sufficient evidence,
refused her application. She went immediately to one of the old
ministers, and the day of her immersion was duly celebrated by a
great gathering, of which she was the heroine. As she clambered up
the bank of the river, shouting aloud, she suddenly encountered one
of the deacons whose church had refused her admission. Giving a
sudden pause to her religious fervor, she thrust her clenched hand
into his face, exclaiming: “There, I am baptized,” and followed up
with imprecations upon himself, pastor, and church, which were, to
say the least, not saintly, and then resumed her shout of glory!

To one who has seen the negro often under religious excitement, it
is evident that he seeks it as many men do intoxication, for the
mere pleasurable excitement; he neither feels nor hears, nor does
he know of reasons for being a better man morally because of his
religion; if it only makes him happier, it meets his need, and the
only demand he has to make of it.

This is a just idea of what conversion was under the old-style
minister among the negroes. Of course, there were many among them
who preached a purer Gospel, and sought renewed spiritual lives
among their people, especially before emancipation, but with
freedom came the hope of political or other power, which could be
gained most easily by the preacher, and many sought and secured
such positions who were utterly unscrupulous as well as ignorant.
It is such a ministry as this which, more than anything else,
opposes to-day our work among the Freedmen.

Dr. Sears stated last spring, in his address at the School
Superintendents’ Convention, that he knew of the presence of one
trained normal teacher in a village to necessitate the dismissal of
seven old-fashioned teachers. Contrast and comparison revealed sad
deficiencies before unknown, and the committee was forced to get
rid of the poor teachers. And so it is chiefly by what we compel
others to do, that we are to estimate the value of our intelligent
and largely undenominational work in the South. The Freedmen
are beginning to see that religion is something different from
dreaming dreams or seeing visions, or shouting, or anything of the
kind; that it means honest, pure, industrious lives, inspired and
controlled by the spirit of Jesus Christ. Education is securing
something better than such conversions, in fact is making them
impossible with the new generation.

       *       *       *       *       *


INCONSIDERATE GIVING.

We deem it inaccurate to say “inconsiderate charity,” for such
giving is not charitable giving. “To him that _knoweth_ to do
good and doeth it not, to him it is sin.” The obligation is as
imperative that we shall give intelligently as that we shall give
at all. The intolerable tramp nuisance with which we have been
so grievously afflicted, was nourished and built up by the illy
considered sentiment which found expression in the declaration of
a well-known minister, who said he would refuse to give anything
to the cause of missions before he would refuse a gift to the poor
fellow who asked at his door for help, and in the custom of a good
woman of wealth, who bought a set of crockery for tramps, and
always kept a large coffee-pot full of that delightful beverage
on the stove ready for the use of her frequent guests, a dozen of
whom she has been known to feed in one day. There can be no doubt
that a ready and full _supply_ of this kind will develop an almost
infinite _demand_.

A lady, prominent and well-known in New York city, whose habit
was never to give to any one asking at the door, but to take the
address of the applicant and investigate the case, said that in
seventeen years’ experience she had never found a single deserving
one among the many who had so applied; in every case a fictitious
address had been given.

We can do no safe and really charitable work until such work is
intelligently organized, so that deserving cases are supplied
with just the kind of aid needed, and fictitious and unworthy
ones are exposed and punished. We must know, either by ourselves
or accredited and trusted agents, what we are doing if we are to
benefit rather than curse our fellows by our so-called charities.

The friends of the negro are in danger constantly of being imposed
upon by impostors, who rob the cause they desire to promote of
much-needed funds. It is very easy for one who comes soliciting
aid for a prospective college or church to secure testimonials
that said institution is greatly needed, and that the solicitor is
seeking money for a most important purpose.

It is not necessary to show, which is by no means the case, that
all who come from the South asking aid for such causes are frauds,
in order to give weight to our words of caution. Many of these
are attempting honestly a most important work, and ought to have
sympathy and material aid, but the individual to whom application
is made has neither time nor facilities for making the proper
investigations to establish this fact. True, the applicant
has testimonials, but they need investigation no less than the
applicant himself.

We know of several cases where funds have been contributed, and
have been expended in the erection and maintenance of schools,
which are doing honest and most valuable work, concerning which
nothing but praise should be spoken, and yet nothing but the life
of one man stands between this present use of these funds and an
utter perversion of them. The school property is the personal
property of the individual who procured the funds, and at his death
will of necessity pass into the hands of others, who can do what
they choose with it.

We know of one case where a wealthy man from New York, spending the
winter in the South, became interested in a negro public school
near his hotel. He converted the rude building into a New England
school-house, supplied with first-class apparatus, and took great
satisfaction in what he had done for the poor negroes. Next year
the negro school was transferred to another building, and the
whites made this one, with its books, globes, and philosophical
apparatus, the foundation of a higher school for their own race. We
believe it best for the friends of negro education to work, through
some one of the various organizations which are doing this work,
who are in position to do it more wisely and efficiently than they
could do it; and would call attention to the following suggestions
from a correspondent of the New York _Tribune_, as being wise and
of urgent importance:

  “There are associations connected with nearly every religious
  denomination in the country, to meet the great and terrible need
  of education among the millions of the emancipated and their
  children. These associations are under the administration of the
  best and most sagacious business men in our communities, and
  it is safe to say that the moneys committed to the custody of
  these associations are judiciously, desirably and economically
  appropriated. Of one of these associations I have personal and
  familiar knowledge. It has extensive colleges or universities in
  Virginia, Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and
  Texas, besides numerous schools scattered throughout the Southern
  States. Nearly $300,000 was expended by this association the past
  year, almost exclusively in the interest of these people, one
  excellent woman putting $150,000 in the treasury, to be expended
  in making much needed additions to colleges so utterly thronged
  by applicants that they were compelled to turn numbers from their
  doors.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN PROBLEM.

GEN. S. C. ARMSTRONG.

The Indian problem is upon us as never before.

The wrongs of the Poncas, both in themselves and as illustrating
our country’s mode of dealing with the red race for generations,
have touched and stirred the people.

The sum of six generations of slavery has been to the negro,
oppression, offset by steady progress through it all, and only
injury to the white man. The sum of six generations of Indian
treatment has been a succession of wrongs, offset by little real
advantage, and the steady gain of the white man.

The negro acquired our language and ways, and by becoming the
industrial reliance of the South, became, even more than his
master, capable of taking care of himself. We have destroyed the
reliance of the Indian, his game, and have put nothing in its
place. With all the justice and humanity intended in our annual
outlay for the red race, there is a pauperizing, weakening tendency
that is full of danger. Practically, has the politician been any
better guardian than the slave-holder?

The country is waking up to a sense of justice. The shameful record
of violated treaties and untold wrongs for the past hundred years
is being brought out. From the outraged negro, for whom the country
can now do nothing but help educate him, and who, indeed, needs
nothing but intelligence to fit him to hold his own, our people are
turning to the Indian and demanding that Government open before him
the only way to manhood and citizenship—_rights_ and _education_.
It must be done.

In the “Century of Dishonor,” just published by the well-known
author, “H. H.,” she states that “To write in full the history of
one of these Indian communities, of its forced migrations, wars,
and miseries, would fill a volume by itself.”

As this shall be better realized, a stronger public sentiment will
be formed and felt. Other forces are at work. The three hundred and
fifty Indian youth who have come voluntarily from the West, many
of them children of chiefs, and entered the Carlisle and Hampton
schools, have already proved their capacity for mechanical and
agricultural, as well as for mental and religious improvements. Not
but that this has already been abundantly shown; but the work has
been done at our doors; the evidence is thrust upon us.

How many know that of the 275,000 Indians in the United States,
150,000 are already self-supporting, 84,000 partly so, while only
31,000 are entirely dependent on the Government; that their numbers
are hardly diminished since the landing of the Pilgrims?

Bishop Whipple, of Minnesota, says: “The North American Indian
is the noblest type of a heathen man on the face of the earth.
He recognizes a Great Spirit; he believes in immortality; he has
a keen intellect; he is a clear thinker; he is brave, fearless,
and until betrayed, he is true to his plighted faith; he has a
passionate love for his children and counts it joy to die for his
people. Our most terrible wars have been with this noblest type of
Indians and with those who have been the white man’s friends.”

Nearly three years’ experience at Hampton has shown that the chief
danger, the death-rate, while serious, is not discouraging. Our 80
Indian pupils are now in better health than ever before. They need
in bodily ailments careful, prompt treatment; with that there is
little danger. It is clear that the death-rate is not increased by
transplanting them to the East.

Is not the story of our last communion service which I sent to the
MISSIONARY last week evidence enough to stimulate Christians to
the greatest effort for this race? I write this paper especially
to urge upon the American Missionary Association and its friends
some effort for Indians in connection with their institutions for
colored people.

The mingling of races at Hampton has worked admirably. Our colored
students increased in number last year by 37 in spite of the 70
Indians for whom separate and special pecuniary provision was made
by Government and by friends.

Bringing Indians to negro schools is like putting raw recruits
among old soldiers. The former are pushed along by a thousand
indirect helpful influences; they are improved by contact with
those always ahead of them in the march of civilization; and the
latter are ennobled by what they do for their needy brethren. It
works well; such mingling will strengthen and not weaken your
schools, if Hampton experience is safe to go by. To make men of the
savages on our frontier and to save their souls by putting them
with the ex-slave of the country is a grand work, if it has been
called “sensational.”

Why not take these twenty Indian children that the Indian
department are ready to give you? This would be safe; then feel
your way along. Let them study mornings and work afternoons,
and play Saturdays. We do so. The labor is one of some delicacy
and difficulty. But the Indian is like everybody else. That’s
our experience. Treat him firmly, fairly, kindly; give him no
second-rate teacher; he is keen and appreciative.

Why not go ahead? The Government will place them at your doors free
of expense, and give you $150 a year for twelve months’ schooling
and care—which will barely pay for their food and clothing. That’s
all we can get. The people must pay in part the cost of such
education to get it done. We try to obtain a yearly seventy-dollar
scholarship for each one and have been fairly successful. You can
get these by working for them. You say, “We have no room for them;
where is the money with which to erect buildings?”

We hope next fall to have thirty more Indian girls, making fifty
boys and fifty girls, and are now trying to raise twenty thousand
dollars to put up next summer a suitable building for the girls,
that shall have every appliance for practical education, including
cooking, sewing, clothes-making, washing and ironing, and housework
generally, furnishing room for seventy.

We have no idea where the money is to come from. We have faith
that it will come, because such work is in the line of God’s
providential movement. He who wisely works in that line cannot
fail. The way to get it is to ask for it, prepare for it, push for
it, be worthy of it, pray for it, and it will come. The people of
the country will sustain a good work for Indians.

Some may object that it will trespass upon the negro. Has it been
so here? How would our colored students feel to-day if our Indians
were to be withdrawn? They would vote solidly against it; they
would lose and not gain, and they know it. Is the mutual love and
respect of these races of no account?

The American Missionary Association aims to destroy caste. This
is our way to do it. Nothing here has ever filled me with more
pleasure than watching our students’ recreations, in which race
lines are utterly forgotten. They exist between them, and many
feared, in consequence, disastrous results of their mingling. Two
of our most important and successful Indian teachers are negroes,
graduates of this school.

Three seventy-dollar scholarships are contributed by Virginia
churches for this Indian work, from Petersburg, Portsmouth, and
Hampton, respectively. Southern churches are aiding negro schools.

Have faith and go in for Indians!

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


Africa.

—A French school of archæology, like those which already exist
at Rome and Athens, will be established at Cairo. M. Maspero,
Professor in the College of France, has charge of the organization.

—M. L. Vassion, attached to the office of foreign affairs in
France, has gone to Cairo; he will start from there for Khartoum
and the river Blanc, where he will study the nature of the
commercial relations which it will be possible to establish with
Soudan.

—Dr. Pogge and his companion, M. Wissman, have sailed from Hamburg
for Saint Paul de Loanda. The German Government has officially
asked for them the protection of the Portuguese Government, by
which they may traverse the African possessions on the western side.

—The mission of Algiers proposes to found two new stations between
the great lakes and the Atlantic. The first will be upon the Congo
itself, at the point where the river bends to the north; the second
will be in the States of Mouata Yamvo.

—Messrs. Brazza and Ballay will descend the Alima in the
transportable steamer which the latter has obtained from Europe, to
complete the exploration of the Congo.

—The _L’Afrique_, in an article on the Sanitary Condition of Africa
and the adjacent Isles, says, “Madeira is remarkably healthy,
so that it has been for a long time chosen as a sanitarium for
consumptives. Malaria is wholly unknown there; dysentery is rare
and shows itself only in the epidemic form.”

—Bishop Crowther returned to Lagos, from a six months’ absence on
the Upper Nile, just in time for his wife’s prayer, that she might
die in his arms, to be answered. She did so, though unconscious of
the fact, on the 19th of October last.

Adjai, afterwards Bishop Samuel Crowther, and Asano, afterwards
Susanna, his wife, were children of the same tribe, kidnapped,
rescued, and landed almost the same time, though not in the
same party, at Sierra Leone, and were placed in the same church
missionary school. They were married fifty-one years since, in 1829.

—_A Kaffir Girl’s Worthy Example._ One day a Kaffir girl in South
Africa went to a missionary and dropped four sixpences into his
hand, saying: “This is your money.”

“You don’t owe me anything,” replied the teacher.

“I do,” she answered; “and I will tell you how. At the public
examination you promised a sixpence to any one in the class I was
in who would write the best specimen on a slate. I gave in my slate
and got the sixpence; but you did not know then that another person
wrote that specimen for me. Yesterday you were reading in the
church about Zaccheus, who said: ‘If I have taken anything from any
man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.’ I took from you
one sixpence, and I bring you back four.”

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians

SISSETON AGENCY, DAKOTA TERRITORY.—Mr. Charles Crissey, the agent,
in a brief report, says:

There have been built since I came here in 1879 seven new frame
houses, and three others finished that were not habitable when I
came, besides a number of log houses roofed and floored. A new
engine has been procured and put in place for the flour mill,
and the building enlarged to double its former capacity. A barn
21×70 feet has been built; the school building repaired, after six
years’ use; the old engine converted into a portable saw-mill; and
timber for a new church at Good Will sawed out. The people have
been supplied with 95 yoke of work cattle, with yokes and chains
complete; also with all the plows, wagons, harrows, etc., that they
will need for some time.

I have also had thrown upon my care the Brown Earth Indians,
formerly living here, 30 families, now 40 miles away, who are
trying to get homesteads like white men. They have been supplied
with 20 yoke of oxen, 20 wagons, all tools necessary, including
portable forge and tools, also carpenters’ tools, and material for
a new school-house.

The Drifting Goose Indians have been quietly disposed of and
settled at Crow Creek, D. T., after being on my hands ten months.

Three Indians are now talking of building for themselves frame
houses as good and large as the one I live in, provided the
Government will furnish half the material required.

Our grain is not all threshed yet. From present indications it will
reach about 28,000 bushels wheat and 10,000 bushels oats; potatoes,
corn, etc., in abundance. I cut down the estimate on flour for this
season 25,000 lbs. The Indians now furnish about 70 per cent. of
what they eat.

My next step will be to introduce stock raising, by procuring cows
and calves for this people.

WASHINGTON TERRITORY.—Hon. John McReavy has fitted up a hall at
Union City for church purposes, and the people have procured an
organ and bell for the same object.

The Clallam Indians at Jamestown, near Dunginess, Washington
Territory, have bought a bell for their church, the first church
bell in their county, although it has been settled more than twenty
years, and has a white population of over five hundred and fifty.

The members of the church at Seabeck, at the close of the services
on the first Sabbath in December, presented their pastor, Rev.
M. Eells, with a purse containing forty dollars and fifty cents;
and the ladies of the place who are not members of the church,
presented his wife on Christmas with a box containing articles of
clothing worth about thirty dollars.

Two persons at Jamestown were received into our church in December,
and two more at S’kokomish in January, all on profession of faith.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

WASHINGTON, D. C.—_The Memorial Church_, recently known as the
Lincoln Mission, has, as noted in the last MISSIONARY, just
blossomed into a church, and begins its life as such in a renovated
hall on the corner of Eleventh and R streets. The A. M. A. and
the trustees of the Mission decided last fall that the building
must be repaired, and the work was so far completed that it was
occupied again by the church on the first Sabbath of the new year.
The room will seat about 800 people, and with the expenditure of
$75 for matting in the aisles, would be very attractive indeed.
Mrs. Babcock, city missionary, has opened industrial schools in
connection with this church, both for mothers and the younger
girls, and proves a great help in the spiritual work of the church.

RALEIGH, N. C.—The winter has been unusually severe, and our people
are so very poor and unprepared for it that the attendance at
church services has been very small. A part of the time it has
been so cold and muddy that it was impossible for the people to get
about. The Sunday-school numbers 128.

WOODBRIDGE, N. C.—The young folks are wide awake and hard at work.
There are three grades in school, the highest studying Mental
and Written Arithmetic, Geography, Grammar, History, Physiology,
Reading, Writing and Spelling. The school is working as never
before. A Band of Truth and Purity has been organized, pledged to
be temperate, truthful and chaste, and to observe the rules of good
society. It meets weekly in a social way and strictly examines its
members.

MACON, GA.—Some idea both of the sufferings of the poor who
could not possibly meet the increased expense, and also of the
drafts upon our appropriations for our school work in the South,
necessitated by the intensity of the cold, may be gathered from the
statement of Mr. Lathrop, of Macon, Ga., when he says: “For a week
or more the mercury stood below the freezing point, going down to
zero one night, and ranging from 8 to 30 degrees above, most of
the time. In some places wood could with difficulty be purchased
for $15 per cord by those who had the money.” Pastor Lathrop has
opened a library of more than 1,000 volumes, open to all classes at
the cost of five cents per month to each member. The cold winter
here, as at all points in the South, has materially increased the
expense of school and church work, and at the same time hindered
its progress.

ATLANTA, GA.—Mr. Francis writes: “I have just come from an Inquiry
Meeting, which was attended by forty persons, most of whom give
good evidence that they are earnestly seeking the salvation of
their souls. We have had less faithful activity in religious
matters thus far in our school year than usual, owing to a variety
of circumstances, but during this week the attention of very many
has been aroused, and we are walking under the shadow of the
manifest presence of the Spirit. Quite a number have already given
good evidence that they have submitted to Christ, and several now
are apparently not far from the kingdom of God. We have a large
attendance, there being 102 girls and about 90 boys in the family,
and we hope to gather a large harvest for the Master. We shall hold
some extra meetings, but do not expect to interfere with regular
school work. Thus far the interest is quiet, deep and persuasive
among the girls, and we trust will be equally thorough in the other
household. Pray that we may have wisdom and fidelity to rightly
care for the precious interests at stake.”

LAWRENCE, KAN.—The last number of the MISSIONARY stated that
a young colored man had been put in charge of the Second
Congregational Church of Lawrence. He (Rev. H. R. Pickney) reports
the outlook of that enterprise as in every way encouraging. Several
have been received into the church by letter, and the church
has been quickened under the manifest presence of the Spirit in
connection with a series of meetings, in which Brother Markham
aided the pastor.

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.—It has been awfully wet, muddy and cold all the
month; the like has not been experienced here for many years. The
great suffering among the poor for the want of food, fuel, clothing
and shelter to keep them from the terribly cold weather, was
fearful. It rained steadily through the week of prayer, and we were
able to have meeting only one night.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—During the present term, a deep religious interest
has obtained among the students in Jubilee Hall. It began soon
after the opening of the fall term. New students, especially,
seemed to be deeply interested in their own spiritual welfare,
and when the opportunity presented itself, offered themselves for
prayers.

The week set apart by the International College Y. M. C. A. for
prayer was observed by the members of the association in the
Institution, in a half-hour prayer-meeting each evening. During
that week several persons were hopefully converted. The meetings
were afterward continued. Up to the time of writing fourteen
students have made a profession of their faith in Christ, and
others are inquiring.

The day of prayer for colleges was a good one. Several of the
students are doing good work among their people in this vicinity,
preaching where there is opportunity and holding prayer-meetings
in private houses, so far as they can without interference with
their studies, and with good effect both upon the people, and upon
themselves as looking forward to their future work.

FLATONIA, TEXAS.—A set of outline maps is needed for the school.
Can anyone furnish a second-hand set?

SELMA, ALA.—Rev. C. B. Curtis writes that he has been very busy
holding meetings every night since the beginning of the week of
prayer. He has been assisted by his brother from Marion and by Rev.
Mr. Hinman, of Oberlin. Thus far there have been six conversions,
a great many inquirers, and a great reviving of the members of the
church.

MEMPHIS, TENN.—Through the kindness of Judge J. O. Pierce, the
cabinet of Le Moyne Normal School has just been increased by the
addition of a fine collection of minerals and fossils, numbering
some hundreds of unusually fine specimens. A very interesting
feature of the institution, added this season, is an experimental
kitchen in which practical cookery is taught to the girls of the
school. Besides this, classes are trained in needlework, etc., a
room having been fitted up for this especial purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

License of a Minister—Severe Winter—Good Progress—Poverty.

REV. ALFRED CONNET, M’LEANSVILLE.

On the 23d of January the church licensed John M. Brooks to preach
Gospel, the license to extend till the time of the meeting of the
State Conference at this place next May. It is expected that the
Conference will be asked to examine him and renew his license. He
is industrious, economical, has good talent, is a good student,
one of our most advanced pupils, a zealous Christian, a member of
this church, and anxious to gain a thorough education, that he may
preach Christ to his fellow-men.

He has no resources but his own labor. He earned nearly but not
quite enough during vacation to carry him through this school year.
He asked my advice whether he should stay at school or go and teach
a school that is offered him. I advised him to stay while his money
lasted, believing that when that is gone the Lord will send more.
Ten dollars will meet his wants.

This has been an unusually severe winter. The colored people have
been poorly prepared for it, both in regard to comfortable houses
and clothing.

Our January communion was postponed, on account of the severe
weather, till the first Sunday in February. We are expecting some
additions to the church.

Our pupils have never made better progress. The deep snow which lay
about four weeks kept some, chiefly primary scholars, away. Those
who did come have done good work. We have among our pupils nine
teachers, several others preparing to teach, and two preparing for
the ministry.

A young lady, three miles distant, is sick with consumption. Mrs.
Connet and I called upon her Saturday. She spent a year at Hampton,
as student, and some years laboring at Waterbury, Ct., the last
sixteen months as chief cook at the St. John’s School. Her health
failed and she came home. She said she did not want to be buried
so far away from her people. She and her sister were working and
saving their wages to buy a farm for their parents, near the church
and school. Her greatest trial now is that she will have to give up
this cherished object of her life. We read and prayed with her, and
commended her to him who healeth all our diseases.

It is sad to see the sick and dying in such uncomfortable hovels.
This young lady is an invalid in a log house. In many places the
daubing is out. The floor is of rough plank, with cracks between.
The joists are partly covered with loose plank, while large spaces
are not covered at all. There is no window, and the door is left
open most of the time for light. The room is about eighteen by
twenty feet. At one end is a fire-place, which answers the double
purpose of cooking the simple fare and heating the small apartment.
The bed of the sick is at the other end.

The above, with slight variation, is a description of the houses in
which all the colored people live.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Thanksgiving Letter—Sequel to Begging Letter.

MRS. T. N. CHASE, ATLANTA.

  I confess that it is with some regret I must inform you the 26
  rooms are all furnished, for this very morning the post brought
  me these words from dear old Massachusetts: “My Willing Workers,
  a society of nearly 70 young people, earnestly desire to send
  $25 to furnish a room in response to your letter in the October
  AMERICAN MISSIONARY, but fear it is too late. * * With kindest
  wishes for abundant answers to all your begging letters, I am
  yours, sincerely,

                                                        Mrs. W.”

During the past three months so many such cheering, cordial
messages have come in response to that October call, that I’m sure
they have a mission to other hearts as well as mine.

Before ever the October MISSIONARY reached my eyes, came this
message from a tried veteran in the field who frequents the New
York office: “I think myself fortunate in seeing the advance sheets
of the MISSIONARY, and in getting the first taste of your appeal; I
think it my privilege to be the first to respond. Save me a light
and cheery room, to be named my daughter.”

A few days later came the following from one who has made thousands
of hearts glad during the past two years.

“I have just finished reading your letter in the October
MISSIONARY, and as I closed, proposed to my wife that we each
respond with $25. She, good, dear wife that she is, at once
assented, and enclosed I send you my check for $50.”

Next came an inquiry from one who had “just read” the appeal. He
had furnished a room ten years before in memory of a brother, and
now begged the privilege of naming another for a sainted sister.
His consideration for others that made him fear the furnishing of
_two_ rooms was too great a privilege to be granted to _one_, made
us question whether the millennium had not really begun.

Later comes a check, and “The money is the gift of the
Sunday-school, and they desire to have the room named for our old
pastor,——-, who was one of the early abolitionists, and lived to
see the slave made free. We feel it would give him pleasure could
he know that we remembered him in this way.”

Again from the Ladies’ Department of a Classical School “way down
in Maine.” “We number fifteen girls in our home, and are—some of
us, at least—trying to work for the same Master as you in your
Southern home. We bring our money regularly to our meetings, and
soon expect to send you the money to fit up a room for some girl
who shall in the future do good work.”

Still later, “Another of my dear Sunday-school scholars, a young
lady of twenty, for whom I’ve labored, prayed and trembled for many
long months, has been ‘born again.’ She is radiant with the new
love in her soul, and when I think how long she was indifferent
to all His entreaties, and know what an unsatisfactory life she
was leading. I cannot thank and praise Him enough who has so
transformed her. And so with the ‘song of thanksgiving’ on my lips
I offer to Him through you this memorial of love and gratitude.
Appropriate it, if you please, to the furnishing of a room in the
new wing. Name it for me, if you choose, but know assuredly it will
henceforth be to me a ‘Peniel.’”

But I must not weary you with extracts. The unwritten history of
other gifts will doubtless touch our hearts even more deeply when
revealed in the light of the Bright Hereafter.

Over 80 girls have already filled the new rooms. Next year it is
hoped still another addition will be made. If so, writing another
begging letter will be no burden while the memory of such prompt
and delightful responses remains.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Emerson Institute.

MISS EMMA R. CAUGHEY, MOBILE.

Emerson Institute, formerly occupying Blue College, which was
burned in 1876, is now in the third year of its progress and
growth, the present school building being dedicated in May, 1878.

During the years 1876-1878 the work never ceased; the workers
having put their hands to the plow did not look back nor abandon
the labor to which they had consecrated themselves. Under many
difficulties and discouragements the school did not wholly lose
its organization. For a time after the fire a small church opened
its doors for its accommodation. It was afterward removed to a
little corner grocery, which was secured and made as inviting as
possible. The third removal was to rooms in the present “Mission
Home.” Now we rejoice in a comfortable and convenient brick
building, in a very pleasant part of the city, in the midst of a
grove of pine and live-oak trees. This present year our work has
been assuming new proportions, which, although a cause for great
encouragement, involved us in new difficulties. Early in the year,
for lack of room, we were obliged to refuse forty or fifty pupils
admission to the intermediate and primary grades. In the course
of a few weeks the A. M. A. sent us another teacher, and a new
department was at once formed. But where should it find a home?
Our walls would not expand. Again the basement room of a church
near by furnished a haven, and the primary department, numbering
between seventy and eighty, has been receiving instruction there.
In the meantime, arrangements have been made for the removal of
our own Congregational church from its old site to a place by the
side of our school building, where it will be fitted up to answer
the double purpose of chapel and schoolroom; and the primary
department will find more commodious and convenient quarters, and
hope, in the course of a few weeks. Up to this time we have had
enrolled 300 pupils, under the instruction of six teachers, two of
whom are teachers in the Normal room, so that the pupils must all
be seated in four different rooms.

Many friends from the North have been generous to us this year, and
we wish to acknowledge their kind donations and express our hearty
appreciation of their gifts through the columns of the MISSIONARY.
The cow purchased with money received by Miss Boynton from various
friends at the North, has been a great luxury and comfort to us at
the Home.

One five-dollar bill given to Miss Boynton, designed especially for
table use, provided us with various essential articles: jelly cups
being exchanged for drinking glasses, a needed coffee-pot, tea-pot,
cups, saucers, etc. A set of silver teaspoons helped to supply
a deficiency. Sheets, pillowslips and towels replaced worn out
articles of prime necessity. Thus, while our personal wants have
been so thoughtfully provided for, other friends have generously
remembered the poor and needy Freedmen among whom we labor, very
many of whom are suffering for the necessities of life. Within a
week two well-filled boxes of good second-hand clothing came to
Rev. O. D. Crawford, forwarded to him by friends in Dubuque and
Waterloo, Iowa, the distribution of which has called forth tears
of gratitude, and invoked blessings on the heads of the donors
from many a poverty-stricken soul. I would that space permitted
me to depict some of the distressing needs of the poor right at
our own door, that the generous heart of the North might be opened
to relieve. I shall hope to avail myself of a future opportunity
to give a more minute account of our work, its growing needs and
opportunities.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

A Changed Home.

Miss Koons, of Tougaloo, Miss., relates the following interesting
narrative:

Two of our young men, brothers, were converted last fall term.
Their step-father was a hard drinker; their mother not a Christian.
When they returned from their Christmas vacation, one of them,
greatly troubled, told me what an unpleasant vacation they had had,
so much so, that he felt as if he could not stay, but must come
back to us. The step-father was drunk continually, and kept about
him other drunken associates, abused the mother, and by his conduct
so grieved the boys that they felt they could not endure it.

They went home in June and took charge of the farm. They held a
little prayer-meeting every Wednesday evening and Sunday morning
with the mother and step-father. They also went together to
the house of a near neighbor—a terribly wicked man—and held a
prayer-meeting with the family every Sunday afternoon. The story
of the Prodigal Son was the means of the conversion of one of the
brothers, and some weeks after his conversion he came in to ask
where it might be found in the Bible, saying, “I have been hunting
for it for two weeks, and can’t find it.” He says now, “I often
read the Bible to my mother, and explained to her that story of
the Prodigal Son, to the best of my knowledge.” During the summer
the mother was converted, afterward the step-father, and then the
neighbor for whom and with whom the boys had been praying. His face
was of joy as he told of the conversion of his mother, who “could
not bear the thought of her boys going one way and she another,”
and he exclaimed, “Oh, Miss Koons, our home is a different place
now!”

Both the boys were at work in the Sabbath-school—one at home and
the other some miles from home, and neither one missed a Sabbath
from June to the time of their return to us in November.

I hardly need tell you that they are not among the silent members
of our weekly prayer-meetings.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

Cabin, “Frame House,” and “Little Brick.”

MISS ALICE E. CARTER, NASHVILLE.

My method of work probably does not bear the merit of originality,
yet the work itself holds for me all the charm and freshness of
novelty. Day by day draws me closer to the hearts of the people;
day by day draws us together closer to that universal Heart, nearer
to the Christ whom we try to serve.

To make a beginning of visiting seemed at first a puzzling and
almost perilous matter. To attempt the mazes of the city—alleys
where one cabin differed from another cabin only in its greater or
less dilapidation without, and squalor within; to hazard a walk
across the common and bottoms through the almost impassable mud,
were equally difficult beginnings, and yet it is in these city
alleys and in the bottoms and commons outside the city limits that
the work is waiting—a harvest too great for the few laborers.

There were many ways, I soon learned, to make entrance to the homes
of the people. The halloo at the gate would immediately bring the
loud “come in,” and a simple excuse, as a wish to warm or rest, or
to inquire where such a cabin might be, would gain for me a ready
welcome. Then, with a few minutes’ chatting and close observation,
it would be an easy matter to detect the special need there.

At first I chose for my visits only the cabins, or, in the parlance
of the people, the _shanties_, but, as my work has widened, I have
often learned of need and suffering in many a “frame house,” or
“little brick.” Indeed, it seems as if the difference between those
in the cabin and those in the frame house and the little brick lies
here: the former have never _tried_ to get above their wretched
poverty; the latter _have tried_, and, with a measure of success,
still remain poor. Those in the cabins need everything—food and
clothing primarily, no doubt; but of paramount importance are their
other needs, viz., to be elevated from their sloth and indolence
and licentiousness by the forces of education and religion. Those
in the frame house and little brick need encouragement in the path
already chosen.

I was asked to visit one day in a neat brick cottage which I
should have passed many times with no suspicion of need within. On
entering, the first thing that attracted my attention was that the
walls and ceiling were entirely unfinished; the walls were the bare
bricks, and overhead were the flooring beams, and, where the walls
and ceiling met, were wide open spaces for the wind to sift up from
under the eaves. The inmates were a colored woman, unfitted for
work by age and rheumatism, and her daughter; the daughter was her
widowed mother’s only dependence, yet the poor girl was lying sick
with pneumonia, and had been two weeks without medical treatment.
They had no money, but pride kept them reticent of their affairs.
To provide medicines, and later, little delicacies; to visit the
sick girl every day and sometimes twice a day was my care for three
weeks. She is now well again, and they are independent.

I have made, up to December 31, one hundred and twenty-five calls,
and have succeeded in relieving some suffering with gifts of fuel
and food, although the little accomplished in that direction is as
one drop in the sea.

From barrels of clothing received from the North I have sold and
given a great many garments; have oftener sold, because it seems
always wiser, although the prices may be ridiculously small. This
money helps me to purchase medicine for the many sick persons.
Let me add here, that with homeopathic remedies I have had most
flattering success, always preparing the medicines myself, and
carefully renewing them until the patients, without exception so
far, are cured.

In addition to my visits, I have tried to reach the women by means
of cabin prayer-meetings, and to help the girls and young women
by the medium of sewing-schools. I have two schools in successful
operation in different parts of the city. One numbers twenty
pupils, the other nearly forty. We begin with prayer and short
Scripture reading, and then with great eagerness the girls set
about their sewing, or lesson in cutting, as the case may be. When
a garment is finished, each girl purchases her own work for a dime
or fifteen cents.

While they sew I read to them, if occasion permits, and sometimes
they sing. They have begged to meet twice a week—a fact which
proves their enthusiasm. My kind friends in Boston and Providence
have done much toward supplying me with print, gingham and cotton
cloth for my sewing-schools.

In Sunday-school work I have succeeded in drawing some strangers
into my own class at Howard Chapel, and in forming some other
classes for volunteer teachers from Jubilee Hall.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEXAS.

“The African Congregational Church” of Paris.

The origin of this church, back in the dark days of terror, in
1868, was so unique, so spontaneous, so much after the spirit and
form of the New Testament Churches, that we think it worth while to
make some record of the same. At that time the colored people were
indeed “scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd.” Separated
from the old church edifices of the white people, they had not yet
gathered themselves into their own churches. A Mr. Smith, from
Illinois, who had gone through the war as a soldier, and who had
settled in mercantile business in Jefferson, Texas, and whose life
was soon after sacrificed in the turbulence of those times, came up
through Paris lecturing to the colored people. He proposed a church
that would accommodate all the Christians, and the result was the
organization above named, with a regular constitution and covenant.
Its preamble reads thus:

“We, the ministers and members of different Christian churches,
feeling greatly embarrassed in our former church relations, and
regarding those matters of difference which divided the churches to
which we have belonged as being unimportant, mischievous in their
tendency, and in discordance with the spirit of Christianity, do
now, on this 15th day of March, 1868, unite in a new organization,
the African Congregational Church. Thankful to God, our gracious
and mighty _Redeemer_, for this right and privilege of choosing
and adopting our own church forms, ceremonies, and government, and
of worshiping God as our conscience dictates, we hereby solemnly
pledge ourselves to God and to one another that we will maintain
a Scriptural Christian character, and support such laws and
regulations founded on the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments
as shall be adopted from time to time by two-thirds of the members
of this church.”

The Constitution provides in the five articles for the election of
“discreet and faithful members” as trustees, deacons, a clerk and
treasurer, who shall pay out money only by vote of the church upon
an order from the clerk; for the use of either one of the three
modes of baptism; and for the choosing of ministers, “who shall
preside over all the deliberations of the church;” a Scriptural
plurality of preaching elders, a “presbytery” _in_, and not over
the church.

Not being acquainted with the technical term of “covenant,” they
bind themselves by five articles of “Church Fellowship.” The first
requires evidence of a Christian experience; not stopping with the
fact, of which they were not aware, that Congregationalism was, at
first, a protest against receiving unregenerate members into the
church, they go back to Acts xx., 20, 21. The third reads: “That,
trusting in the promised grace of God, we will not indulge in our
hearts, nor practice, any of these manifest works of the flesh”
(see Gal. v., 20, 21); example: adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
etc. The fourth binds them to cultivate the fruits of the Spirit
(Gal. v., 22, 23). In the fifth they bind themselves to obey the
Scriptures (1 Thess. v., 11, 12), “by studying to be quiet in doing
our own business, working with our own hands, walking honestly
toward them that are without;” and also to discharge faithfully
their Christian duties as subjects of civil law and authority in
obedience to God (Rom. xii., 1, 2).

Here is the way by which, for lack of a council (of which they
knew nothing), and for lack of authority this side of the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom they had taken as the Head of their Church, they
ordained their first presiding pastor:

“_Resolved_, That we, the members of this church, in conference
assembled, do call, set apart, and ordain our well-beloved
brother, John McAdams, as the pastor of the church, to minister
to us in spiritual things as the minister of the Gospel; that we
hereby authorize our said well-beloved brother to administer the
ordinances of baptism and the holy sacrament of the Lord’s Supper,
and to solemnize the rite of matrimony in accordance with the laws
of this State; and that our well-beloved brother be furnished with
a certified copy of this resolution.”

Four years later the church called to its aid Rev. Warren Norton,
a Congregational minister then at Brenham, Texas, in ordaining
brothers Albert Gray and Wm. Hamilton as their ministers in the
Lord. And this last fall I was permitted to participate in a
regular council for the ordination of Mr. J. W. Roberts as pastor
in that same church, and of Mr. J. W. Strong as a pastor for the
church in Corpus Christi. We had a sermon and all the other parts,
including the solemn laying on of hands in prayer; but still we
were only helping the church in a function which, in the first
place, it exercised alone with a beautiful simplicity and all
legitimate _authority_.

How has the church gotten along? Why, it ran up to a large
membership. It paid $115 in gold for a lot, and built a church. It
branched out into the Shiloh, the New Hope, and the Pattonville
African Congregational churches, in neighborhoods about, and these
four became associated in a quarterly conference. But, as the
propagandists came along, they found in the walls of the mother
church stones with old inscriptions. Baptists, African M. E.,
Campbellite, Northern M. E., and each pulled out his own and set up
churches of those several sorts, so that now the original church
building is the shabbiest of the lot, and the membership is only
an average. But still, with a high standing for character, with an
educated minister, and an educated teacher, Prof. S. W. White, with
a new and more respectable site, purchased, with the old acre and
a half to be sold, and with some members of property (two of them
large farmers) and of influence in the community, they give promise
of great usefulness, promise of realizing the expectations of the
martyr founder.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNION SUNDAY AT HAMPTON.

MISS ISABEL D. EUSTIS.

Many warm friends of Hampton have come to see her on her gala days;
have crowded into the hall decorated with flags and flowers, while
the band played a welcome, and her graduates waited to give to the
audience the fruit of their three years’ study and experience.
Perhaps some of these would like to go with the quiet company who
are walking to the little church in the Soldiers’ Cemetery, near
the close of a bright day that has fallen in the midst of weeks of
rain and storm, and join in the simple communion service of the
first Sunday in the New Year.

The afternoon sunlight slants in through the windows upon the
plain walls and benches, and lights up the dusky faces of the
colored and Indian students who fill the seats. The simple service
upon the communion table is the gift of the strong and loving
woman, who gave the best of her heart and brain to Hampton at its
start, and who kept her connection with the church she helped to
organize until she was called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.
In the seats nearest the table are six colored and eight Indian
students who begin the New Year by confessing Christ as their
Saviour. We ask ourselves, as we notice their quiet and decorous
manner, if these can be some of the strange and uncouth people
who came knocking at our doors two years ago, and as we watch the
sweet, softening expressions stealing over their faces, telling of
reverent and gentle thoughts within, we wonder still more if these
are the very faces from which once it seemed impossible to win an
answering smile.

The congregation rise and sing together in full, sweet chorus,
as only a colored audience can, “My faith looks up to thee.”
The minister reads the creed and covenant, and then the Indian
scholars, whose parents had, perhaps, hardly heard the name of
Christ, come one by one to receive the rite of baptism. As they
kneel beside the font the minister says to each, separately and
calling him by name, “Do you promise to take Jesus Christ as your
Saviour, to love him and serve him? Do you _promise_?” and the
emphatic Indian assent and little Annie’s timid “Yes, sir,” are
heard through the still church, and those who wait to hear know
that the heart’s promise has gone with the lips.

Ahuka (White Wolf) comes first for baptism. As he stands there
quiet and reverent, a sudden memory of the first time we saw and
knew him flashes across our minds. We see again the school-room,
the day after the arrival of the new pupils. They are seated
in a semi-circle around a teacher, who stands by a black-board
on which some easy English words have been written: “Stand up;
Walk; Stop; Look up;” which she has been teaching the scholars to
illustrate. On the front seat at one end sits Ahuka, a somewhat
alarming-looking pupil. His thick, shaggy, black hair bangs down to
his waist over the blanket which he holds wrapped tight about him,
while he casts now and then stealthy but keen glances from under
his heavy eyebrows.

Teacher debates for a few seconds whether to call on him for
a recitation; but concludes not to shirk, and he comes to the
board. Teacher points to the first word on the blackboard, on the
pronunciation of which she has been drilling the class, and looks
at the brave for a response. Brave looks at her, then at the word,
back again, more sharply at her, says nothing. Teacher mustn’t
expect a response in a hurry, keeps her pointer on the word and
her eye on the brave. Brave continues to transfer his glance from
the word to the teacher, till suddenly, whether in despair or rage
she cannot tell, he throws his head back, bends forward and utters
a prolonged howl. Teacher with difficulty restrains herself from
a flight down the corridor, and doesn’t question why he is called
“the Wolf.” It is no difficult task to picture him back in the
wilds of Dakota.

We think of him now: his quiet and reverent manner; the pleading
look we have learned to know in the once defiant, savage eyes,
and we pray that as he is laying aside all that was the pride
and pleasure of his savage strength he may grow (slowly he must,
but certainly he shall) into the beauty and power and glory of a
Christian manhood.

Harry Brown, Chief White Horse’s manly little son, stands by the
font now. We came near making a bad mistake about Harry. The day
that the minister had appointed to talk to the scholars who were
to unite with the church was a crisp winter one, and the creek
was covered with glittering ice. Harry went skating; almost the
first chance he’d had since he left Dakota. There was no way to
tell the time; he was having splendid fun. He stayed too long;
when he came back it was too late for the meeting. The next day,
when the minister kindly made an appointment for him by himself,
one of the first questions he asked was, “Harry, do you pray?”
“No.” “Not pray?” “No.” “Did you ever pray?” “Yes.” “And you don’t
pray now?” “No.” “Why not?” And then Harry shut himself behind his
Indian reserve and his inability to talk English, and didn’t say
anything more. It certainly didn’t look as if he was far on the
road to saint-ship. And yet if there was a boy in the school who
was commending himself by his faithful, kind and manly conduct
it was Harry Brown. What did it mean? The minister asked one of
the teachers, with whom the boy might not be so shy, to try and
find out. She dismissed the interpreter, who seemed to embarrass
him, and all her questions were answered with thoughtfulness and
earnestness till the old one came up, “Harry, the minister says you
don’t pray?” Then came the same emphatic “_No_.” “Well, Harry, this
isn’t a little thing you want to do. You are going to give yourself
to God to be His child all your life, and you say you don’t pray to
Him. It seems as if you didn’t care much about it. We think you had
better wait till the next Communion Sunday, and be sure you mean
what you are going to do.” “How long?” said Harry. “Two months.”
“Too long. Can’t wait. Must come now,” said Harry decidedly. “How
long have you been trying to do right, Harry?” “Two years.” Then
I think Harry’s good angel put a thought into the teacher’s mind.
“Harry, have you changed your room lately? Do you stay now with
those seven boys up-stairs?” “Yes.” “Is that the reason you don’t
pray? Are you ashamed?” “Yes.” “Doesn’t any boy in that room pray?”
“Just one.” “Well, if you are going to be Christ’s soldier you
have got to fight for Him sometimes when it’s hard. Will you pray
to-night?” “Yes.” And knowing that older Christians had wavered
before the same temptations, and not been more honest and brave
in acknowledging it, we forebore to shut the boy away from the
patient guidance and long suffering love which leads us all. A few
weeks afterward we asked Harry one day when the interpreter was by,
“Harry, do you pray now?” The little interpreter himself looked
up with a quick, bright smile, “All we boys in that room pray now
every night.” It was a good victory, surely, for the first one.
God grant that each of those who are now confessing Christ be kept
by Him in the temptations which will crowd them in the life to
which they must go.

The service is almost over. The bread and wine have been passed. To
each waiting heart down through its darkness to its weakness has
come the touch of the Divine Soul which is light and power.

Once more the sweet strong chorus rises, “Jesus, Lover of my Soul.”
We go out into the twilight. The young crescent and the star of
love hang in the Western sky whose glowing sunset lights are
reflected in the lovely waters, and through the heavens falls a
voice with the old word, at once reproof and inspiration, “Say not
ye, There are yet four months and then cometh the harvest. Behold,
I say unto you, Lift up your eyes and look on the fields; for they
are white already to harvest, and he that reapeth receiveth wages
and gathereth fruit unto life eternal.”

       *       *       *       *       *




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_.  MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Executive Committee of the W. H. M. A. are happy to announce
that with this number of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY and of the _Home
Missionary_, they begin a series of monthly reports of their work,
which they know will be welcomed by many. The American Missionary
Association and the American Home Missionary Society have each
generously given us the opportunity of reporting in its monthly
publication the work undertaken by us in its field. Our friends
will therefore find in the AMERICAN MISSIONARY, accounts from our
missionaries among the negroes; and in the _Home Missionary_,
reports from the West. For the courtesy which has given as this
opportunity we desire to express, thus publicly, our thanks.

Recent statements show that the present condition of our work is
not known. Five ladies are now at work in the South and West,
and two more teachers will soon go to Utah. Those already in the
field are: Miss Mary Snyder, Assistant Principal of the Academy
at Albuquerque, New Mexico; Miss Julia A. Wilson, who is working
among the colored refugees in Kansas; Miss Alice E. Carter, acting
as city missionary in Nashville, Tenn.; Mrs. Clara B. Babcock, who
is doing missionary work in connection with the colored church
recently formed in Washington, D. C.; Mrs. Almira S. Steele, who
teaches a day and Sunday-school at Almeda, S. C. Detailed accounts
of the work of each of these will be given from time to time. But,
that more work may be undertaken, we ask for larger contributions
and a wider support, for annual subscriptions and donations as well
as for auxiliary societies.

Some suggestions as to organization and management of auxiliaries
are here made in the hope that they may be helpful. In many places
the sewing society, devoted to parish work, may take in addition
the Home Mission work, if it is as agreeable to the members as
it has been found to be in many cases already. At each meeting,
some one previously appointed may communicate intelligence of Home
Mission work, while others sew.

In other places the old cent society to which our grandmothers
belonged is available as the channel for contributions.

In other places still, a wholly separate organization may be
most advisable, in which the filling of Home Mission boxes, the
collection of money for the W. H. M. A., and the communication of
intelligence as to Home Mission work may be the only objects of the
society.

The regular Woman’s Prayer Meeting might well set apart one
meeting each month where they are held weekly, or a meeting at
longer intervals when they occur less frequently; this monthly or
quarterly meeting to be devoted to prayer and conversation about
the spread of the Gospel in our own country. At these meetings a
collection may be taken and there may be a treasurer to receive
this, and an officer, either secretary or president, to preside at
the meeting. It is not necessary that these officers should serve
no other organizations, since the same person not infrequently
acts as an officer in one or more societies and keeps the business
of each by itself. It seems wise, however, whenever a sufficient
number of persons can be obtained, to have separate officers for
different organizations. The end to be attained is that there be a
definite, separate time given to praying and working for the cause
of the evangelization of our own country, and a definite, separate
contribution arranged so that each woman of the church may have
just the channel at hand by which to send her own offering for this
cause direct to its destination.

And further, may we not ask those churches that have adopted the
system of weekly offerings, known as the “Harris plan,” to put this
Association also on their list, to make this one of the channels
of distribution through which individual members of the church
show their desire and accomplish their purpose of co-operating in
Christ’s work of saving men? It is no longer—if it ever ought to
have been—the age in which Christian men and women should wait
to be stirred, to be urged, even to be invited, to give. Does
it not become each of us to find out by calculation, careful,
generous calculation, how much we can afford to the specific work
of spreading the Gospel; and then through what channels we can
best effect our object? And if this is done by all will there not
be some who will wish to send part of their funds through this
society, whose work is, directly, for the women and children of our
country?

New opportunities for work are presenting themselves almost every
week, in the new West, the South, for Indian girls, for colored
women and children. There is no quarter to which we can look that
we do not see those, dear to us by nature, and by what Christ has
done for us, waiting to be helped and to be taught; nor, as yet,
have we had any lack of those who were well fitted for the work of
teaching and helping, and anxious to go into it.

We, therefore, ask the Christian women in our churches whether,
in addition to the interest, money and prayer they are giving to
kindred societies, they do not wish to give also to this particular
work which seems at once so urgent and so promising. It requires
but small individual sums, regularly and prayerfully given, to
enable the church to pursue a vigorous and effective work in this
direction for the kingdom of Christ.

  Receipts from Oct. 15, 1880, to Jan. 1, 1881:

    From auxiliaries                                    $761.00
    From donations                                       155.08
    From life members                                    100.00
    From annual members                                   81.00
                                                       ————————
    Total                                             $1,097.08

The committee also acknowledge with thanks, the following
donations: From the Congregational Publishing Society, $19 worth
of papers and maps, and from Mr. J. L. Hommett, three large wall
maps, and from S. M. H. a movable black-board, all for the use of
Mrs. Steele at Almeda, S. C. A barrel has been sent to Miss Carter
containing new material for use in her Industrial school, and
clothing for distribution.




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


                                     6 WASHINGTON PLACE,}
                             TROY, N. Y., Dec. 31, 1880.}

Dear Mr. Hubbard: I remember your showing us the place where you
put our contributions, in the great safe on Reade St., and your
deciding where you met Aunty Lizzie before.

I will send a share of the money which we earned, for the American
Missionary Association.

This Summer I devoted one of my broods to your society. The hen’s
name was Nano: she had eight chickens. Two of them died, four
were given to Papa for the hen’s feed, and the rest were sold for
fifty-three cents.

This was this hen’s second brood.

Margaret had also a hen named Goldy, and her second brood was
devoted to your society. She stole her nest in the bushes and
hatched thirteen little, beautiful chickens;—five died, two are
kept, and the three remaining ones were sold for eighty-eight
cents. We earned money in other ways, so we each add the necessary
sum to make it two dollars.

I send much love to you, and Miss Dodge. Your Loving Little Friend,

                                                MARY F. CUSHMAN.


A CRUMB FOR THE BOYS.

A clergyman on his way to a missionary meeting overtook a boy, and
asked him about the road, and where he was going.

“Oh!” he said, “I’m going to the meeting to hear about the
missionaries.”

“Missionaries!” said the minister. “What do you know about
missionaries?”

“Why,” said the boy, “I’m part of the concern. I’ve got a
missionary-box, and I always go to the missionary meeting. I
belong.”

Now that is what we want. Every child should feel that he is “part
of the concern,” and that his work is just as important as that of
any one else. Linch-pins are little things; but, if they drop out,
the wagon is very likely to come to a stand-still. Every pin and
screw should be in working order, and every child should be able to
say, “I always go to the missionary meeting. Why, I’m part of the
concern!”—_Exchange._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JANUARY, 1881.


  MAINE, $696.91.

    Alfred. Mrs. Charlotte Dane, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            $20.00
    Alfred. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                15.54
    Bangor. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $150;
      First Cong. Sab. Sch., $14.67                          164.67
    Bethel. T. and M. E. B.                                    1.00
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      23.65
    Blanchard. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Brunswick. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $11.38;
      Marshall Cram, $10                                      21.38
    Brunswick. Box of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._
    Calais. John Barker, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Castine. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Cumberland Centre. J. W.                                   1.00
    Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch. to const. JAMES
      GRAHAM, L. M.                                           45.00
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           48.00
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    10.00
    Gilead. I. B.                                              0.51
    Hallowell. Correction.—Fannie A. Davis, $25,
      ack. in Dec. number, should read “Friends”
      by F. A. D.
    Machias. Cong. Sab. Sch., $5.36; Prayer
      Meeting Coll., $5.14; E. G. L., 50c.; U. M.
      Penniman, $5                                            16.00
    Norway. Mrs. Mary K. Frost                                 5.00
    North Yarmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         5.00
    Orland. S. E. Buck to const. MISS HANNAH T.
      BUCK, L. M.                                             30.00
    Portland. High St. Cong. Ch., $100; State St.
      Ch., $84.66; Mrs. L. D., $1                            185.66
    Richmond. Ladies of Cong. Parish, _for
      Freight_, $1; Cong. Ch., half Bbl. of C.                 1.00
    Scarborough. “A Thank Offering”                           38.00
    Skowhegan. Mrs. F. A. M., $1; M. D. P., $1                 2.00
    South Berwick. Ladies, Bbl. of C. _for
      Wilmington, N. C._
    Thomaston. Infant Class in Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      $6; Mrs. J. H., 50c.                                     6.50
    Weld. Rev. D. D. Tappan                                    2.00
    Wells. B. Maxwell                                         20.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $440.42.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch., $20.50; Miss C. M.
      Boylston, $20                                           40.50
    Amherst. Ladies U. M. Soc., $29; L. K.
      Melendy, $25, _for Student Aid, Straight U._            54.00
    Amherst. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Box of C. and
      $2, _for Freight, for Wilmington, N. C._                 2.00
    Brookline. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Concord. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      DEA. CHAS. KIMBALL, L. M.                               51.50
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        13.69
    Dover. First Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                              1.94
    Exeter. “Friends” _for Chapel, Wilmington, N.
      C._                                                      0.50
    Francestown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      REV. H. M. KELLOGG, L. M.                               34.20
    Fisherville. J. C. Martin                                 10.00
    Greenfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.05
    Greenville. E. G. Heald                                    6.00
    Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.77
    Hancock. Ladies’ Sewing Circle and The
      Cheerful Workers, Bbl of C., and $1.50 _for
      Freight, for McIntosh, Ga._                              1.50
    Hebron. J. B. C.                                           1.00
    Hillsborough Bridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   12.75
    Keene. Geo. Cook                                           5.00
    Keene. Correction:—Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of
      First Ch., Bbl. of C. acknowledged in Feb.
      number, should read, of Second Ch.
    Kensington. “Friends,” _for Chapel,
      Wilmington, N. C._                                       2.50
    Londonderry. C. S. P.                                      1.00
    Manchester. W. O. A., 50c.; I. G. M., 50c.                 1.00
    Marlborough. Ladies’ Freedman’s Aid Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              10.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch., $11.90; Mr. and Mrs.
      Harris, $10                                             21.90
    Nashua. Pilgrim Ch.                                       27.11
    Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, $5; C. C. S.,
      51c.                                                     5.51
    Pittsfield. John L. Thorndike                             10.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.50
    Rochester. Phebe J. Moody, _for furnishing
      room, Atlanta U._                                       25.00
    Sanbornton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            15.00
    Short Falls. J. W. C.                                      0.50
    Stratham. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.00
    West Lebanon. Mrs. E. L. K.                                0.50
    West Peterborough. Mrs. Lucy B. Richardson                10.00
    Wilton. Willing Workers, _for Student Aid,
      Wilmington Normal Sch._                                 15.00
    Wilton. A. B. C.                                           0.50
    Wolfborough. Rev. S. Clark                                 5.00


  VERMONT, $638.95.

    Barnet. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.00
    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                              86.66
    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                         13.06
    Bellows Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. H.
      A. TITUS, L. M.                                         36.25
    Brookfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.29
    Burlington. N. G. H.                                       1.00
    Cabot. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from Milton
      Fisher)                                                 14.02
    Chester. Penny Contributions of Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $50; “A Friend,” $15; Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $16.03; G. H. C., 60c.                            81.63
    Clarenden. Mrs. J. P.                                      1.00
    Cornwall. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 11.33
    East Hardwick. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            20.86
    Fairlee. “Friends”                                         5.00
    Felchville. M. C. F.                                       0.51
    Ludlow. N. M. P.                                           1.10
    Middlebury. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               23.53
    North Thetford. Cong. Ch., $8.56; Mrs. E. G.
      B., 50c.                                                 9.06
    Pittsford. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        44.00
    Quechee. Cong. Sab. Sch., “New Year’s Gift.”              13.40
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch., $136.45;
      South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $35                          171.45
    Sharon. Mrs. A. F., $1; S. P. F., $1                       2.00
    Thetford. Rev. L. H. Elliot                               10.00
    Townshend. Mrs. Mary Burnap, $5; Mrs. Anne
      Rice, $5; Mrs. Harvey Holbrook, $2; Mrs. W.
      C., $1; Mrs. E. H., $1; S. D. W., $1; G. P.,
      $1                                                      16.00
    Vergennes. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing
      room, Atlanta U._                                       25.00
    Weathersfield. Mrs. Edson Chamberlin                      10.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    9.80
    West Randolph. Mary and Susan E. Albin, $6; S.
      J. W., $1                                                7.00
    West Rutland. W. Newton                                    5.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $7,929.61.

    Amesbury. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Washington, D. C._
    Amherst. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $45, to
      const. MRS. ELLA M. HALL, L. M.; MRS. OLIVE
      C. STERNS, $30, to const. herself L. M.; Wm.
      M. Graves, $20; “A Friend,” $5; “A Friend,”
      $10                                                    110.00
    Amherst. “Friends,” 18 Bbls. apples and 3
      Bbls. vegetables, _for Atlanta_.
    Andover. West Parish Cong. Ch.                            29.18
    Andover. G. W. W. Dove, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Ashby. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Ashland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Ashland. Ladies Assn., Bbl. of C., _for
      Talladega C._
    Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         29.42
    Auburndale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           173.71
    Ayers Village. Mrs. E. M. C.                               0.50
    Berlin. Mrs. Mary G. Houghton                              5.00
    Barre. E. C. Sab. Sch.                                    19.58
    Boston. “Wilberforce,” _for Chapels_                   1,000.00
    Boston. “A Friend,” New Year’s Gift _for a
      Chapel_                                                300.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      by Mrs. H. M. Moore, Chairman of Finance
      Com., ($30 of which to const. MRS. HANNAH F.
      TYLER, L. M.)                                          247.91
    Boston. Cong. Pub Soc., Box of books and
      papers _for Talladega C._
    Boston. Charles Nichols. $30, to const. EDDIE
      WORTHEN, L. M.; Miss S. B. Jones, $15; Mount
      Vernon Ch., ad’l. $3; “H. B. H.,” $5; Miss
      A. P. B., 50c.                                          53.50
    Brimfield. Cong. Ch., $39.56, to const. NEWTON
      S. HUBBARD, L. M.; Second Cong. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., $15                                               54.56
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                          104.20
    Cambridge. A. E. Hildreth, $100; Mrs. A. G.,
      $1; Miss R. L. McP., $1; F. C. S., $1                  103.00
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch. and Soc.,
      $109.09; “Cash,” $25; G. B. C., $1; V. D.,
      50c.; A. A. P., 50c.                                   136.09
    Charlton. Rev. W. C. Fiske                                 2.00
    Chelmsford. “A Friend.”                                    5.00
    Chester. Rev. A. E. T.                                     0.50
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.00
    Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       12.78
    Coleraine. Mrs. Wm. B. McG.                                1.00
    Dalton. Hon. Z. M. Crane                                 100.00
    Dalton. Mrs. J. B. Crane, _for Indian M.,
      Hampton Inst._                                         100.00
    Danvers. J. F. Fuller, 5 Bbls. apples, _for
      Atlanta_.
    Dorchester. Mrs. Susan Collins, $5; Second
      Cong. Sab. Sch., $2                                      7.00
    East Berkshire. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    East Douglas. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          61.29
    East Longmeadow. Mrs. G. W. C., $1; E. M., $1              2.00
    East Medway. First Ch. of Christ                          14.00
    Essex Co. “Howard,” _for Repairs, Talladega C._          100.00
    Everett. A Friend                                         10.00
    Fall River. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc., $14; M.
      E., $1; C. E. F., 50c.                                  15.50
    Fairhaven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    Fitchburgh. Mrs. Wm. Hubbard, $10; “A Friend,”
      $5                                                      15.00
    Florence. Mrs. I. G. Jewett                                1.50
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                        157.88
    Framingham. Young People’s Soc., by Alice
      Hastings, $25, and Box of C., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         61.93
    Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. ALEXANDER PETTIGREW, JOHN K. DUSTIN,
      JR., and JERGEN C. OVERBECK, L. M’s.                   110.00
    Grafton. Evan. Sab. Sch., Box of Books
    Grafton. Ladies Sew. Circle, Bbl. of C., _for
      Atlanta_.
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $100 to const. C. W. BALDWIN, A. W. SELKIRK,
      and I. R. PRINDLE, L. M’s.; Mrs. L. M.
      Chapin, $5                                             105.00
    Greenwich Village. Daniel Parker                           2.00
    Groton. Rev. Darwin Adams                                 10.00
    Hadley. First Ch. and Soc., $8.16; and Sab.
      Sch., $7.67                                             15.83
    Hampden. W. B. S.                                          1.00
    Hardwick. C. A. W.                                         1.00
    Haverhill. West Cong. Ch. and Soc., $17.81;
      and Sab. Sch. (Eben Webster’s Class), $3.24;
      Mrs. L. P. F., 50c.; E. W., 50c.; Mrs. S.
      C., 50c.; C. C., 51c.                                   23.06
    Haverhill. Mrs. Mary Ann Chase ($5 of which
      _for Indian M._)                                        10.00
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.86
    Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch. ($200 of which
      from Bequest of E. N. H., and $50 from E. E.
      H.), $322.01; Mrs. C. Thayer, $5                       327.01
    Holden. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta,
      Ga._
    Holliston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      $20; Band of Helpers, $5.25; Other Sources,
      $1.75; _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                    36.00
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4.”             25.00
    Hopkinton. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $90.04;
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., Mon. Con. Coll., $11.85            102.09
    Housatonic. W. G.                                          0.50
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         38.63
    Ipswich. Limebrook Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    Lawrence. Lawrence Cong. Ch.                              95.00
    Lee. M. A. H.                                              1.00
    Leicester. Mrs. M. A. S. and Miss A. G. L.,
      50c. each; Cong. Sab. Sch., Pkg. of papers               1.00
    Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   19.17
    Lexington. G. S.                                           0.50
    Lincoln. “Friends,” 24 Bbls. apples, _for
      Atlanta_.
    Lowell. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $90.10; M.
      C., $1                                                  91.10
    Lowell. “A Friend,” _for Emerson Inst._                    2.00
    Lowell. Miss Puffer, Box of C., _for
      Talladega_.
    Lynn. B. V. French, $25; Central Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $20                                               45.00
    Mansfield. P. M. E.                                        1.00
    Malden. Mrs. Valeria G. Stone, by Trustees             1,292.05
    Medway. E. M.                                              5.00
    Merrimac. John K. Sargent, $2; Chas. N.
      Sargent, $2                                              4.00
    Middleborough. Mrs. G. H. D., $1; E. B. E.,
      50c.                                                     1.50
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $61.46;
      Mary E. Bond, $7.25                                     68.71
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Millbury. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      furnishing room, Atlanta U._                            25.00
    Mill River. Miss M. R. Wilcox                             10.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch., $19; Mrs. Dewey’s Sab. Sch.
      Class, $6, _for furnishing room, Atlanta U._            25.00
    Monson. Two Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                9.00
    Monterey. Young Ladies’ Sew. Soc., by Amelia
      A. Bidwell, _for Ed. of Indians, Hampton,
      Va._                                                    10.00
    Natick. Mrs. S. E. Hammond                                10.00
    Newburyport. Leavitt Lincoln, $10; Miss S. N.
      B., 50c.                                                10.50
    Newburyport. “Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. H. W.                                    1.00
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         243.64
    Newton. “Friends,” 11 Bbls. Apples, _for
      Atlanta_.
    Newton. “Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc.,” by
      Ellen D. Jackson, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $13.73; Mrs. W. T. W., 50c.                             14.03
    Newton Highlands. Sunday Sch., by E. W. B.,
      _for freight_                                            7.85
    North Amherst. Miss Harrington, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       12.00
    Northampton. “A Friend,” $100; “Member of
      first Cong. Ch.,” $5                                   105.00
    Northbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            3.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                20.00
    Norfolk. Friends, 18 Bbls. Apples, _for
      Atlanta_.
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $6.25, and
      Sab. Sch., $20                                          26.25
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch., $31.50; First Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $18; L. Shumway, $10                         59.50
    Paxton. Ella Rowell, _for Freight_                         1.60
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $35.35;
      H. A. B., 50c.; Mrs. H. M. Hurd, a
      Comfortable                                             35.85
    Plymouth. Pilgrimage Ch. and Soc., $50.18;
      Mrs. C. W. P., 50c.                                     50.68
    Reading. Old South Ch. and Soc., $12.50; A. T.
      H., 50c.                                                13.00
    Reading. Bethesda Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    Reading. Rev. W. H. Willcox, D. D. and Wife,
      _for furnishing rooms, Atlanta U._                      50.00
    Rockland. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     25.00
    Royalston. “A Friend”                                      1.00
    Salem. A. and M. B., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            1.00
    Salem. Individuals, _for Mag._                             2.70
    Sherborn. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                1.00
    Somerville. Prospect Hill Ch. and Soc., $5.56;
      Miss M. C. Sawyer, $2; “A Friend,” $1.25;
      Mrs. H. T. S., 50c.                                      9.31
    Southampton. Miss E. L. S.                                 0.60
    South Boston. Miss J. A.                                   0.50
    South Deerfield. Mrs. M. B. R.                             0.50
    South Egremont. “A Friend” to const. REV.
      ALLEN F. DECAMP, L. M.                                  30.00
    South Hadley. H. M.                                        1.00
    South Weymouth. Union Ch. and Soc., to const.
      JOHN A. FOGG, L. M.                                     30.00
    South Weymouth. Miss Grover’s Class in Second
      Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      7.00
    Springfield. Mrs. R. K., $1; Mrs. R. C. H., $1             2.00
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.25
    Sutton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $21.50; Mrs.
      M. H. L., $1                                            22.50
    Topsfield. Richard Price, _for furnishing
      rooms, Atlanta U._                                      50.00
    Tewksbury. North Ch., $5 and 2 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          5.00
    Uxbridge. W. J.                                            1.00
    Walpole. Lowell Mann, 4 Bbls. apples and 1
      Bbl. cranberries, _for Atlanta_.
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $88.39; L.
      A. S., 50c.                                             88.89
    Ware. C. C. Hitchcock, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     25.00
    Watertown. Phillip’s Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Talladega_.
    Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             27.03
    Wellesley. May Chase, _for furnishing room,
      Atlanta U._                                             12.50
    Westborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc., (Mon. Coll.)             22.69
    Westborough. Ladies’ Freedman’s Aid Soc., Bbl.
      of bedding _for Atlanta U._
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Miss. Assn., Bbl. of
      C., _for Savannah_.
    West Boylston. Willing Workers, $25; _for
      Student Aid, Storr’s Sch., and_ $25 _for
      furnishing a room, Atlanta U._                          50.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., (of which
      $10 _for Indian M._)                                    42.00
    Westminster. “E. A. W.”                                    5.00
    West Newbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $17;
      J. C. Carr, $2.50                                       19.50
    Whitinsville. Cong. Sab. Sch., $27.39; A. F.
      W., 50c.; Mrs. S. A. D., 50c.                           28.39
    Whitinsville. Mrs. J. C. Whitin, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      30.00
    Williamsburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          48.80
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., _for Atlanta U._                 3.00
    Winchendon. Mrs. M. D. B.                                  1.00
    Woburn. Cong. Sab. Sch., $120; Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $27.81; William Temple, $5; G. A. B.,
      $1; “S. B. Soc.,” by E. A. E., $2, _for
      freight_                                               155.81
    Worcester. Ladies of Plymouth Ch., $11.50; and
      2 Bbls. of C., _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     11.50
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch.                             100.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            8.00
    —— B. Sanford, Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo_.
    —— Unknown Source, Bbl. of C.
                                                           ————————
                                                          $7,399.61
    LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of Rebecca I. Gilman, by Hannah
      E. Gilman, Ex.                                         185.00
    West Medway. Estate of Lucy M. Clark                     340.00
    Lancaster. Interest, Legacy of Sophia Stearns,
      by Wm. M. Wyman, Ex.                                     5.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $7,929.61


  RHODE ISLAND, $91.51.

    Barrington. Cong. Ch., $36.88, and Sab. Sch.,
      $23.20                                                  60.00
    Little Compton. United Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 25.00
    Pawtucket. Mrs. R. B., 51c.; Mrs. R. R., 50c.              1.01
    Providence. S. L. H.                                       0.50
    Westerly. Mrs. Emeline Smith                               5.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,862.64.

    Bridgeport. J. B.                                          1.00
    Bristol. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  20.00
    Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                     15.61
    Burnside. Miss E. S.                                       0.50
    Cobalt. Mrs. Lewis Taylor                                  2.00
    Colchester. Mrs M. J. G.                                   0.50
    Collinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17.20
    Cornwall. First Cong. Ch.                                 17.00
    Cromwell. “Friends,” _for furnishing room,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                       23.00
    Deep River. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $32.73, to
      const. DEA. JABEZ SOUTHWORTH, L. M.; “J.,”
      Thank Offering, $4                                      36.73
    Durham. G. Newton                                          5.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Quar. Coll.; ($75 of
      which from Henry D. Hawley, _for General
      Purposes_, and $50 _for Tillotson Inst._)              169.23
    Glastonbury. Wm. S. Williams                             100.00
    Grassy Hill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           14.00
    Greenfield Hill. Cong. Ch., Bbl. Dried Apples,
      _for Talladega C._
    Greenwich. Miss Sarah Mead                                50.00
    Groton. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch., $21.05; Eli
      Parmelee, $10                                           31.05
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford, $50; Jos. W.
      Hungerford, $50; Cong. Ch., $4.80                      104.80
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., $385.23; Mrs.
      Mary C. Bemis, $20; Windsor Av. Cong. Ch.,
      $11.73; Mrs. Joseph Terry, $5                          421.96
    Hartford. O. D. Case & Co., Box of Wall Maps
      _for Talladega C._
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           35.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch. (50c. of which _for
      Refugees in Kansas_)                                    10.50
    Lebanon. Exeter Cong. Ch.                                 10.58
    Manchester. E.A. B.                                        0.50
    Mansfield Centre. Miss L. S., $1; Mrs. E. M.
      S. T., $1, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               2.00
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                               6.93
    Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                  15.36
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                 5.50
    Moodus. Master Amasa Day Chaffee, proceeds of
      Garden for the year 1880                                 3.00
    Morris. F. L.                                              0.50
    New Hartford. Bible Class, by Rev. F. H.
      Adams, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                        5.00
    New Haven. “A Friend,” $50; Third Cong. Ch.,
      $20.75; W. A. L., 60c.; G. Johnson, $2; M.
      N., $1; Mrs. U., $1; Individuals, _for
      Mag._, $1; E. A. P., $1                                 77.35
    New London. Second Cong. Ch.                             618.41
    New London. “A Friend,” _for Talladega C._,
      and to const. REV. EDWARD W. BACON, L. M.               30.00
    Newtown. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Northford. C. F.                                           0.50
    North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett                            19.50
    North Stamford. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch., $60.97, to const.
      GEO. B. ST. JOHN and H. B. WIGHAM, L. M’s;
      Mrs. Wm. B. St. John, $3                                63.97
    Norwich. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Norwich Town. “Member of First Cong. Ch.,”
      $38; S. H. P., 50c.                                     38.50
    Old Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                 19.90
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          6.56
    Plainfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               10.00
    Plantsville. Hattie Higgins, $25; Ladies’
      Soc., $25, _for furnishing rooms, Atlanta U._           50.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       15.50
    Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Putnam. Sab. Sch. Class, by W. P. White, Sec.,
      $15.50; Miss H., 50c.                                   16.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      57.03
    South Norwalk. Mrs. G. P. A.                               0.60
    Stafford Springs. F. J. Chandler                           5.00
    Terryville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           70.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from “A
      Friend”)                                                36.20
    Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.38
    Unionville. Ladies’ Soc., by Miss Belle B.
      Dunham, $18.04, and Bbl. of C., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      18.04
    Vernon Depot. Sab. Sch., by C. D. Tucker, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 9.00
    Washington. F. A. F.                                       1.00
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. RUTH M.
      ATWOOD and FRANK LOVELAND, L. M’s.                      63.25
    West Suffield. “A Friend.”                                 2.00
    Winsted. Mrs. Mary A. Mitchell, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Wolcottville. L. Wetmore                                 100.00
    Woodbury. Mrs. E. L. Curtiss                              10.00
    —— “A Friend.”                                            25.00
    —— “A Friend of the Needy”                                17.50
                                                           ————————
                                                          $2,612.64
    LEGACY.

    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven,
      _for Talladega C._                                     250.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $2,862.64


  NEW YORK, $1,226.03.

    Bangor. Cong. Ch.                                         21.00
    Bangor. Mrs. L. K., 50c.; Mrs. H. T., 50c.                 1.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend,” _for a Teacher_                     30.00
    Brooklyn. Church of the Pilgrims, (ad’l), $20;
      “A Friend,” $5; Mrs. Rev. Geo. Hollis, $2;
      J. A. S., $1                                            28.00
    Binghamton. Sheldon Warner                                10.00
    Brier Hill. O. J.                                          0.50
    Canastota. E. B. Northrop, $5; Mr. and Mrs. R.
      H. Childs, $5                                           10.00
    Centreville. Mrs. Jerusha Higgins                          2.00
    Chataugay. Joseph Shaw                                     5.00
    Coxsackie. Rev. Matthias Lusk                              5.00
    Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                     5.00
    Fulton. J. C. Galispie, $10; Almon Bristol,
      $5; T. W. Chesebro, $5; Dea. F. S., 50c.                20.50
    Greigsville. Mrs. Sarah J. Palmer, $2; Mrs. H.
      A. G., $1; Miss L. A. G., $1                             4.00
    Hamilton. Correction—Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
      ack. in Jan. number, should read, Sab. Sch.
      of Second Cong. Ch.
    Hudson. Mrs. D. A. Jones                                  15.00
    Hume. Mrs. L. H. P.                                        1.00
    Ithaca. Miss Jennie Stebbins, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00
    Jamesport. Friends, by Rev. T. N. Benedict                15.00
    Kingsborough. J. W.                                        1.00
    Livonia. Geo. Jackman, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              8.50
    Livonia. Mrs. Rachel Calvert, $5; Miss Matilda
      Jackman, $5; _for Storrs School, Atlanta,
      Ga._                                                    10.00
    Locust Valley. Mrs. Sarah Palmer ($1 of which
      _for Woman’s Work for Woman_)                            6.00
    Ludlowville. S. S. Todd                                    5.00
    Marcellus. Mrs. L. H.                                      1.00
    Marion. “A Friend,” _for Woman’s Work for
      Woman_                                                   1.00
    Middletown. Geo. Wickham, Bbl. of Apples;
      Lewis Wisner, Bbl. of Apples.
    Middlesex. Lester and Emma J. Adams                       10.00
    Nassau. Isaac O. Rankin                                    5.00
    Newburgh. J. H. Corwin, pkg. reading matter
    New York. S. T. Gordon, $250; Z. Stiles Ely,
      $250; Broadway Tabernacle Sab. Sch. Miss.
      Soc., $50; E. R. Dillingham, $25; “X. Y.
      Z.,” $10 and package of Maps; J. A. V. A.,
      60c.                                                   585.60
    New York. Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., _for
      furnishing room, Atlanta, U._                           25.00
    Orient. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   25.00
    Otisco Valley. Mrs. O. S. Frisbie, deceased,
      by I. T. Frisbie                                        50.00
    Penn Yan. E. W. Mills                                     10.00
    Perry Centre. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., $12.25, and
      Bbl. of C., by Miss Belle Sheldon, Treas.               12.25
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Poughkeepsie. Mrs. M. J. M.                                0.51
    Rochester. Gen. A. W. Riley                               25.00
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Sherburne. Chas. A. Fuller, _for Talladega C._            25.00
    Syracuse. W. E. Abbott, $50; Miss C. W., $1               51.00
    Troy. E. C. S.                                             1.00
    Troy. Mary F. and Margaret Cushman, earnings
      in raising chickens and from other sources               2.00
    Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan, $10; Mrs.
      Fanny D. Duncan, $10                                    20.00
    Walton. First Cong. Ch.                                   67.17
    Walton. C. S. Fitch, _for Mendi M._                        5.00
    Watkins. Mrs. E. S. M., $1; Miss E. D., $1                 2.00
    West Camden. E. M. H.                                      1.00
    West Chazy. Daniel Bassett                                 5.00
    Windsor. Mrs. Julia Woodruff, $2; Rev. J. S.
      P., $1                                                   3.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             50.00


  NEW JERSEY, $39.70.

    Camden. Mrs. J. T. Crane                                   2.00
    Fairview. D. D. Anderson                                   5.00
    Newark. Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, $20; Mrs. L.,
      60c.; Mrs. M., 60c.                                     21.20
    Newfield. Rev. Chas. Wiley                                10.00
    Paterson. Mrs. E. F.                                       1.00
    Roseville. J.C.                                            0.50


  PENNSYLVANIA, $27.96.

    Allentown. Rev. C. M.                                      0.50
    Canton. H. Sheldon                                         5.00
    Cherry Ridge. Miss M. D.                                   1.00
    Erie. Carrie Sprague, _for Ind. Dept., Le
      Moyne Sch._                                              2.00
    Kenneth Square. H. M. D.                                   1.00
    Minersville. First Cong. Ch.                               7.61
    Philadelphia. C. E. B.                                     0.50
    Philadelphia. Sab. Sch. Union, Pkg. Papers,
      _for Talladega C._
    West Alexander. Ladies, $10.35, and 2 Bbls. of
      C., _for Atlanta, Ga._                                  10.35


  OHIO, $1,346.40.

    Ashland. Mrs. Eliza Thomson                                2.28
    Bellefontaine. Mr. and Mrs. John Lindsay, _for
      Refugees in Kansas_                                     10.00
    Berea. James S. Smedley                                    5.00
    Braceville. S. P. I.                                       1.00
    Bristolville. Mrs. Fansler, Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo_
    Bryan. S. E. Blakeslee                                     5.50
    Chippewa. M. S. F.                                         1.00
    Cleveland. Franklin Ave. Cong. Ch., $13.25;
      Mrs. Charlotte Ruggles, $2; C. B. Ruggles,
      $2; Mrs. C. W. R., $1                                   18.25
    Columbus. Mrs. P. L. Alcott                                5.00
    Conneaut. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  9.16
    Cuyahoga Falls. G. S., $1; J. B. H., $1; J. A.
      V., $1                                                   3.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                             40.00
    Findlay. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   8.60
    Galion. Mrs. E. C. Linsley                                 3.00
    Geneva. Mrs. S. Kingsbury, $10; Wm. C. Sexton,
      $2                                                      12.00
    Geneva. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo_.
    Heart’s Grove. T. R.                                       0.50
    Hilliard. E. McC.                                          0.50
    Kent. Sab. Sch. Children, Cong. Ch.                        4.50
    Kinsman. Rev. H. D. K.                                     0.50
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           25.33
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $20,
      _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._, and $20 _for
      Ch. and Sch. building for Refugees in Kansas_           40.00
    Marysville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid_             5.00
    Medina. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            7.00
    Mount Vernon. First Cong. Ch., to const. C. G.
      COOPER, F. L. FAIRCHILD, REV. R. T. HALL,
      MRS. T. W. LINSTEAD, CHARLES COOPER, L. M’s            161.25
    North Benton. Mrs. Margaret J. Hartzel                     5.00
    North Fairfield. H. E. S.                                  0.50
    Oberlin. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                               75.00
    Oberlin. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta,
      Ga._
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., $27; Harris Lewis,
      $5; B. F. W., 50c.                                      32.50
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch., $24.22; Mrs. L.
      S., $1; E. L., 50c.; Mrs. E. M., $1                     26.72
    Painesville. R. Hitchcock (First Cong. Ch.),
      _for Lady Missionary, Athens, Ala._                    700.00
    Parisville. Rev. D. D.                                     0.50
    Radnor. Troedshewdalar Ch.                                 6.00
    Ravenna. Cong. Ch., _for Ladies’ Hall,
      Tougaloo U._                                            29.70
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch. (ad’l), to const. FRANCIS
      P. BICKFORD, L. M.                                      23.50
    Rootstown. Friends, Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo_.
    Ruggles. H. T.                                             0.50
    Salem. Asa W. Allen, to const. Mrs. THEDA E.
      ALLEN, L. M.                                            30.00
    Savannah. J. A. Patterson                                  5.00
    Seville. Julia Hulburt                                     5.00
    Sharonville. J. H.                                         1.00
    Sicily. S. W. Huggins, $7; J. F. Cumberland, $3           10.00
    Strongsville. Elijah Lyman                                10.00
    Sulphur Springs. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo_.
    Tallmadge. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $2; Friends,
      _for Freight_, $2.60                                     4.60
    Unionville. Mrs. H. B. Fraser, _for Woman’s
      Work for Woman_                                         10.00
    Wellington. A. H. A.                                       0.51
    Welshfield. Mrs. S. P.                                     1.00
    Willoughby. Mrs. C. A. G.                                  1.00


  INDIANA, $18.05.

    Elkhart. Cong. Ch.                                         7.55
    Madison. G. W. Southwick                                   5.00
    Versailles. John B. Rebuck, $3; J. D. Nichols,
      $2.50                                                    5.50


  ILLINOIS, $1,073.75.

    Aurora. Mrs. J. H.                                         1.00
    Chicago. New England Cong. Ch., $10 (ad’l),
      Mon. Con., $15.83; First Cong. Ch., Mon.
      Con., $22.71; E. Rathburn, $10.50; Mrs. J.
      H. McArthur, $5; J. H. P., $1; Mrs. J. M.
      S., $1                                                  66.04
    Chicago. Ladies of Union Park Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                          25.00
    Chicago. Warner Smeenk, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Cobden. E. W. Towne                                        2.00
    Crescent. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Dixon. “A Friend of Missions,” $150; C. A.
      Davis, $5                                              155.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                   10.92
    Evanston. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of C.; Pres. Ch., 2
      Bbls. of C., _for Talladega_.
    Galesburg. First Church of Christ, $35.75;
      Mrs. H. S. H., $1                                       36.75
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), $123.63;
      Mrs. Lucy B. Perry, $5; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      $28.20                                                 156.83
    Geneseo. “Band of Sisters,” Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              50.00
    Hamlet. L. C.                                              1.00
    Henry. Cong. Ch. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                       15.00
    Ivanhoe. G. B.                                             0.50
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch. to const. REV. J. F. LOBA
      and MRS. L. M. B. LOBA, L. M’s                          78.86
    Kewanee. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Liberty Co., Ga._, by Mrs. C. C.
      Cully                                                   20.00
    Lisbon. Dr. G. K.                                          0.50
    Morrison. Cong. Ch.                                       25.00
    Naperville. Cong. Ch.                                     10.50
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch.                                       62.80
    Park Ridge. Rev. L. P. Sabin                               2.00
    Paxton. “A Friend.”                                       10.00
    Plymouth. L. A. Cook                                      10.00
    Port Byron. Ladies’ Mission Circle, $5.25;
      Emma Hollister, $2                                       7.25
    Providence. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary,
      Liberty Co., Ga._, for Mrs. C. C. Cully                 10.00
    Rosemond. Mrs. B. A. P.                                    0.50
    Seward. Cong. Ch., Rev. E. F. Wright                       5.00
    Sycamore. A. S.                                            0.50
    Sparta. Bryce Crawford, $5; P. B. Gault, $2;
      J. R. A., $1; J. H., $1; R. H. R., $1; D. P.
      B., $1; J. G., $1                                       12.00
    Tonica. J. C. Heywood                                      5.50
    Wauponsee Grove. Cong. Ch.                                 4.00
    Weathersfield. Cong. Ch., $2; Mr. and Mrs. A.
      B. Kellogg, $5                                           7.00
    Wilmette. Cong. Ch., $7.30, Miss C. B., 50c.               7.80
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       9.50
                                                           ————————
                                                            $823.75
    LEGACY.

    Galesburg. Mrs. W. C. Willard, by Prof. T. R.
      Willard, Ex.                                           250.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,073.75


  MICHIGAN, $348.98.

    Armada. Cong. Ch.                                         16.00
    Assyria. Mrs. M. B., $1; Mrs. D. H., 25c.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          1.25
    Battle Creek. “Friends,” $1.10; C. A., $1;
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          2.10
    Blissfield. Pres. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.52
    Birmingham. Mrs. A. D. S., $1; J. McC., 50c.               1.50
    Calumet. Miss. Soc., by E. T. Curtiss, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              20.00
    Charlotte. Ladies, 2 Bbls. of C., _for
      Talladega_.
    Clio. Cong. Ch.                                           10.00
    Covert. Cong. Ch., $13.91; F. C., $1                      14.91
    Detroit. Pres. Sab. Sch., Thanksgiving
      offering, _for Repairs, Talladega C._                   25.00
    Detroit. Individuals, by N. A. E. Nutting, $2;
      J. C. H., 50c.                                           2.50
    Dexter. Dennis Warner                                     10.00
    Frankfort. First. Cong. Ch.                                2.29
    Galesburgh. W. Whitford, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett                                1.50
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                       4.14
    Ludington. Ellen C. Shaw                                   4.00
    Olivet. Wm. B. Palmer, $100, _for
      Encyclopedias_; Young Ladies of Ladies’
      Hall, Box of C. and $1.25, _for Freight, for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                             101.25
    Otsego. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Owasso. Cong. Ch.                                         51.52
    Pontiac. Jackson Voorhies                                  2.00
    Romeo. Miss S. S. Clarke                                  10.00
    Stanton. First Cong. Ch.                                  14.50
    Union City. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               17.00
    Union City. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Talladega
      C._


  WISCONSIN, $333.06.

    Appleton. MRS. MINA PFENNING, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           50.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., $32; Second Cong. Ch.
      Sab. Sch., $10.75 _for Talladega C._                    42.75
    Beloit. Second Cong. Ch., $8.41; W. P., 51c.               8.92
    Brandon. Busy Bees, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                     12.00
    Evansville. N. W.                                          1.00
    Fond du Lac. H. S. M.                                      0.50
    Geneva. D. L. H., 50c.; Mrs. D. A. B., 50c.                1.00
    Geneva Lake. Presb. Ch., $20.24; W. H. H., 50c.           20.74
    Liberty. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Mazo Manie. R. L.                                          1.00
    Milwaukee. Rev. H. D. Kitchell                            10.00
    New Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                    8.60
    Ripon. Cong. Ch.                                          54.52
    Salem. William Munson $50; F. W. Munson, $4.42            54.42
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           3.10
    Whitewater. Cong. Ch.                                     60.31
    Wilmot. Cong. Ch.                                          2.20


  IOWA, $422.89.

    Bellevue. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 5.00
    Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                    106.32
    Clay. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans_                                                 1.50
    Clinton. Cong. Ch., to const. WM. RUSSELL, L.
      M.                                                      30.00
    Crawfordsville. J. A. A.                                   1.00
    Des Moines. Mrs. A. W. Rollins, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00
    Grand Junction. J. T.                                      1.00
    Grinnell. “F. P. B.,” $6; Mrs. A. S. Smith,
      4.50                                                    10.50
    Grinnell. Prof. H. W. Parker, _for Talladega
      C._                                                      5.00
    Grinnell. S. H. Herrick’s Sab. Sch. Class,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          5.00
    Grinnell. Mrs. C. Hobart, Sewing Machine, _for
      Le Moyne Sch._
    Hampton. “Four Sisters of Cong. Ch.”                       3.00
    Keokuk. Cong. Ch., $50.29; Mrs. R. A. W., 50c.            50.79
    Marion. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary in New Orleans_                              10.40
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc., bal. to const.
      MRS. D. D. FRASER, L. M.                                19.71
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc., Box of C., val.
      $23.68, _for New Orleans, La._
    Muscatine. Cong. Sab. Sch., $20; Mrs. Cora L.
      Weed, $5, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._               25.00
    Oskaloosa. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                10.00
    Orchard. Cong. Ch.                                         5.10
    Osage. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                                  4.52
    Sherrills Mount. Rev. Jacob Reuth                          2.00
    Tabor. “Friend,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._           20.00
    Waterloo. Leavitt & Johnson, _for Talladega C._           25.00
    Waterloo. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           26.00
    Waterloo. Mrs. W. W. F.                                    0.50
    Iowa. Postville, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $3;
      Decorah, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $10; Ceresco,
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $5.15; McGregor,
      Woman’s Miss. Soc., $12.40; Lansing, Woman’s
      Miss. Soc., $2; Waucoma, Woman’s Miss. Soc.,
      $2; Lawler, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1;
      Garnaville, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1;
      Fayette, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1; Elkader,
      Mrs. Mary H. Carter, $3; Marshalltown, Young
      People’s Miss. Soc., $5; _by Mrs. Henry L.
      Chase, Green Mountain, for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       45.55


  MISSOURI, $77.46.

    Kirksville. J. S. Blackman                                10.00
    Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                              67.46


  KANSAS, $44.01.

    Leavenworth. Mrs. A. E. H.                                 0.51
    Manhattan. Cong. Sab. Sch., $17.50; M. P., 50c.           18.00
    Meriden. J. Rutty                                         10.00
    Olathe. Rev. W. W. McM.                                    1.00
    Topeka. H. N. F.                                           1.00
    Wyandotte. First Cong. Ch.                                13.50


  MINNESOTA, $555.06.

    Austin. Cong. Union Ch.                                   26.50
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Fairibault. Cong. Ch.                                     23.40
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch., $1.62; “Two Friends,” $2            3.62
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $28.71; Second
      Cong. Ch., $2.40; J. G. N., 50c.                        31.61
    Minneapolis. Rev. E. M. Williams, _for
      furnishing rooms, Atlanta U._                           50.00
    Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           40.00
    Northfield. J. W. S., $1; A. L., 51c.                      1.51
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                       13.81
    St. Paul. Plymouth Ch.                                    48.60
    Wabasha. Cong. Ch.                                         9.50
    Wadena. J. K.                                              0.51
    Waseca. “C. and K.”                                       12.00
    Waseca. “Friends” ($150 _of which for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._)                                      250.00
    Winona. First Cong. Ch., to const. H. M.
      KINNEY, L. M.                                           30.00


  CALIFORNIA, $418.25.

    Santa Cruz. Pliny Fay                                     10.00
    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                        408.25


  OREGON, $10.00.

    Canyon City. E. S. Penfield                               10.00


  DAKOTA, $2.00.

    Dakota. Mrs. M. S. Wells                                   2.00


  NEBRASKA, $34.80.

    Nebraska City. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                          3.00
    Ponca. G. H. S.                                            1.00
    Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                  15.80
    York. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._           15.00


  COLORADO, $3.00.

    Colorado Springs. Edward Hildreth                          3.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $2.00.

    Washington. “Little Rills of Llensmary,” by
      Rev. M. P. Snell                                         2.00


  TENNESSEE, $460.75.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        150.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne School, Tuition                        186.25
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      114.50
    Nashville. Prof. F. A. Chase                              10.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $106.25.

    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition                       106.25


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $325.25.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         325.25


  GEORGIA, $674.61.

    Athens. Wm. A. Pledger, _for furnishing room,
      Atlanta U._                                             17.00
    Atlanta. Atlanta University, Tuition                     230.50
    Atlanta. Storrs School, Tuition                          219.01
    Atlanta. Prof. T. N. Chase, _for furnishing
      room, A. U._                                            12.50
    Atlanta. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid_                     5.50
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           60.85
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $107.75; Rent,
      $10                                                    117.75
    Savannah. Rev. B. D. Conkling                             10.00
    Savannah. Rev. J. H. H. S., _for Talladega C._             1.00
    Spoonville. M. B. C.                                       0.50


  ALABAMA, $505.55.

    Marion. R. A. M.                                           0.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $226.05; Cong.
      Ch., 60c.                                              226.65
    Mobile. Mothers’ Missionary Assn., _for Mendi
      M._, by Mrs. O. D. Crawford                              3.50
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Selma. Rev. C. B. Curtiss, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.45
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition                     97.45


  MISSISSIPPI, $48.20.

    Bolton’s Depot. E. E. S.                                   0.50
    Jackson. S. Lemly & Son, _for Ladies’ Hall,
      Tougaloo U._                                            20.00
    Jackson. A. W.                                             0.50
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U.                                     27.20


  LOUISIANA, $104.25.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition                104.25


  TEXAS, $3.75.

    Centennial. N. C. W.                                       0.25
    Goliad. J. R. S. H.                                        0.50
    Helena. Children of Busy Bee Mission Circle,
      $2; G. H., 50c.; D. D., 50c.                             3.00


  INCOME FUND, $77.

    —— Town of Greenwich, N. Y., _for Straight U._            35.00
    —— Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             42.00


  DOMINION OF CANADA, $33.

    Caledonia. A. C. Buck                                      2.00
    Guelph. First Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Orangeville. Rev. J. H.                                    1.00
    Sherbrooke. Saml. F. Morey                                20.00


  JAMAICA, WEST INDIES, $5.

    Pear Tree Grove. Rev. H. B. Wolcott                        5.00
                                                           ————————
        Total for January                                $20,984.05
    Total from Oct. 1st to Jan. 31st                      70,424.49

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.

    _From Oct. 7th, 1880, to Jan. 17th, 1881._
    E. PALACHE, _Treasurer_.

    I. From our Auxiliaries, viz.:
      Marysville Chinese Mission:
        Collection at Anniversary                 24.85
        Six Annual Members                        11.50
        Chinese Pupils                             8.90       45.25
      Sacramento Chinese Mission:
        Chinese monthly offerings                             25.00
      Santa Barbara Chinese Mission:
        Collection at Anniversary                  2.55
        Rev. E. P. Baker, $1; Mrs. Guy White,
           $1; Mrs. Josiah Bates, $4               6.00
        Nine Annual Memberships                   18.50
        Chinese monthly offerings                 24.00       51.05
    Stockton Chinese Mission:
        Chinese monthly offerings                              9.00
                                                           ————————
                                                             130.30

    II. From Churches:
        Grass Valley Cong. Ch., Rev. F. B. Perkins, by
          Edward Coleman, Esq., $15; Mrs. H. Scott, $2        17.00
        Oakland First Cong. Ch. Coll.                         15.00
        Redwood Cong. Ch., Mrs. K. M. Fox                      2.00
      San Francisco:
        First Cong. Ch. Coll.                                 46.60
        Bethany Ch., Mrs. Mary Mailer, $2; H. C.
          George, $2; Chinese, $5                              9.00
        San Jose Cong. Ch., Mrs. M. S. Post, $2; Miss
          M. W. Bye, $1                                        3.00
        Santa Cruz Cong. Ch., Two coll’s.                     20.00
                                                           ————————
                                                             112.60

    III. From Individuals:
      Oakland:
        At Annual Meeting, cash, $1.50; Annual
          Members, $20.50                                     22.00
      Point Pedro:
        Chas. W. Otis, Esq.                                    3.50
      San Francisco:
        Four Chinese Brethren                                 14.00
                                                           ————————
                                                              39.50
    IV. Eastern Friends:
      “Almost Home”                                           25.85
      Bangor, Me., E. R. Burpee                              100.00
                                                           ————————
                                                             125.00
                                                           ————————
        Grand total                                         $408.25

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Exeter, N. H. Mrs. Woodbridge Odlin                      100.00
    Saint Johnsbury, Vt. Mrs. T. M. Howard                    10.00
    Ayer, Mass. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding                          25.00
    Holliston, Mass. “N. G.”                                   5.00
    Norton, Mass. Mrs. E. B. Wheaton                          25.00
    South Abington. Mass. Ladies’ Sewing Circle of
      Cong. Ch.                                               25.00
    South Abington, Mass. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                 25.00
    Clifton Springs, N. Y. A. Peirce                          25.00
    Ansonia, Conn. J. H. Bartholomew                         100.00
    New Haven, Conn. Atwater Treat                           400.00
    New London, Conn. Mrs. McEwen and Mrs. Perkins            50.00
    Painesville, Ohio. Reuben Hitchcock                       50.00
    Salem, Ohio. D. A. Allen                                  25.00
    Lewistown, Ill. Mrs. Myron Phelps                         25.00
                                                           ————————
        Total                                               $890.00
    Previously acknowledged in December Receipts           3,186.50
                                                           ————————
        Total                                             $4,076.50

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    Leeds, England. Robert Arthington, conditional
      Pledge, £3,000.
    Received from Oct. 1st to Jan. 31st                    1,608.96
                                                         ==========

                                    H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                     56 Reade St.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 6; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_,
2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       Brown Brothers & Co.

                          59 WALL STREET,

                             NEW YORK.

=Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great Britain and Ireland,
France, Germany, Belgium and Holland, =Issue Commercial and
Travelers’ Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part of the
world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and Guadaloupe.

                Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

    Between this and other countries, through London and Paris.

=Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all parts of the United
States and Canada, and of =Drafts drawn in the United States= on
Foreign Countries.

=Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash deposited or
satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In Dollars for use in the
United States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use
in any part of the world. Applications for credits may be addressed
as above direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                     26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                       BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

  MASON
  AND
  HAMLIN
  ORGANS

BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street,
Boston; 46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                   J. & R. LAMB, 59 Carmine St.
                             NEW YORK,
                      ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS

                   MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                              MEMORIAL TABLETS

                Sterling Silver Communion Services
                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                      Oxford Teachers’ Bibles

                       THOS. NELSON & SONS,

                 No. 42 Bleecker Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 _1850._                   _1881._

                        THIRTY-FIRST YEAR.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             MANHATTAN

                        LIFE INSURANCE CO.,

                           OF NEW YORK.

  Assets, January 1, 1880,                =$ 9,706,101.68=
  Assets, January 1, 1881,                 =10,151,289.28=
  Income, year 1880,                        =1,998,383.03=
  Claims paid, Returned Premiums, &c.,      =1,300,966.29=
  All other payments, Taxes, &c.,             =252,229.14=
  Liabilities, New York Standard,           =8,144,454.38=
  Surplus,                                  =2,006,834.90=

Solid, conservative, economical.

See new form of Policy—plain, liberal, incontestable,
non-forfeitable.

Non-participating, very low rate, fixed premium policies issued, as
well as the ordinary participating, ordinary rate policies.

Its liberal published tables of surrender values fixes that
important point.

  HENRY STOKES, _President_.
  C. Y. WEMPLE, _Vice-President_.
  J. L. HALSEY, _Secretary_.
  S. N. STEBBINS, _Actuary_.
  H. Y. WEMPLE,}
  H. B. STOKES,} _Assistant Secretaries_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         W. & B. DOUGLAS,

                        Middletown, Conn.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                              PUMPS,

   HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON
            CURBS, YARD HYDRANTS, STREET WASHERS, ETC.

                          [Illustration]

 Highest Medal awarded them by the Universal Exposition at Paris,
France, in 1867; Vienna, Austria, in 1873; and Philadelphia, 1876.


                         Founded in 1832.


                        Branch Warehouses:

                         85 & 87 John St.
                             NEW YORK,
                                AND
                         197 Lake Street,
                             CHICAGO.

                _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       American Missionary.

                               1881.


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress. Patriots and
Christians interested in the education and Christianizing of these
despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its circulation.
Begin with the January number and the new year. The price is only
Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 96. Donations and subscriptions should be
sent to

             H. W. HUBBARD, _Treasurer_, 56 Reade Street, New York


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         A FOOL’S ERRAND.

                       By One of the Fools.


            “_The Greatest Romance of American History
                    since Uncle Tom’s Cabin._”

                        12mo. CLOTH, $1.00.


“Holds the critic spell-bound.... English literature contains no
similar picture.”—_International Review._

“The story is brilliant and fascinating, evidently a leaf from
experience.”—_Chicago Evening Journal._

“An awakening book, a thrilling book, indeed.”—_Cincinnati
Commercial._

“The sated novel-reader will find it fresh and thrilling.”—_Boston
Daily Advertiser._

“Abounds in sketches not matched in the whole range of modern
fiction.”—_Boston Traveler._

“The book will rank among the famous novels that, once written,
must be read by everybody.”—_Portland Advertiser._

“The night-ride of young Lily Servosse ... is one of the finest
and most thrilling incidents that has ever been told in history or
romance.”—_San Francisco Chronicle._

“A _live_ novel. Read ‘A Fool’s Errand,’ for the reading will carry
its own reward.”—_Providence Press._

                          AGENTS WANTED.

              Sold everywhere, or mailed post-paid by

                     FORDS, HOWARD & HULBERT,
                           _27 Park Place, New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                         BARBER BIT BRACE.

Hereafter every Bit Brace found in any market with Jaws as shown
in the above cut, and bearing our name, will be made of Rolled
Steel and heavily Nickel Plated. The Head is of Lignumvitæ, and
the revolving Hand piece of Rosewood. The Jaws are of forged and
tempered Steel, and will adapt themselves to any shape tool tang,
round, square or flat, and hold it perfectly without any fitting.
When made with a Ratchet Attachment it will bore in places where
there is not room to revolve the Sweep; a slight back and forth
motion driving the bit in or out. We formerly used Iron Jaws, which
wore out. All such we will now replace with Steel, sending them by
mail prepaid on receipt of 25 cents. They are all one size and will
fit any Brace which we ever made. Our Braces are for sale by nearly
all Hardware Dealers. Those who do not have them in stock will
furnish them if requested. Price from $1.75 to $3.25 each. Many
Braces are sold for less money; but this is the only Steel Brace in
market; and one of them is worth six of any other kind. Save this
notice as it may not appear again.

                        MILLERS FALLS CO.,
                             74 Chambers St., New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors have been corrected.
Arithmetic errors detected in the Receipts section have been left
as printed. Inconsistent hyphenation has been retained due to
multiple authors. Ditto marks have been replaced with the text
they represent in order to facilitate eBook alignment.

Duplicate “the” removed from page 81. (gifts through the columns)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 3, MARCH 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.