VOL. XXXIV.                                                 No. 3.

                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                 “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

                              MARCH, 1880.




                              _CONTENTS:_


  EDITORIAL.

    PARAGRAPHS                                                      65
    ZEAL FOR STUDY                                                  66
    TROPICAL AFRICA                                                 67
    THE NEGRO IN AMERICA AND AFRICA                                 69
    DR. BLYDEN ON THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY SOCIETY                   70
    REV. CHAS. B. VENNING—ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                      71
    AFRICAN NOTES                                                   73


  THE FREEDMEN.

    AT TALLADEGA: REV. J. E. ROY, D. D.                             74
    NORTH CAROLINA—McLeansville School                              75
    SOUTH CAROLINA, CHARLESTON—Church and School Work
      —Cause of the Exodus                                          76
    GEORGIA—Report of Board of Commissioners on Atlanta
      University                                                    78
    ALABAMA, TALLADEGA—Why he likes it: Rev. H. S. DeForrest        79
    ALABAMA, ATHENS—Building Progress—Missionary Spirit             80
    MISSISSIPPI, TOUGALOO—Student-Conversions—Crowded Rooms         81
    TENNESSEE, MEMPHIS—School work and Week of Prayer               82
    TEXAS—Two Hours’ Work by Student Canvasser                      82


  THE INDIANS.

    AN INDIAN BOY’S LETTER                                          83


  THE CHINESE.

    ANNIVERSARY AT SACRAMENTO                                       85


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    HOW TO MAKE MONEY FOR THE MISSIONARIES                          87


  RECEIPTS                                                          88

  CONSTITUTION                                                      93

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS                                            94

                   *       *       *       *       *

                               NEW YORK.
           Published by the American Missionary Association,
                        ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




                    American Missionary Association,

                         56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                   *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    ANDREW LESTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street,
New York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch
Offices, 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112
West Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty
dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.




                                  THE

                           AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

  VOL. XXXIV.                 MARCH, 1880.                      No. 3.




                    American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *


We are glad to be able to announce the safe arrival of Prof. Chase at
Sierra Leone, about the 8th of January, and hope before our next issue
to receive valuable advices from him.

       *       *       *       *       *

We call attention to the Thirty-third Annual Report of the Association,
recently published. In addition to the general survey which was read at
the Annual Meeting at Chicago, and the minutes of that grand gathering,
we have given, as usual, a detailed report of our work, and we suggest
to pastors and others who may desire to inform themselves in regard to
particular aspects of it, that if they will notice, they will find all
this matter so classified in the Report that they can easily select
just what they want. Thus, after the list of institutions and teachers,
they may find the following headings: Delay in Opening Schools, Quality
of the Work, Closing Exercises, Industrial Departments, Growing Favor,
Buildings, Rented Property, Libraries, Student Aid, Religious Character
of Schools, Colored Teachers, Theological Departments. The Church Work
and other main departments are analyzed in the same way. We have done
this, hoping to make the Report a helpful document and one easily used
by the friends of the Association. Dr. Storrs’ sermon is also printed
with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Parmelee’s paper, read before the Woman’s Meeting at the
Anniversary in Chicago, excited so much interest at the time and
since, and gave so vivid, so faithful and so sympathetic a view of
the perils of the girls of the South, that we have, besides giving
a portion of it in a former MISSIONARY, re-printed it in full, and
have sent it largely to the Christian women of our churches. We
beg them to read it, remembering that its statements are facts,
and that the evils of which it speaks are among the better class
of the colored women of the South, and hardly suggest the depths
below, in which the mass are at home, and into which education and
enlightenment only make the fall more fatal. May God’s spirit move
the hearts of our Christian women to save their sisters.

One of our colored ministers, trained in an American Missionary
Association school, in stating some incidents of his life to a friend,
said that he was led, when about sixteen years old, to give up gambling
and licentiousness, simply out of regard for his teacher, fearing that
she would learn of his evil ways and despise him. That teacher little
thought then, and has never learned even, of the blessed influence
upon that young man, of her pure and consecrated life, which, through
the providence of God, led to the transformation of a gambler and
profligate, into an efficient and esteemed Christian minister, through
whom she is now preaching to hundreds and even thousands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Superintendent, scouring through Georgia, came across Rev. Mr.
Thomas, a choice man, who has charge of two colored Presbyterian
churches at Union Point and Woodstock, under commission of the Northern
General Assembly, and who got all his schooling—three years—at our
Lewis High School in Macon, Ga. So the fruit of our tree of knowledge,
is falling over into other church lots, and we are glad of it. Such
fruitage is a great encouragement to the teachers of our minor schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Bible Example of Reconstruction._—It was after the return from
Babylon. Civil and the moral reformation went hand in hand. The
first Governor, Zerubabel, who was a grandson of a former king, had
the high priest, Joshua, to lead in the worship, and the prophets,
Haggai and Zechariah, to preach and to teach. The next Governor,
Ezra, instituted for the instruction of the people an extensive
system of Bible-readings. “So they read in the Book, in the law of
God, distinctly and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading.”

The next Governor, Nehemiah, was a reformer. He put down the practices
of taking heathen wives, of violating the Sabbath, and of exacting
illegal interest. No improvement has as yet been made upon that style
of civil reconstruction. Religion and education, the church and the
school, must go along with the re-ordering of the State. So we find our
work at the South in the line of a Divine pattern. The Bible gives us
its ideal of dealing with freedmen by taking into its sacred canon the
five books of Moses for the emancipated Israelites, the books of Ezra,
Nehemiah, Haggai and Zechariah, for the restored captives.

       *       *       *       *       *


ZEAL FOR STUDY.

A good deal has been said, from time to time, of the abatement among
the colored people of that eagerness to learn, which marked the days
immediately following their emancipation. Of course, much of it is
true; many found by trial that it was not so easy or instantaneous
a process to learn to read as they had supposed; the pressure of
self-support drew away the attention of others from their aspirations
after an education; unduly excited ambitions and crude hopes were seen
to be unfounded, and in the disappointment many were discouraged.
But all of it is not true. There are many instances yet of the early
eagerness to learn among the young, and even among the old; we give
an instance from a teacher’s letter: “One woman, 39 years old, lives
in the country, and walks six miles to school, and six miles again
after school to her home. Her seat has been vacant only on one or two
of the rainiest days since the school opened, September 1st. At home,
she has all her household affairs to look after, and finds time to
study at night even then; and if, on account of helping her husband to
pick cotton in the fall, she would go late to bed without ‘knowing her
lesson,’ it ‘worried’ her so, she said, that she ‘could not get a wink
of sleep,’and her husband would waken to find her up and studying. She
is gaining slowly in rudimentary knowledge, and is very much pleased,
or, as she would say, ‘proud’ of her success. Several such ones, eager
to learn, I have under my care, and though they can learn but slowly,
it is really better than that they should never know anything, though I
think we would count it hardly worth while to take such pains so late
in life; yet, better to get upon the first round of the ladder than not
to rise at all.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TROPICAL AFRICA.

The Three Lake Missions.

Among the great movements of this stirring age, none are, perhaps,
more far-reaching than those for the exploration and evangelization of
Tropical Africa. The splendid achievements of Livingstone and Stanley
crown and complete the efforts of their heroic predecessors. Africa’s
three great central lakes and her two great rivers—the mysteries of
the ages—are now explored and mapped.

The missionary efforts that have followed these discoveries reveal an
enthusiasm, and a consecration of talent and life, worthy of the vast
field thus opened. In the promptness of the response, the money and the
lives devoted and the number of missions founded or projected, the last
five years give a history that probably has no parallel in the records
of Christian missions. The story of these adventures in discovery and
evangelization has the fascination of romance, and is pathetic in the
piety and the sufferings of both travellers and missionaries.

We select as illustrations the three Lake Missions of Tropical Africa.


1. The Victoria Nyanza Mission.

On the northern shores of this greatest of Africa’s central lakes is
the dominion of King Mtesa—a name now familiar to the civilized world.
He rules over two millions of people, has a navy of 300 war canoes and
an army of 150,000 warriors. In 1875, Stanley reached his capital. The
welcome was cordial, and for two months the traveller taught the King
the principles of Christianity with such happy results that the Bible
was studied, and in obedience to its teachings, an enemy and rebel,
conquered in battle and doomed to death in accordance with African
morals and invariable practice, was spared! Stanley appreciated the
true value of the King’s “conversion,” and saw the need of having his
own incipient teaching followed up by steady missionary labors. His
appeal for such labors was written in Africa and appeared in a London
paper Nov. 15, 1875. The prompt response should be noticed. Three
days after it appeared, came an anonymous offer of $25,000 for the
founding of the mission, and soon another equal sum was proffered.
The venerable and efficient Church Missionary Society undertook the
work. The consecrated money was soon followed by the consecrated
men. In 1876, the company of missionaries landed at Zanzibar, and
travelling the 800 miles of jungle in six months, and marking their
first disaster in the death of one of their party, reached Mtesa’s
capital. They were welcomed with enthusiasm, and when the name of Jesus
was uttered, a salute was fired. The work was begun immediately, but
soon the second great disaster came—two of the company, Lieutenant
Smith and Mr. O’Neill, were murdered at no great distance from the
capital. But instead of discouragement, these disasters called forth
new enthusiasm. Three young men were promptly sent out by the Church
Missionary Society. They took the Nile route, but a journey that should
have taken three or four months was protracted to nine by the floating
islands in the Upper Nile and the ignorance of the Arab captain. One
of the missionaries received a sunstroke and was obliged to return. At
length they reached Uganda and were joyfully received, but soon came
the greatest calamity—a week after their arrival two French Jesuit
priests came also, and succeeded in so disaffecting the mind of the
King as to arrest the work, and lead to the withdrawment of most of the
missionaries. The summary at the latest dates is: Sixteen missionaries
in all have been sent, of whom six have died and three have returned
sick. Of the seven still in Africa, four have been permitted to go on
various duties and three remain at Uganda without the facilities either
to carry on their work or to withdraw.


2. Tanganika Mission.

Ujiji, the location of the Tanganika Mission is endeared to the friends
of Livingstone. Here he made his temporary home, and here, almost ready
to die, he was discovered by Stanley, to be restored to vigor and to
toil still longer for Africa, till at last he was found dead upon his
knees. The plan for a mission here was formed by the London Missionary
Society, scarcely less venerable than the Church Missionary Society.

Mr. Arthington of Leeds, Eng., one of the generous and prompt donors
of $25,000 for the Nyassa Mission, gave a like sum for this. Four
ordained missionaries, one scientific man and one builder, left
London in March, 1877. Their journey from the coast of Africa was
protracted over thirteen months in consequence of the many obstacles
and vexatious delays. Added to these trials, death did its fearful
work. Under these discouraging circumstances, Dr. Mullen, the intrepid
and beloved Secretary of the Society, obtained the reluctant consent of
the Directors to lead in person an additional force, and to hasten the
progress of the supplies. But he had gone only 200 miles from the coast
when death closed his useful career. No event in the last five years
has cast such a gloom over mission circles in Great Britain as the sad
fate of this noble man.


3. Nyassa Mission.

Again is the stimulus of Livingstone’s labors seen, and his name and
memory honored in the founding of another mission: the Livingstonia on
Lake Nyassa. It was a labor of love for the Free Church of Scotland,
aided by sister communions to undertake this mission. In the Spring of
1875, the expedition started, having been furnished with all needed
supplies, including a beautiful steel steamer and two boats for the use
of the mission on the Lake. After a tedious journey up the Zambesi and
Shiré and a toilsome land journey of 60 miles, around the Murchison
Falls, the Lake was at length reached.

After a brief search, a site was selected that held out unusual
hopes of coveted advantages—there were no mosquitos and a favoring
lake breeze gave promise of health. But alas for the unforeseen
and insignificant difficulties that sometimes defeat the greatest
undertakings—the fatal tsetse fly compelled the choice of a new
location. But we cannot give space for the subsequent details.

The disasters and deaths in these missions have had a depressing effect
upon the hearts of Christians in Great Britain, and we fear that the
discouragements will to some extent be felt in this country. But we
must guard ourselves against hasty inferences and unwarranted fears. We
should remember:—

1. That trials at the outset are often God’s means of arousing a
deeper faith. The history of missions, modern and Apostolic, is
full of examples. The Teloogoo Mission where such an unusual work
of Divine grace has recently been experienced and the converts have
been numbered by thousands, was for a long time the scene
of unfruitful labors. Bishop Crowther’s Mission in West Africa, now so
strong and growing, had an early experience of toils and persecutions.
The Apostles themselves encountered imprisonments and death not only,
but their labors were sometimes followed by defections, perversions of
doctrine and scandals in life.

2. We should take courage from the fact that the slave-trade, the worst
foe to missionary labors in Africa, is feeling the effects of the
earnest efforts of Great Britain for its overthrow. Sir Samuel Baker,
and after him Col. Gordon, the stout old Covenanter—the Havelock of
Africa—have crippled its power on the Upper Nile, while the labors
of Sir Bartle Frere, and subsequently of Dr. Kirk at Zanzibar, have
been equally effective along the coast, so that the Church Missionary
Intelligencer feels authorized to say that “the slave-trade if not
killed, is scotched.” The missions themselves, though hindered in many
respects, have had a salutary influence in shaming and arresting this
fiendish traffic.

3. Finally, the church of God must bear in mind that the Saviour’s last
and great command, “Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel,” is
accompanied by that all-comprehensive and all-sufficient promise, “Lo,
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.” God will redeem
the whole world, and in the Saviour’s heart and plan, Africa is not
forgotten.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO IN AMERICA AND AFRICA.

Dr. Edward W. Blyden, of Liberia, Africa, is the author of an
interesting article in the _Methodist Quarterly Review_ for January,
1880, from which we gratefully reprint elsewhere his tribute to
our work. Anything which comes from the pen of this distinguished
gentleman—one of the most cultured men of the race whose cause he
pleads—is well worth reading and consideration. With much that the
Doctor says, we are in full and hearty agreement, but beg leave to make
one or two suggestions, growing out of what seem to be at least not
unwarranted deductions from his positions.

No one can regret more than we do the prejudice which exists, in this
country especially, against the colored man. And there is no doubt
that, as Dr. Blyden observes, even among those who are not unmoved by
the story of his wrongs, and who are earnestly engaged in philanthropic
efforts for his uplifting, this personal prejudice and sense of
superiority does exist. That it is not so to anything like the same
degree in England and on the Continent, is suggestive in the light it
casts upon the fact among us. On what is the difference of feeling
founded? Certainly not altogether in the natural race-prejudice. That
is a fact not to be denied. There is a prejudice which is universal
between all people of distinct races of men. It is felt by the original
inhabitants of Africa against the Caucasian, as Dr. B. shows, as well
as by the white man in his own home against the black. But in this
land, the prejudice is intensified by the position and the character of
those who have made up the negro population.

Dr. Blyden objects to our calling the Negro, Indian and Chinaman
“the despised races.” He even dislikes to have Africa called “the
Dark Continent.” Of course, our brother knows that the sympathies of
this Association are, as they have always been, with these people of
his land, and that our toils and labors have not been limited, nor
of brief continuance, in their behalf. All this he most fully and
kindly acknowledges in his article. It is hardly necessary for us to
say, then, that we have used the term as describing what is, and as
contrasted with what ought to be. It is true, rightly or wrongly,
that they have been looked down upon and are still despised. And
we have used the word as setting forth the fact, and as, therefore,
the strongest plea to Christian sympathy and help; for we have been
sure that where we could enlist these, the term would no longer have
application. The good Samaritan did not despise the poor Jew who had
fallen among thieves, as he held him up on the ass which bore him to
the inn. He was too busy pitying and helping him. Perhaps this is
enough to say. We have used the term “the Despised Races” not as an
epithet, but as a plea.

A fair inference at least from the Doctor’s article is, that he sees
no hope for his people on this continent, and that their only way to
success is to emigrate to the land of their mothers, and to make its
reclamation their ambition. But how does that affect our work and the
present generation? The American Colonization Society, as seen by
its last published report, sent out to Africa during the year 1878,
one hundred and one colonists; during the same year the bark Azor
transported two hundred and forty. It is but a spoonful dipped from
this deep sea. It is but the smallest possible percentage even of the
increase of the colored population of America. Meanwhile, what are we
to do with the five millions who remain, and with their children and
their children’s children? What we do for them we must do for them here.

We, too, believe in colonization; in the evangelization of Africa by
Africans; and the only difference in our aim and purpose from the
work with which the Doctor is so fully identified, is that we want to
distribute our colonists more widely. It is well to have a Christian
republic in Africa. But it is our desire to plant small colonies
of twenty-five or thirty, among whom shall be both ministers and
mechanics, here and there through the still “dark continent”—points
of radiation for the light of life and of Christian civilization which
they are to hold forth.

We are full of sympathy and interest with the good work in Liberia.
May the Lord bless it abundantly. But the work here is not hopeless.
Hundreds of thousands of the Freedmen still answer, from amid all their
disappointments and disabilities, “We are rising.” Our plan and purpose
desire to take part in both hemispheres of the whole rounded work—to
save the African in America and in Africa alike.

       *       *       *       *       *


DR. BLYDEN ON THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

The American Missionary Association, whose publications we have
prefixed to this paper, in their work of lofty and noble purpose
through the South are endeavoring to prepare the negro for higher
spheres of labor than “cotton-fields, turpentine orchards, and
rice-fields.” Every negro who is at all acquainted with matters in the
United States must have the highest admiration for it. Almost alone
among the benevolent institutions of that land in the days of the great
struggle, they never for one moment yielded to the imperious dictates
of an oligarchical monopoly, but gave expression to the idea which they
inscribed upon their banner, that one of the chief purposes of their
organization was to resist the tyranny of the autocracy which doomed
the negro to perpetual servitude. No one could be enrolled among its
members who was a slave-holder. They have the gratitude of the negro
race.

But history will have a brighter page than even that with which
to adorn their annals, when she comes to recount the devotion and
sacrifices of the hundreds who have been sent forth under their
auspices, as uplifters of the prostrate host in the South, to whom,
left as they were, paralyzed by slavery, free movement and real progress
were intrinsically impossible without the aid of such agencies as the
American Missionary Association. As time rolls on, the romance which
clings to those heroes who fought to unfetter the body of the slave,
will fade beside the halo which will surround these who have labored to
liberate his mind.

  (_Methodist Quarterly Review._)

       *       *       *       *       *


REV. CHARLES B. VENNING.

One of our most earnest and devoted missionaries at the Jamaica
Mission, after severe and protracted suffering, has entered into his
rest. Mr. Venning went about fifty years ago, when Negro-slavery was at
its height, to work on a Jamaica sugar estate. He was then an ardent
young Englishman, and easily led into dissipation and vice. But the
Lord arrested him, and the course of his whole life was changed. He
entered the Mico Institute, a Training College for Schoolmasters, and
was a successful teacher. He then became interested in the efforts of
the American Missionary Association, and desired to devote himself
entirely to school work and religious teaching among the Negroes in
the country districts of the Island. His name stands on the list of
missionaries in our first Annual Report, and he has labored faithfully
every year since—while his health would permit by active efforts, and
when on a bed of suffering by example and counsel.

We quote the following from the letter of a fellow missionary: “I never
saw a man who so entirely devoted himself to the work as he did. He
had the true missionary spirit. He not only preached the Gospel in his
own church, but from house to house and in the most out-of-the-way
places; indeed everywhere where men would give a listening ear. No
other missionary in the Island did so much for the education of his
people as Bro. Venning, and outside of the towns there could be found
no people so intelligent as his. He watched over his flock with almost
a painful interest—encouraged and reproved. He gathered the poor that
were otherwise uncared for about his own door, gave them shelter, fed
them from his own table, and clothed them from his own wardrobe.”

One who knew him intimately at the Island writes: “He labored literally
night and day most earnestly for the salvation of souls and the welfare
of those who had been converted. Being a born educator, he has left
his mark upon the generation that has grown up under his instruction.
As a private Christian, he was most real and honest, and free from all
guile, exemplifying in all his life, in the most striking manner, those
beautiful words of Scripture ‘harmless’ and ‘blameless.’ His faith
triumphed nobly in the end. In my interviews with him of late, it has
been most interesting to see with how firm a grasp he held fast to the
assurances of God’s blessed word, and thus found perfect rest and peace
to his soul.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—Religious interest is reported in the school. Six
persons have professed their faith in Christ. The day of prayer for
colleges was observed and we hope that good may result from the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

MCINTOSH, LIBERTY CO., GA.—Pastor Snelson writes: We observed the week
of prayer. The weather was mild, and consequently we did not have to
go into the Academy for the use of the stoves. Last Sabbath, eleven
were received into the church by confession and one by letter. It was
a blessed day with us. There is much here to do. Miss E. W. Douglass is
a great help to us. The people all like her. She is at work any and
everywhere. They call her in some places the lady-preacher. I would to
the Lord that more missionaries like her were sent throughout the field
of the American Missionary Association. Pray for us.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANNISTON, ALA.—On Thursday night, December 25th, the colored church
was crowded to its utmost capacity to witness the exercises of the
school children, which consisted of songs, recitations, etc. The Rev.
P. J. McEntosh has had this school and church at Anniston in charge
for a number of years and has labored with untiring energy to elevate
the colored people, and has met with a great deal of encouragement.
After the school exercises, the presents from the Christmas tree were
distributed among the children. Several white visitors were present and
spoke very highly of the management of the church and school. On Friday
night, they gave a fair at which they realized $56.80.—_Chattanooga
(Tenn.) Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

GREENWOOD, S. C.—Mr. J. D. Backenstose writes: I have just closed my
first week of school for this year (1880), and am glad to be able to
report a larger number of students than ever before at this place.

I have had to rent a room of one of my neighbors, and we have as many
boarders now as we can well accommodate, even with our new house, and
more are to come in the middle of the month.

The house is 18×36, containing two rooms 18×18, with two windows and a
door in each room and a chimney in the middle. Each room is to contain
three bedsteads, and from six to nine chairs. The house completed and
furnished will cost $228.68, a little more than we calculated, but it
is large, well built and well furnished.

       *       *       *       *       *

TALLADEGA, ALA.—Both of the barns, one being new and very valuable,
with most of their contents, including hay, grain, corn, and
corn-fodder, 300 bushels of cotton-seed, with tools and farm-implements
and three cows, were burnt Wednesday night, Jan. 7. Evidently it was
the work of an incendiary, but not instigated at all by any prevailing
ill-will toward the College. Subscriptions were at once circulated
among citizens, both white and black, and while the amount raised is
not large, the number and willingness of the contributions prove the
interest felt by this community in the College. Efforts will be made to
rebuild at once. The loss is estimated at $1,200. It falls heavily on
the agricultural department, which is becoming an important factor in
the college work. The farm does much toward feeding the large family,
and gives opportunity of self-help to the young men.

       *       *       *       *       *

NORTH CAROLINA.—While Islay Walden’s people in Randolph county
were hauling in logs for the lumber of their new church, the mill
was burned, and a part of their boards. The owner not being able to
rebuild, and there being no other mill near, the people came together
to help him, the young colored preacher putting down $25 from his
scanty salary. They hope to have the mill under way again in three or
four weeks. Meantime they will hurry in their logs, to be the first of
the new sawing.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOUGALOO, MISS.—We have a colored man visiting his daughter to-day;
his first visit to Tougaloo. He says he is keeping his daughter in
school with the money saved by himself and wife on snuff and tobacco
since signing the pledge; the result of the work of one of our students
who taught in his district.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW ORLEANS, LA.—The Central Church is having a wonderful
revival. Mr. Alexander has preached every night since the beginning
of the year. The interest is remarkable, crowding the room
every evening with a quiet, orderly, and earnest audience; many have
been converted. Twenty-eight united with the church Feb. 1st.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICAN NOTES.

—The long delayed tidings have been received by the London Missionary
Society from Messrs. Hore and Hutley at Lake Tanganika. The particulars
of Mr. Dodgshun’s death are given. Annoyances and delays interposed
by the Arab slave-traders are rehearsed. We give a few extracts from
letters:—

“During the seven months of our stay here, we have done much towards
making friends with the natives; they have closely observed us, and
admit that they can see nothing bad; but the influence of the Arabs
is so powerful that they, the Wajiji, are afraid to make any definite
negotiations with us apart from the Arabs.

       *       *       *       *       *

“The slave-trade at Ujiji is merely a small local affair—slaves
captured in war, &c., amongst surrounding tribes, and passed from
hand to hand, till they finally come to a stand in some Arab’s
_shamba_: this used to be done in the market, but since we came here,
it has all been kept out of sight. Once only some Wajiji offered us
a slave for sale as they passed by our _tembe_. The traders owning
these domestic slaves, have from twenty to one hundred of them
(I think Muniyi Heri reaches the larger number); they are their
domestics, boatmen, carriers, body guard, and cultivators, and, of
course, form the principle population of the place, filling up with
huts the spaces between their masters’ larger houses.

“Slavery amongst the natives is another matter. The Wajiji are great
slave-holders, slaves being as common as domestic servants at home;
but no great numbers are owned by individuals as among the Arabs. A
common present between chiefs is one or two slaves, and Mirambo sends
small parties from time to time to buy both slaves and ivory. When
the Portuguese and Arab slave-trades are crushed out, or nearly so,
we shall see and more fully realize the extent of native slavery,
or slave customs, which cover the continent through its length and
breadth. The former will have cost an immense outlay of the power and
influence of civilized Europe ere it is swept away. The latter will
take years of faithful mission labor to eradicate.

“To fulfil my promise to an Arab, to whom I said, ‘We do not want to
buy except for our own use; but I will send your words to England,’ I
add these few lines:—The Arabs say, ‘If the white men will come here
and buy, we will grow as much sugar and rice, and spice and oil, &c.,
as they want, and would much rather get our money in that way, than
in dangerous [and, as they admit one by one privately, _illegal_]
slave-hunting.’ I keep telling them that the slave-trade is dying
out, and they had better look to something else before they are left
in the lurch.”

       *       *       *       *       *

—“I have great trouble with my sailors who of course are _not_
sailors. On one occasion I was close off Cape Kiungwe. About two A.
M., pitch dark, a heavy squall burst on us from the northward, with
sheets of rain. I could not see one foot in front of my eyes. This
lasted for two or three hours, the boat sweeping along at a great
rate without a stitch of canvas, and a nasty foaming sea. All six men
became perfectly helpless, and huddled together inside the cabin. The
good little binnacle, however, kept the compass-lamp burning, and by
it only I knew where to steer; had it gone out, none of them could
have put it to rights. I could not possibly let go the tiller; they
were perfectly unable to work the paddles had they been required, and
it was only after roaring myself hoarse at them that I could rouse
them to bale the water out. When they get home they strut about with
a little cane in their hands, and boast of their sailorizing.”

       *       *       *       *       *

—“I trust,” he writes, “no one will call this mission disastrous, or
condemn Ujiji hastily as unhealthy. It is certainly much healthier than
Zanzibar, and both Mr. Hutley and myself were never more persistent in
our determination to go on. Certainly we want more help, but the work
is _going on_. We are living down native prejudices and suspicions,
and the lies of slanderers. We will slacken no effort to carry on this
work; and I am speaking, not at home, but in the midst of the work and
its difficulties. May God induce His stewards to do their part, and
see in the vacant spaces of the ranks only cause for new and earnest
effort. I commenced this letter with but mournful news; I desire to
close it with an expression of thankfulness to God for what health and
strength and success He has given us, and with an earnest appeal to all
missionary hearts to apply their means and strength with renewed vigor
to this work, and to be assured that, however cavilers may talk of
disaster, there is no despondency here.”

—On the eve of going to press the Directors have received a telegram
from the Society’s agent in Zanzibar, to the following effect: “The
Rev. W. Griffith and Dr. Southon arrived at Ujiji on the 23d of
September; all well.”

       *       *       *       *       *

—An Alexandria despatch to the _Daily News_ says Ismail Eyoud Pacha
has been appointed Governor of the Soudan, vice Gordon Pacha resigned.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D. D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.


AT TALLADEGA.

_At the Faculty Meeting._—Three men and four women present. Prayer.
The circle is passed around for matters of business. Besides minor
things these results are reached; Will observe the day of prayer for
colleges, with an address at morning worship, with a prayer-meeting
in the afternoon for the male students, one for the females and one
for the faculty, and with a general meeting at night; will hold a
Normal Institute on the last two days of the present term, inviting
the colored teachers in the region round about to come, and asking
Mr. A. W. Farnham, Normal Professor at the Atlanta University, to be
present and help; will have a series of familiar lectures, alternating
on Friday night with the young people’s sociable. Surely all this looks
like business.

_At the Library._—The donation of books to the value of more than four
hundred dollars, from Rev. W. H. Willcox, of Malden, Mass., attracts
the eye, and feasts it, too. The books are new, of standard and current
interest.

_At the Prayer Meeting._—One of the colored young preachers reports
the fine large old Bible which, as the gift of some Eastern friend, he
had taken into his little church at the Cove on the preceding Sabbath.
The people had requested him to express their thanks. Then President
DeForest followed. There is a story connected with that book. It came
with a box of things from the Congregational Church at Columbus, N.J.,
Rev. E. B. Turner’s. It came from Harriet Storrs, who is a cousin of
my mother. Every page of the book has been prayed over. Out of the
Sabbath-school of that old hill-town church, six ministers of the
Gospel have been raised up, among whom, I suppose, they count myself,
for that was my father’s home; and two wives of foreign missionaries
have come from the same source. Surely that old nest must be kept warm
for more of such productiveness.

_At Evening Prayers._—It is in the dining-hall, where the students
of both sexes and the teachers meet. The repast over, the President,
as is his wont, gives a resumé of the current news, the discovery of
the intro-Mercurial star, the day’s phase of the Maine affairs, and
other such. Then the students at two of the tables recite each a verse
upon a particular topic, temptation; then the sweetness of a religious
song; then prayer; then a quiet and orderly retiring. It is alone the
religion of Jesus that can present such a scene.

_At the Farm._—You enter its enclosure, passing under a graceful
arch that bears in large letters the emblazonment, “Winsted Farm.”
So everybody knows what town it was in Connecticut that did a good
deal toward the providing of that industrial department. The wheat
and the rye and the oats are covering the fields with green, even at
this mid-winter time. You can see that there is good farming in that
locality. You can see it, too, by contrast.

_Co-operative Farming._—During the last season the colored people
about our church at Lawson’s, in Alabama, Rev. J. W. Strong, pastor,
rented a half-dozen acres of land, and cultivated the most of it in
cotton, for the purpose of adding to the fund for supporting their
school. They had a board of managers. They worked when called upon.
They plowed and hoed. They at last picked out the cotton and found
that they had two bales, worth $120. One bale they sent to the colored
folks’ Industrial Fair, on the grounds of Talladega College. This
church is now also engaged in building a house of worship, having the
frame erected, intending, with the aid of $100 from the A.M.A., to go
on this season with the finishing, and hoping that a revival will be
its process of dedication.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

Our School.

REV. ALFRED CONNET, MCLEANSVILLE.

Our school is put down as a common school. That is correct. Yet we are
laboring to make it more than a common school. To this end we have
graded it as follows:

A. Normal; B. Normal. A. Intermediate; B. Intermediate. A. Primary; B.
Primary.

Through the kindness of friends in the North the school had been
supplied with a good many books, and unfortunately, there was a great
variety of text-books. We have ordered new, standard books, and have
secured uniformity. As we had new books it was easy to require all to
begin at the bottom and work up, and to do thorough work.

In a very few instances we have found pupils who can go into two
classes in the same branch. In this way they bring up from the first,
and at the same time go on with a more advanced class.

The grading, the new books, and the uniformity of books, have each and
all had a stimulating effect. They see there is a ladder to climb. They
see they cannot start at the top, or the middle, but must begin at the
bottom. They study harder. The school has improved in numbers and in
regularity of attendance. The number enrolled is 84.

Our pupils are from four counties, including this (Guilford) county.
Thirteen are here paying board, or boarding themselves. Of the thirteen
all are professors of religion but three: one is a minister, two are
preparing for the ministry; one professed religion since he came here
a year ago, one of those preparing for the ministry united with the
church at the last communion, and one is a teacher. Of those enrolled
last year, seven are teachers, six of whom are now teaching, and one
attending school. One pupil who is a minister reports over forty
hopeful conversions in connection with his labors during the summer
vacation.

A year ago we greatly felt the need of dormitories, and accommodations
for students to “batch.” For this the Association could make no
appropriation. One of the neighbors has put up a building for this
purpose, another is building, and a third has converted an old
store-room into dormitories, and four families have taken boarders.
Last year our school was confined to one room; now we have added a
recitation room.

On the whole, the outlook is hopeful. By the close of the present
school year twelve to fifteen of our pupils will be able to obtain
teacher’s license from the County School-Examiner.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH CAROLINA.

Church and School Work—The Cause of the Exodus.

REV. TEMPLE CUTLER, CHARLESTON.

The work goes quietly on here in Charleston—in all its departments.
The school is flourishing. It never had so many pupils as now, and was
never more popular than under the direction of Mr. Gaylord. We are not
ashamed to have visitors from North, South, East, or West, visit Avery.
If any of your readers doubt the capacity of these colored boys and
girls, let them come and see for themselves.

Miss Wells, our missionary, is doing good work—visiting the homes and
teaching the mothers and daughters how to make the home what it should
be.

The church work goes on slowly. The feeling of unity and harmony is
increasing, and, so far as I can see, may be said to be universal in
the church. We have had stormy weather in Plymouth for some time; it
has been a sort of Cape Hatteras, around which the winds have revelled,
but now the sky is clear and the sea smooth. We have a large growth of
tares in the church that does neither us nor anybody else any good.
If we should undertake to root it out, I do not know how much wheat
might come up with it, nor how much wheat we would trample down in
getting to it. Oh, how wise we need to be in dealing with these people;
what a broad mantle of charity we have to throw over them. Those of
us who glean after the reapers in this field, where the “patriarchal
institution” once flourished, find that either the type of piety
that prevailed in the “Abrahamic household” was very defective, or
the “Abrahamic duty” was woefully neglected. Certainly, the idea of
religion that prevails among the former dependents of these modern
patriarchs, is not that of either the Old or New Testament. But why
throw stones at the old defunct institution? What did I say? Defunct?
I wish to God it was defunct, and that these freemen had a fair chance
and a free fight for their rights and liberties. But that day is a long
way off; and I fear the shimmer of the morn is not yet seen. I want to
be just as hopeful as possible. I never was a croaker. I generally see
the bright side of a thing. But sometimes, when I come in from some
tale of oppression and misery, the clouds just shut right down—it is
midnight. When I am made to know that there are 20,000 poor wretches
here in this city that are the carcass on which rich cormorants are
fattening, my soul is sick within me. Congress may investigate the
cause of the emigration of the colored people to all eternity, and come
to what conclusion they may, it won’t stop. I pray God it may not
stop until enough laborers get away from the South to give room for
those who remain to grow. God knows the truth, and He will open some
way for His people to go out. I assure you His new Israel has not yet
come to the land flowing with milk and honey. What think you of a man
supporting a family of four on 25 cents a day, and paying five dollars
a month for house rent? What think you of a family of five living on
the wages of the daughter who gets six dollars a month working out, and
paying five dollars a month for house rent? _Hungry mouths will stifle
conscience._ Or, how long could the good people of the North live on
hasty-pudding without molasses or milk, morning, noon and night, and
nothing else, day after day and week after week?

Do you say, why not go back into the country and work the land? So
I said to one who had brought his family of five or six down here
to starve with the rest: “Why didn’t you stay up in the country?”
“Couldn’t lib up dar no how. Starve up dar shuah. Rent so high couldn’t
lib. Had free acres of land and a po, misable shantie, and had to work
fo days ob de week fur de rent, and but two days to tend my own crop.
Hab to buy ebreting ob de commisary. Hab to pay twenty cents a pound
fur meat (bacon), and forty cents a peck fur grits (corn meal). Starve
to deff up dar shuah.” Four days’ work every week for the rent of three
acres of land! The best land in that section is worth four dollars per
acre. Call the man’s work worth twenty-five cents a day. His rent was
one dollar a week—fifty-two dollars a year. No wonder the landlords
are not anxious to sell land to the colored people, when they can get
four times the value of the land every year in work at twenty-five
cents a day. Defunct institution! Yes, on the statute book. “But, my
man, why didn’t you buy the land at four dollars an acre?” “Well, sah,
some ob ’em did buy de land. I dunno how much dey pays; but I knows
when dey’s paid two or tree stalments dey can’t pay no mo, and gibs
em up.” Do you wonder the people listen to glowing pictures of better
opportunities somewhere else? If these people had a decent chance at
home, they would not listen to invitations away. The fact is, they
are perfectly helpless, and there is nothing for the mass of them but
to sit down and wait, wait, wait, through the long, long years till
the morning comes. I do not wonder they emigrate. I pray God they may
continue to go, until those who remain shall have their hands full to
supply the demands for labor. It may not be better for those that go,
but it will be better for those that remain. The more you thin out your
woodland, the taller and stouter will be your timber. The only hope
for this people is a scarcity of laborers. There are so many who must
have work, or die, that every vacancy has a dozen ready applicants.
Twenty-five cents a day, I am told, is all that some of these planters
will give to man or woman; and they can get enough at that price. In
such circumstances, you cannot expect people to haggle long about the
price of labor. The cry is simply, “Give me my hire.” And then, if you
remember that two hundred years of slavery in a man’s blood is not a
very good preparation for independency, you may get a pretty good idea
of the situation of the people.

But my letter is too long. Tell the churches to pray for the freeman
of the South. I do not say freedmen, because there are thousands
here who were never slaves and are no better off. Ask the churches
to help us to give them the only consolation they can at present
have—a sure and intelligent hope of a better world than this on
the other side—and not expect them, out of their deep poverty,
to pay for their own schooling or preaching just yet.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Report of the Committee of the Board of Commissioners to the Atlanta
University, June, 1879.

A large majority of the entire Board attended the examination of the
colored University at Atlanta, which receives an annual donation of
$8,000 from the State. The report of the special committee appointed
to make a suitable minute of the exercises and the condition of the
Institution was unanimously adopted. It is as follows:

TO THE BOARD OF VISITORS:

Gentlemen—The undersigned, your appointees, herewith submit
the following report upon the final examinations of the Atlanta
University, for the school year just closed.

The Board attended these examinations in an almost entire body.
They were promptly and courteously met by President Ware and
his associates, and the examinations proceeded with systematic
regularity. The exercises were designated by neatly printed
programmes, with the time and place of recitation distinctly set
forth.

The examinations were fairly conducted and disclosed the fact that
the most advanced methods of teaching were employed. These methods
were mainly topical, supplemented by appropriate questions, which
evinced that the students had an intelligent comprehension of the
subjects under consideration. We were especially impressed by the
evidences of patient, systematic, untiring training on the part of
the teachers, so well adapted to the colored, or any race, and by the
progressive manner in which a subject was developed. All branches
taught, passed in review before us, and whether the immediate subject
was reading, grammar, history, mathematics, the classics, or other
branches, the means employed and the results attained were entirely
satisfactory. The examinations were entirely oral and the decorum and
order maintained were of a high character.

The cleanliness of the recitation rooms, the preservation of school
property and the gradual improvement of the grounds were marked.

The final exercises at Friendship Church were very creditable to
the institution. The subjects of the speeches and essays were
appropriate, without political bearing, and they were delivered and
read in a becoming manner.

Comparing the examinations with preceding ones, we are satisfied that
the University is steadily on the up-grade, and that it is becoming a
centre of great interest among the colored people.

The religious training of the pupils appeared to be excellent.

The Normal feature of the institution we regard with especial
interest. In no way can education be so rapidly extended, or its
improved methods so effectually multiplied, as by the special
training of teachers. This we believe to be the great educational
want of our State.

We have one suggestion to make, viz: as the oral recitation has
been now so satisfactorily developed, would it not be beneficial
to introduce some written examination work in the higher classes,
as affording a better comparative test, and as advancing the
examinations fully up to the modern standard?

It is your committee’s opinion, based upon the foregoing, that
the State has acted wisely in her appropriation to the Atlanta
University, and that a continuance of it is to her best interests.

Respectfully submitted,

H. C. MITCHELL,

Chairman Special Committee.

T. G. POND,      C. M. NEAL.

       *       *       *       *       *

On motion the above report was ordered to be submitted to the Governor.

H. H. JONES,

Chairman of General Board.

J. T. WHITE,      C. M. NEAL.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Why He Likes It.

REV. H. S. DEFORREST, TALLADEGA.

A minister recently called to one of our schools in the South, gives
these reasons for liking his place.

1st. I am needed. This is a great work and the workmen are few. It
is not at all here as it used to be, and perhaps now is, in Boston
on a Saturday morning, scores of men standing with carpet-bag in
hand, waiting for a chance to preach, and many waiting in vain. We
have here more of field than we can occupy. On all sides comes up the
Macedonian-African cry, “come over and help us.” I am often weary on
Saturday and poorly enough prepared for Sunday, but am spared the
anguish of not knowing where to go or what to do. Besides, there is so
much of self-denial in the work that there are probably not a great
many thinking that, if I should die or leave, there would be a vacancy,
and if there should be a vacancy they would like to fill it. Not many
are interested in my will; few would care for my shoes,—I hope to wear
them myself and wear them here. For,

2nd. There is here a grand, perhaps unsurpassed opportunity for
influencing men. I am not only a Home Missionary, but also a Foreign
Missionary to Africa, and that last with special facilities. I am
master of the language, and do not work at the disadvantage of a
half-learned and half-murdered tongue. Neither is there any prejudice
against me as a Foreigner because of my brogue, or my dress or my
habits. Without the honors of a Foreign Missionary, I am also without
many of his disadvantages, and my national and Yankee peculiarities,
which might hinder across the sea, help on this side of the Atlantic.
This is indeed a missionary field, but operated with special
facilities. It is a double missionary field. For,

3d. The most pressing work in our own country is here. As surely as in
1861 our national peril is largely in the South. Ignorance is dense;
immorality is rampant: lawlessness is wide-spread, while intelligence,
morality and obedience to law form the only basis for such a government
as ours. To save our country, we must save the South; to save the
South, we must save the Southerners, and there are no Southerners
more hopeful and more deserving than the late slaves. They are down
but their faces are upward. Give them a hand and they will take it,
especially if it be a “Yankee hand,” and a little lifting develops a
good deal of spring in themselves. Thus it is that Patriotism as well
as Humanity and Christianity keep me here, and no campaigning in our
recent war seemed more a duty of loyalty than that in which I am now
engaged. I am glad to be in the ranks and to still wear the blue. But,

4th. Looking beyond our broad land, I hope, standing here, to reach
some portion of the “Dark Continent.” I regard this as a good _pou
sto_ for moving Africa. Our students, more than those who have been
life-long readers, use their memories. They are more impressible than
the young of some other stock. They have a strong desire, as they are
helped, to help others. Apparently the great missionary movement of
the next few years is to be in Africa. The call is already heard for
men. Some of these men are here, and the impressions now made, the
very words we now speak, may yet be felt and heard in lands whence the
fathers of these men were stolen, and in the jungles which the white
man may well fear to tread.

5th. Besides, there are some special rewards in this work. If we
have the white man’s contumely, we have the black man’s love. A more
grateful and appreciative people than some of these, fresh from the
prison-house of bondage but now rejoicing in a double freedom, I have
never seen. Seldom is a pastor more fervently and affectionately
prayed for than are some of us here. And I suspect as the Lord
judges souls—He seeth not as man seeth—we have our companionship
chiefly with the foremost of this part of the Land. These and similar
considerations have led me to think that this College stands somewhere
on Mt. Pisgah. Certainly just now I would rather be here than in any
other part of the Universe of God. Tell our friends at the North that
we do not need their sympathy but we do need their help. With more of
means we could greatly multiply our labors and their results. Let those
at the rear at least send on supplies, and more abundantly.

       *       *       *       *       *


Is the Work in Vain?—Building Progress—A Missionary Spirit.

REV. HORACE J. TAYLOR, ATHENS.

Sometimes one is tempted to say that the work here is in vain. We
know, for instance, that a great deal has been done during the last
fifteen years by the Principal of Trinity School, and yet one can see
that the work is by no means finished. Have not some people at the
North been thinking that, after fifteen years of good work among the
colored people of the South, the A.M.A. ought to be about leaving the
field here for some other? Some here say to me, it will be a work
of centuries to bring up this people; others, that the colored race
never will be fit for anything but farm laborers; they must be hewers
of wood and drawers of water. Some people in Ohio think the religion
of the colored man in the South is a “pure and undefiled” religion.
Some people here think there is no use in trying to give the colored
man a pure system of religion. “They get together and shout and carry
on, and that is all they are fitted for.” “Their religion is impure
and defiled, and they cannot appreciate a pure religion.” So say the
enemies of the colored race. Well, this is partly true; too true. The
colored man has emotion, and his late masters were too often content
with that “religion” in the slave. As slaves they were allowed to
preach and steal and commit adultery, and all together, too.

When we think of the pit from which they have been lifted, and of their
ancestry—only a few generations ago heathen all of them, cannibals
some of them—can we think that the results are less than we might
expect? A great deal has been done here, and there is a great deal to
show for it. Some might think there was not much to be seen of good
results. A church of forty-four members—three less than two years ago,
five less than one year ago—some weak ones, the church as well as the
school still pecuniarily dependent on the A.M.A., they will not be
ready to cut loose from the fostering care of the Association for some
years yet.

Christ said that the kingdom of heaven was like a grain of mustard
seed, or like a little leaven. These churches and schools act like
leaven in a mass of ignorance. And this leaven works. And it is because
of this leavening power of the Gospel that we are encouraged. The whole
will be leavened in time. But time is necessary. The Congregational
churches have undertaken a mighty work, and they must patiently stick
to it for years yet. Much as can be seen of the results of the work
here, more than half of it cannot be easily seen. Other churches have
been enlightened and helped. Even those who try to keep out the light
can’t prevent some of it getting through the chinks.

You will want to know about the work for the new school building. If
we had had the least idea that we must work five months with less than
one hundred dollars in money, we never would have undertaken the job.
We hoped a fair share of the subscriptions would be paid in cash. One
or two had themselves to buy the moulds for making the bricks, and the
shovels to dig with, and the cord to line the ground with. We had no
boards to cover the bricks, so, instead of kilning the bricks as they
were made, they were piled in an old log house. Many were broken in
this way. Then they were moved when we had boards to cover the kiln;
and many more were broken. And from the 1st of August—we didn’t begin
to prepare the ground till July 17th—till November we had heavy and
frequent rains. The papers said such a season had not been known for
many years. We were hindered in our work, and lost bricks from the
rains. But we have over a hundred thousand bricks, and a total expense
of one hundred and fifty dollars. If the workers next summer can have
the money, as we hope, they will not work to such disadvantage, for
they will have boards on hand, and can kiln the bricks as they make
them, and have tools. The building will be finished, but it takes more
time than we at first thought. Such a school-house was not necessary
fifteen years ago. Our neat church building, and the necessity for a
substantial school building, are proofs of the great work done here
by Miss Wells. I enjoy this work, and have become attached to the
people. But it is too nice a place for me. I never expected to preach
from a carpeted platform. I must go far hence to more destitute places
beyond—to the islands of the sea. But the work is one. Whether in
Alabama or Micronesia, under the A.M.A. or the A.B.C.F.M., we are
working for one Lord, to establish the kingdom of Christ on earth. We
can but praise Him that He calls us to work in any corner of His wide
vineyard.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

Sunday-Schools—Student-Conversions—Crowded Rooms.

MRS. G. STANLEY POPE, TOUGALOO.

The year thus far has been most pleasant and profitable. During the
fall term we had an unusually large number of students who entered into
study with faithfulness and energy.

Many who had been teaching during the summer, gave most interesting
reports of their work. The Sunday-school and temperance work had been
vigorously pushed with excellent results; one of which is over thirteen
hundred signers to the temperance pledge. Some conversions in their
Sunday-schools were also reported; and quite often now some one speaks
in our prayer-meeting of receiving a letter from a pupil asking for
prayers that he may become a Christian.

Just at the close of the fall term we were visited with a remarkable
outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Our good Dr. Roy had been here, and a
sermon which he preached left impressions which brought some to decide
for Christ. And then the Sunday-school lessons. I remember watching the
young people during the closing exercises of Sunday-school the Sabbath
before Christmas, and I saw that there was deep feeling, and felt sure
that there were some who would not long resist the Spirit, and during
the next three days there were nineteen conversions.

Three or four others have since then found Christ. There is also a
marked Christian growth and a growing interest in the study of the
Bible. Our hearts are greatly encouraged, and we go forward rejoicing
that we are permitted to work for Christ. Truly “The Lord hath done
great things for us whereof we are glad.”

At present we have one hundred and four boarders, with the prospect of
more soon. Every room is occupied, and we are crowded to what seems
the utmost limit of our accommodations. What we shall do with those
yet to come, is a problem which neither mathematics nor the laws of
expansion have solved. Shall they hang up in the trees or bivouac under
them? We want to put an addition to the “barracks,” but have not the
means necessary. Dear friends at the North, shall we turn these young
people away? What is your answer? We hope that by a year from now, a
good substantial building will be at least in process of erection, that
shall do away with some of the temporary accommodations we now have.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

School Work and Week of Prayer.

E. A. H., MEMPHIS.

Next week will, I believe, close my second month’s work here. I find
the work very pleasant, and am enjoying it greatly, though I think I am
working harder than I have ever worked in a school before. The school
has filled up very rapidly since the holidays. My room is full to
overflowing, and I have been obliged to seat a few of my pupils in the
Normal room. That room and the Primary are also quite full. Of course,
these additions to the school have made the work of the teachers
much harder. Besides my work with my own pupils, I am having some
practice work done. Four students from the Senior Class of the Normal
Department, are engaged for a short time each day in teaching in my
department, and under my supervision. This corps of teachers is changed
once in two weeks, thus giving each pupil in that class a chance to
work. I also meet the Senior Class three times a week, for talks with
them on school and class work, taking up the objects to be gained by
recitations and the best methods used. I think I can see already that
this work is doing good, and I hope that it may prove of great value to
the pupils.

We have been observing the week of prayer in the school, by fifteen
minute prayer meetings, directly after school. At first, these were
held in a recitation room, but Thursday evening the meeting had grown
so large that it was held in the Intermediate room, and Friday evening
in the Assembly room. A good deal of interest has been shown, and a
number have expressed a desire for the prayers of Christians. We hope
that the interest may deepen and much good be done.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEXAS.

Two Hours’ Work by a Student-Canvasser.

The following letter, with enclosure of $3.50 and fourteen names for
the MISSIONARY for six months, will not only explain itself, but may
furnish a suggestive example to many.

DEAR FRIENDS: Of course you will be curious to know how it happened
that some persons in this place—Marshall, Texas—suddenly conclude
to read the AMERICAN MISSIONARY, consequently I send you these words
of explanation. I am indebted to your schools for all the education I
possess. I attended Straight University five months—from January to
June, 1874; then beautiful Fisk University nearly nine months—from
September to May, 1879, entering college regularly with the class.
Commencement over, I set out for Texas, earnestly desiring to secure
means to go through with; but, owing to bad health and the want of
proper precaution, I failed. I was unwilling to return immediately to
Fisk University empty-handed, to give my teachers additional concern
about my welfare, and, as I am firmly resolved to complete the course,
everything to the contrary notwithstanding, something had to be done.
Hence I decided to remain in Texas a few months longer, giving my
wife, who is at Nashville, the choice of remaining there or joining
me here, until the difficulty is past. I could get no paying work
right away, having walked upwards of two hundred miles and spent three
weeks of valuable time in the search. Finally, weary, foot-worn and
exhausted, I fell under the effects of intermittent fever—indeed, I
was in trouble. Nothing remained, then, but to be idle two months or
more, at the expiration of which I could begin to teach, in accordance
with a contract that I then held. In the meantime my class would be
making progress; this thought, believe me, gave me as much concern as
my ill-health. I carried the subject to the Lord in prayer and became
reconciled. I reached Marshall, on the 22d instant. I plainly stated
my case to the teachers of this Institution. They seemed to sympathize
with me, and on the following morning assigned me work. Thus, you see,
I am doing something, though it may be very little.

I heard an interesting discourse Sabbath evening from I. Corinthians
xv., 58. The preacher proved clearly to my mind that Christians ought
to be zealous of good works for the churches to which they belong.
He proved, too, that all could do something. The whole furnished me
excellent food for reflection. I began to figure out how much we
colored people in the South could advance your glorious work if we
only had the zeal. I found, indeed, that we are neglecting a very
important service; so I resolved, not having anything else in view,
to secure some subscribers to the AMERICAN MISSIONARY, and within two
hours yesterday I begged fourteen persons to put down their names. Now,
suppose each one of your students in the South should do even that
much, is it not plain that you would soon have a large constituency
here as well as in New England? Such service alone would increase your
subscription-list by many thousands, and add largely to your income, as
well as disseminate, as should be, a wide knowledge of your work. Let,
then, every one, put his hand to the wheel, for all can do something.
Believe me, I am heartily ashamed of myself, now that I can see what
an excellent opportunity of doing great good I have lost by not doing
the lesser. I have lived, more or less, in no fewer than twenty towns,
and I have taught in at least fifteen different schools since I first
left one of your schools, at any one of which I ought to have raised at
least as many subscribers to the AMERICAN MISSIONARY as I have here. I
have been a Christian for several years, but unfortunately one of that
class who are afraid to “stand up for Jesus.” I am feeling differently
now, consequently am likely to fly to the other extreme. Should any
little work, then, suggest itself to you, such as you may regard me
capable of performing, why be assured that a willing servant is at
hand. It is to be very much regretted that, since I have to remain
here, I could not be with the teachers at Tillotson College; still
those who can work will work anywhere.

  Very sincerely,

  H. C. G.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN INDIAN BOY’S LETTER.

DEAR FRIEND: I was born in Grand Island, Neb. in the 15 day of
November. My mother was married by a white man, and used to live in
Grand Island, and my father was scouting with the Pawnees, and once it
rain very hard and he got lightling struck and died; I did not know
him, I never seen him, my mother tells me about him. When he died, my
mother went back to her home, and lived with her brother, who lived
like a white man. In 1869 I went on a hunting bufflos with the Pawnees
and Puncas. We went on about three days; they found some bufflos, so
all the men got their best horses and fixed them up, and then took
their bows and arrows and guns. They went all around them, and then
they just run their horses to see who’ill get there first, one man
would kill two or three, sometimes four and eight, and they skin them,
and take them home, skin and all. The skins is used for mocassins and
men legends (leggings). Once I went swimming while the men went after
bufflos, while I was in the water I seen a bufllo coming where I was,
frightened me to, I had to climbed upon a tree. It was mad, and some
men were after him; and had some arrows in him. They killed it, and
then I got down, and I seen them skin it. We had lots bufflo meat; we
camp the same place, the Indians were drying their meat, so it will
less (last) long. After while we went on again, we went on till sun
was sat. Next morning they seen some more bufflos; they killed many
more; they had to stay there till their meat was dry. We stayed there
and then the Indian women got their work things and work on with their
skins. They finished them and had lots meat and skins. We return home
again.

I just eat dry meat all the time. No town near to buy some bread nor
sugar. I used to be hungry for bread. I used to cry for bread. My
stepfather had to take me where their was some Pawnees, that did not go
on hunting. We got there. I had all the bread I want. I was glad then.
The next day we went on and got to a town; and got in the cars, and
went on; we got to another town; we get out and went to my home, and
then they sent me to school. I went to school four months. I went home
again.

After while some of the Pawnees ran away from their homes, went to
Indian Territory and stayed there for couple years, had nice time and
had many ponies, then one went back home and told them it was very
nice down the Territory, and it made part of the Chiefs think it would
be nice to go down there. They used to have a counsil all day, and
had a counsil one year. One Chief did not want to go down there; that
was Lone Chief, because he liked that place, because the Pawnees were
civilized when they were up there. They commencing putting up their
houses, and farming. They went down there. I went down with them. When
I was there, I used to work on my farm. I have got a farm my own. I use
to go to school in winter. I had been wanting to go to school somewhere
else. I am very glad they took me to Hampton School. I think my friends
will help me all they can. I want to learn all I can at Hampton School
and stay here till four or five years, my mother was willing for me to
go to school and be among the white people, and when I went to Indian
Territory, and I went to the day school one year, and the next year I
went to the Boarding School. I never use to talk English one year ago,
but the Agent at my home, keep me at his office where there was many
white men were writing. They use to talk to me all the time in English,
and then I learn how, and then I use to interpret for the Agent.

When we first went down to the Territory, there use to be many
sickness; they used to die; they were not use to in warm country. Once
I was sick. I had the chills and favor. I near died. I got well again;
before I came away, I plow part of my field and sowed some wheat, but I
have got brothers who will work at my field while I am away, and keep
my horses good, and houses. Some white people used to want to take me.
When I was at home I used to write to Col. Meachem, to help me to go to
some school. He did help me, and I am glad I went to Hampton School.
I am trying to be a good boy, and study all I can. The only thing
troubles me is Geography, that is the only thing I have to try hard.

  Yours truly,
  JAMES MURIE.




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L. Stone,
D.D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low,
Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey, D.D.,
Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D.D., Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball, E.
P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN ANNIVERSARY AT SACRAMENTO.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

We have sustained a mission school among the Chinese at Sacramento for
nearly ten years; but our first public anniversary was held at the
Congregational church there, on Sunday, January 11th. The following
account of it was furnished for _The Pacific_ by the pastor, Rev. Dr.
Dwinell:

“The attendance was good, and the exercises thrilling with Christian
interest to one who can see in such facts the beginning of a great
tidal wave of grace that is yet to flow over the Chinese empire;
and, what is more, a good collection was taken, showing the interest
to be genuine. The exercises consisted of recitations of classified
Scripture, an original address, an original dialogue, and singing—all
by the Chinese—and brief introductory and closing exercises by others.
The mission is in a very prosperous condition, and shows the fruits
of the earnest, faithful teaching of those who have had charge of the
school, and especially of the present principal, Mrs. Carrington.”

After several of the exercises a muffled applause was audible, such as
on any other day and in any other place would have been irrepressible.
Especially was this the case after the following


ADDRESS BY LEM CHUNG.

“Ladies and gentlemen: I am very glad to see you all here this evening.
I thank you very much for your kindness, teaching us about the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, because our people are in very darkness indeed,
worshiping idols. I would like to tell you of something I did when I
was a little boy at home. My parents were very careful to attend to
worshiping idols, but on the first day of the year they must worship
more than any other day of the year. At this time I used to carry a
basket with some sacrifice in it, follow after my father from place to
place where the different gods were for worshiping. I believe on them
very much. I thought the idols can help us a great deal. So when I was
at school one day, I wrote a piece of paper, it represent a sage, and I
put it inside of my desk. I then bought some nuts and wine and offered
to him, and bowed my head to him, and ask him to help me about my
lessons, that I might recite them well, and I said, ‘If you do not help
me to recite my lessons well, when I return I tear you off and burn you
up.’ When the time come I could not recite very well, so then _I burn
it_. I had been at school about three years. My father sent me to the
high school professor. Explaining the book of Confucius at that time, I
often go with the priest to help them play the music for worshiping the
evil spirits. After little while the priest came to my father, see if
he can let me go learn to be a priest. My father was willing to let me
go, but when my mother knew it she said, ‘I cannot spare my son to be a
priest, worshiping too much for the evil spirit, but I rather to send
him to California, getting his living.’

“Nearly five years have passed since I leaved my native land and came
to this country, where I found all the things strange and different
from what I had ever seen before. I found there was much for me to
learn. A friend of mine invited me to Sunday-school, and I went with
him. When I returned to the Chinatown I ask some person what kind of
people are they who teach us there? They said, American people; but
I could not know how it was that they should be willing to come and
teach us without pay. They told me that they were very good people who
come to teach you, and talk about Jesus Christ, and show us the right
way. I kept on going till I can read the Bible. Great many things very
different from other books. My heart was touch of Christ. I could not
understand all; but not many days after the same friend invited me to
go with him to the evening mission school. So I went with him to the
school. After the lessons were over, the Chinese helper explained the
Bible and talk to us, telling us it was useless to serve idols; they
cannot help us; _they cannot take care of themselves_. But we must come
to God of heaven, who made all things, heaven and earth. We must ask
Him to help us, and pray to Him to give us all things what we need. We
ought to praise Him. So when I heard him say this I saw and felt all I
had done before was of no use, and was very wicked. Then I make up my
mind to leave off worshiping idols, and begin to worship the true and
living God. So I went back where I was employed. When I kneeled down
to pray I opened my window, because I thought God cannot hear me if I
leave it closed. After a few days the Chinese helper request me to join
the Association of Christian Chinese, which I did, and read the Bible
day by day, learning more about Christ. Oh, friends, I was very happy
when I was converted! when I come to Jesus and worship the true God;
leave the darkness and follow the light, and try to lead others of my
countrymen to learn of Jesus, and know Him who died for us and save us
from sin.

“When my father heard I follow Christ he sent me a letter. He said:
‘What are you doing out there? Are you going to believe Jesus, and
leave all your countrymen, and your ancestors, and idols, and Confucius
unserved?’ And he said: ‘No other way better than Confucius; so many
of your countrymen do not believe Christ. You must leave off and
come back to _our own way_. Believe the way that most of our people
believe.’ But Christ tell us, ‘He that loveth father or mother more
than Me not worthy of Me.’ I cannot leave off the way of Christ for the
way of darkness; but I can try to bring them to Jesus. I hope you all,
brethren, who come to Christ, will help hold up the light of the Gospel
to shine on them which are in the dark and bow down to idols, and that
many of my countrymen shall go back to China to tell the glad news to
thousands there who have never heard of Christ; and if we cannot reward
you, God will reward you every one.”

I have not been willing to correct any of the little mistakes of
grammar, but give the address in exact copy from the original. It
was uttered in a clear voice, with a distinct and quite correct
pronunciation, and with such simple earnestness that every eye was
fixed upon him, and every heart seemed touched. Lem Chung has been our
helper in Sacramento for about eight months, is _growing_ mentally and
spiritually, and gives promise of a very useful future.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO MAKE MONEY FOR THE MISSIONARIES.

An original Essay written by a Girl eleven years old, and read by her
at a Woman’s Foreign Missionary Meeting in Indiana.

I should think that everyone could think of ways for themselves, but I
suppose we can help each other. Some ways that I may suggest might not
be thought of by others, while others in turn might think of many ways
that I would not.

The first way that enters my mind is what I found to be a very good
plan at one time; have your grandfather get sick so that your father
will have to go and see him, and on his return your grandmother will
send you a present of one dollar. With it buy a pig in partnership with
someone else who has the same amount, and after feeding it with your
father’s corn for a year, sell it for twenty dollars, you of course
getting one half of it.

Another way is to have a little garden and sell vegetables out of it;
and another way is to have a hen and sell eggs, or raise chickens and
sell them. One way that I found to be a good one, is to make tidies
and sell them. And those of us who are fortunate enough to have a baby
brother or sister, attend it two or three hours for a penny an hour.
And I think another good way is to be a great talker, and have your
mother give you five cents to be still. We may also relieve our mothers
very much by watering the house plants, and may be she will give us a
little bit.

And I have often thought it would be a good plan to have pay for
washing dishes, and may be some of your mothers would; just mention
it to them; but mine won’t, for I have tried it! And when your mother
sends you to pick berries, just mention the missionaries to her. And if
you live in the country, gather apples, churn, kill potato bugs and dig
potatoes. And then have a penny a dozen for finding pins; and the best
place in the world to find pins is in the oldest sister’s room.

And another way of getting money for our school in Persia is to save a
part of the money we spend in candies. But I hope that in our dividing
between ourselves and missions, none of us may be like the little
boy that I heard of not long ago. His uncle gave him two bright new
nickels. They were a little fortune to him, and as he looked upon
them, he said, “One of these must go for the heathen and the other for
candy.” After this decision he put them away, and every few minutes he
would go to see if his fortune was safe. But once, after having them
out, one of them was missing. What should he do? and which piece was
lost, the missionary or the candy money? His little eyes rested upon
the shining piece in his hand, and after many minutes of hard struggle
with selfishness and benevolence, he said to his mother, “It was the
missionary money that I lost!” But then I guess that bigger folks than
children often have their business plans, which they think cannot be
broken into by missionaries.

  (“Children’s Work for Children.”)

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JANUARY, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $528.76.

    Bangor. Central Ch. Sab. Sch., $25, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._;—Hammond St. Ch. (ad’l),
      $15.21; T. U. C., $1                                   $41.21
    Bath. Mrs. J. C.                                           1.00
    Biddeford. J. N. A.                                        1.00
    Brownville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            16.00
    Cumberland. S. M. R.                                       1.00
    Farmington. —— Bbl. of C.
    Lovell. Ladies, by Mrs. Lewis Goodrich, Bbl. of C.
    Machias. Miss U. M. Penniman.                              5.00
    Norway. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         12.84
    Orland. Mrs. S. T. Buck and Daughter, $30;
      “A Friend,” $1.00                                       31.00
    Portland. State St. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l),
      $221.45; High St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $100;—High
      St. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $25, _for Hampton N.
      and A. Inst._;—Mrs. David Patten, $5;
      Mrs. L. D., 50c.                                       351.95
    Rockland. Mrs. E. R. S., 51c.; Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
      bbl. of C.                                               0.51
    Saccarappa. W. K. D.                                       0.50
    South Freeport. Miss Fannie E. Soule, $25, _for
      Miller’s Station, Ga._;—Rev. H. I., 50c.                25.50
    Sweden. E. P. Woodbury                                     8.00
    Wells. First Cong. Ch., $5.50; Individuals, $2.50          8.00
    West Newfield. Samuel C. Adams                            10.00
    Winthrop. E. H. N., $1; Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1 and
      bbl. of C.                                               2.00
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.25


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $452.38.

    Amherst. Mrs. Ed. Aiken, $25, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._;—Ladies Soc., $2 and Box of Goods,
      _for Wilmington, N. C._;—Miss C. M. Boylston, $2        29.00
    Colebrook. J. A. H.                                        0.50
    Concord. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $47.01;
      —W. H. Pitman, $2, _for Mendi M._;
      —Miss F. A. G., 50c.; Mrs. C. D., 50c                   50.02
    Francestown. ESTATE of Miss Lucy Everett, by Joseph
      Kingsbury.                                              60.00
    Francestown. A. F.                                         1.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch., $8.50; E. G. Heald, $6             14.50
    Hanover. Dartmouth Religious Soc.                         25.00
    Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.00
    Harrisville. D. Farwell                                    2.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.00
    Keene. Individuals                                         1.50
    Kensington. “Friend”                                       3.00
    Lake Village. B. Q. J.                                     1.00
    Londonderry. C. S. P.                                      1.00
    Manchester. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc., $100, to
      const. REV. WM. V. W. DAVIS, F. B. EATON and E.
      L. BRYANT, L. M.’s; “Pillsbury,” $10                   110.00
    Mason. Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                        19.31
    Monroe. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 0.97
    Mount Vernon. J. A. S.                                     1.00
    Nashua. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc., $30.28; Mrs.
      E. A. S., and Rev. F. A., 50c. ea                       31.28
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $3; J. W. C., 50c.        3.50
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $13; Mrs. M. B. Pratt,
      $11; A. E., $1                                          25.00
    Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson, $7; Cong. Ch.
      and Soc., $5                                            12.00
    Pittsfield. —— $10; John L. Thorndike, $10                20.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.30
    Short Falls. I. W. C.                                      0.50
    Temple. Individuals, by Rev. J. F. Bassett                 5.00
    Wentworth. Ephraim Cook, $10 and bbl. of C.               10.00
    Wolfborough. Mrs. Sumner Clark                             5.00


  VERMONT, $1,153.69.

    Barnet. W. G. H.                                           0.60
    Bellows Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         21.56
    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                              83.44
    Craftsbury. ESTATE of Mrs. Deborah W. Lewis, by
      C. S. Smith, Ex.                                       520.87
    East Hardwick. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            31.56
    Enosburgh. G. A.                                           1.00
    Felchville. M. C. F.                                       0.50
    McIndoes Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         8.50
    North Thetford. Cong. Ch., $13.63; Mrs. E. G. B.,
      50c.                                                    14.13
    Pittsford. Cong. Soc.                                     20.00
    Post Mills. Mrs. F. J. C. May, bbl. of C.
    Royalton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              21.50
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch. $111.55;
      South Cong. Ch., $38.17; Mrs. T. M. Howard, $25,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                             174.72
    Sheldon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  27.76
    South Peacham. Mrs. W. W.                                  1.00
    Springfield. “Springfield Miss. Circle,” _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                               120.00
    Vershire. Mrs. M. W. Parker                                2.00
    Waitsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            13.51
    Weathersfield Centre. Mrs. Edson Chamberlin                5.00
    West Barnet. Ref. Presb. Ch., $10; Mrs. S. G., $1         11.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch., $62.24;
      Mrs. F. C. Gaines, $5                                   67.24
    Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $7.30; G. F. H.,
      50c.                                                     7.80


  MASSACHUSETTS, $4,691.00.

    Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 20.00
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $78.55; North
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $60, to const. Mrs. MARIA
      DUTTON and Mrs. JEANETTE E. STEARNS, L. M’s.           138.55
    Andover. Peter Smith, $500;—“Lady Friends,” $75,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._;—West Cong. Ch.
      and Soc., $45.18; F. A. T., $1                         621.18
    Ashby. Cong. Sab. Sch., $25, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._;—G. S. S., 51c.                             25.51
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    6.22
    Barre. “Friends,” $3, and Bbl. of C. by Mrs. Edwin
      Woods                                                    3.00
    Bedford. M. E. R.                                          0.50
    Belchertown. Orrin Walker, $5; D. B. B. 50c.               5.50
    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Boston. Mrs. Nancy B. Curtis, $200; Rev. Charles
      Nichols, $30, to const. REV. J. ENWRIGHT, L. M.,
      “A Friend,” $20; H. S. Robinson, $10; “A Friend,”
      $10; Geo. P. Smith, $5; Mrs. B. F. Dewing, $5;
      Mrs. S., $1;—“S. E. H.,” 50c. _for Chinese M._         281.50
    Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.19
    Brocton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc., $34.09; Joseph
      Hewett, $10; —— Bbl of C.                               44.09
    Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    118.16
    Buckland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.25
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch. and Soc., $124.17;
      Pilgrim Cong. Ch., $8.24; Miss A. J. P., 50c.          132.91
    Campello. “Mrs. W.,” _for Lady Missionary, Nashville,
      Tenn._                                                   3.00
    Chelsea. Miss M. E. Brooks, $2;—Mrs. A. E. P.,
      $1, _for Lady Missionary_,——; Miss H., 50c.              3.50
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           7.50
    Cohasset. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        7.36
    Colerain. Miss E. McG.                                     1.00
    Conway. David Lyons                                        2.00
    Cotuit. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           7.00
    Dalton. Hon. Z. M. Crane, $100; Mrs. James P. Crane,
      $100                                                   200.00
    Dorchester. Mrs. H.                                        1.00
    East Douglass. Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      to const. MISS HELEN L. R. BRIGGS, L. M.                55.45
    East Longmeadow. Mrs. G. W. C.                             1.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               68.00
    Fitchburg. Rev. and Mrs. J. M. R. Eaton                   10.00
    Framingham. Young People’s Circle, Plymouth Ch.,
      $98; Plymouth Ch. and Soc., $50.27;
      —— Box of C.                                           148.27
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         33.30
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. Sag. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Gloucester. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      GEO. R. BRADFORD, JOHN CUNNINGHAM and JOSIAH
      K. HURST, L. M’s                                       100.00
    Granville Corners. C. Holcomb                              5.00
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $100;
      Miss Emily Beckwith, $10; —— “A. C. T.,”
      $1 _for Hampton N. & A. Inst._                         111.00
    Greenfield. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             15.00
    Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.51
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $143.19;
      West Cong. Ch. and Soc., $7.04;
      Mrs. L. P. F., 50c.; Dea. E. W., 50c.; C. C., $1;
      Mrs. S. C., 50c.                                       152.73
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.10
    Holliston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., 2 Bbls. of C, val.
      $74.11, by Eda B. Partridge, Treas.; A. F., 51c.         0.51
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            103.80
    Housatonic. M. A. H.                                       0.51
    Hubbardston. A. G. D.                                      0.50
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $28.15; Limebrook
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $4.50                               32.65
    Indian Orchard. Cong. Ch.                                 43.00
    Jamaica Plain. Boylston Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                   6.53
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $150;
      —Lawrence St. Ch. Sab. Sch., $50, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                       200.00
    Lexington. Miss M. E. P.                                   0.50
    Littleton. Woman’s Miss. Circle, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $50;—Ladies’
      Soc., $1 and bbl. of C., _for Wilmington, N. C._;
      —Mrs. S. L. P., 50c.                                    51.50
    Lynn. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.00
    Malden. “A few Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Matfield. Mrs. S. D. Shaw                                  3.00
    Medford. “A Friend”                                        2.00
    Methuen. A. P. C.                                          0.50
    Middleborough. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $11.68; Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $10.41                                    22.09
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        57.95
    Monson. Mrs. C. O. Chapin and her S. S. Class, $11,
      _for ed. of Indian boys, Hampton N. and A. Inst._;
      —Mrs. Dewey’s S. S. Class $6; Miss E. A. W., $1         18.00
    Monterey. Rev. A. E. T.                                    0.50
    Natick. Postage                                            0.10
    Needham. Mrs. Ellen H. Green                             100.00
    Newburyport. Freedman’s Aid Soc., by Mrs. Mary E.
      Demmick, Sec., _for Lady Missionary, Macon, Ga._        25.00
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         223.15
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $77.32;
      S. A. E., 50c.; J. W., 50c.                             78.32
    North Abington. Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.                     5.00
    Northampton. Sab. Sch. of First Ch.                       20.00
    North Amherst. H. S.                                       1.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                         61.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.00
    Norwood. Mrs. Fuller                                       3.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          23.50
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  13.57
    Pittsfield. By John T. Poorer, $2.50; Mrs. N. G. B.
      and Miss E. F., 50c. ea.                                 3.50
    Plymouth. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                            56.56
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               3.15
    Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         12.06
    Reading. Old South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     14.92
    Rockland. E. Shaw                                         25.00
    Rockport. John Parsons                                     3.00
    Salem. A. P.                                               0.50
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                14.00
    Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        7.00
    South Attleborough. Mrs. Harriet L. Draper, Bbl.
      of C. _for Savannah, Ga._
    South Boston. Infant Class of Phillips Sab. Sch.,
      $15; Miss J. A. 50c.                                    15.50
    South Natick. John Eliot Ch. and Soc.                      9.63
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc. to
      const. MISS MARY B. TIRRELL and MISS MARY A.
      LLOYD, L. M’s.                                          51.00
    Somerville. H. B. S.                                       0.50
    Springfield. “M,” $200; First Cong. Ch., $33.06;
      South Cong. Ch., $32.91; G. B. K., $1;
      Mrs. H., 50c.                                          267.47
    Stockbridge. Cong. Ch.                                    74.48
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              21.80
    Stoughton. Betsey E. Capen                                 2.00
    Sutton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                11.40
    Sudbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $21; “A Friend,” $3          24.00
    Taunton. “A Friend”                                       20.00
    Uxbridge. W. J.                                            1.00
    Watertown. Ladies of Phillips Ch., 2 Bbls. of C.
      _for Wilmington, N. C._
    Wellesley. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $36.08; “L. B. H.,”
      $20                                                     56.08
    Westborough. Rev. J. W. B.                                 0.60
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers” $2 and Bbl. of C.         2.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       18.16
    West Medway. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. ADDISON A.
      SMITH, L. M.                                            31.08
    West Newbury. J. C. C.                                     2.50
    West Roxbury. South Evan Sab. Sch. _for Indian
      Pupils, Hampton N. and A. Inst._                        20.00
    Whitinsville. Cong. Ch., $30; “A Friend,” $20;
      S. A. D., 50c.                                          50.50
    Williamstown. Cong. Ch., $40; Rev. Mark Hopkins,
      $10                                                     50.00
    Wilmington. Dea. J. Skilton                               10.00
    Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc., mon. con. coll. $34.22;
      North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $11.12                        45.34
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $133.57;
      Old South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $28.24                   161.81
    Yarmouth. Rev. John W. Dodge                               5.00
    —— “A Friend,”                                            10.00
    —— “A Friend,”                                             5.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $199.96.

    Bristol. Mrs. R. R. and Miss C. De W., _for Mag._          1.00
    Little Compton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        22.00
    Pawtucket. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             25.00
    Peace Dale. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Providence. Union Cong. Ch. (ad’l), $126.64;
      Charles St. Cong. Ch., $13.72; M. E. L., $1;
      Miss P., 60c.                                          141.96


  CONNECTICUT, $3,036.40.

    Ansonia. J. H. Bartholomew                                25.00
    Berlin. C. S. Webster, $50, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._;—Second Cong. Ch., $19.12                 69.12
    Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                      6.00
    Bridgeport. V. C.                                          1.00
    Bristol. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  20.00
    Broad Brook. Cong. Ch.                                    12.50
    Burnside. Miss E. S.                                       0.50
    Canaan. “A Friend”                                         2.00
    Canton Centre. Wm. G. Hallock                             10.00
    Cheshire. Cong. Ch., _for ed. of an Indian boy,
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._                                 5.00
    Colchester. S. G. Millard, $10, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._;—C. B. McCall, $10, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._; Mrs. M. J. G., 50c.                 20.50
    Collinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($6 of which
      _for Girls’ Ind. Sch., Talladega C._)                   28.43
    Cornwall Bridge. Geo. H. Swift                            10.00
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch. ($3 of which _for Indian M._)         11.00
    Danbury. E. B.                                             1.00
    Durham. Ladies’ Miss. Ass’n, $3 and Bbl. of C. _for
      Talladega, Ala._                                         3.00
    Eastford. ESTATE of Royel Warren, by J. D. Barrows,
      Ex.                                                    250.00
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  20.00
    East Windsor Hill. Ladies, $10.50, and Bbl. of C.
      _for Lady Missionary, Nashville, Tenn._                 10.50
    Enfield. Sarah A. Abbe                                    30.00
    Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                    13.20
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Quar. Coll., (of which $150
      from Henry D. Hawley, to const. FLORA E.
      Hawley, L. M.)                                         204.45
    Georgetown. Cong. Ch., case of S. S. Books;
      Rev. C. A. N., $1                                        1.00
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $35; G. M. J.,
      63c.                                                    35.63
    Goshen. “A Friend”                                        20.00
    Greenwich. Miss Sarah Mead                                50.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                               5.77
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., $149.96, ($10 of
      which _for Hampton Inst._); Park Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $133.57; Windsor Ave. Cong. Ch., $20.07;
      Mrs. Mary C. Bemis, $20;—Young Girls’ Miss.
      Ass’n, $5, _for Talladega, Ala._;
      Miss P. Johnson, $1.50; Mrs. W. T., 50c.               330.60
    Harwinton. Mrs. Frederick S. Catlin                       50.00
    Hebron. “Friends”                                         15.00
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           20.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.44
    Lebanon. Goshen Sab. Sch. $12; Mrs. P. E. H., 50c.        12.50
    Litchfield. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                     17.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         1.00
    Manchester. E. A. B.                                       0.50
    Meriden. Centre Cong. Ch.                                 21.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.04
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                 6.95
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch., $55.40; Mrs. A. A., $1      56.40
    New Hartford. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    24.55
    New Haven. Mrs. Henry Johnston, $5.00; Miss B. P.,
      $1; Others, $1                                           7.00
    New London. Second Cong. Ch., ($300 of which
      from TRUST ESTATE of H. P. HAVEN.)                     778.26
    New Milford. Mrs. F. G. B.                                 1.00
    New Preston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           40.50
    North Branford. J. A. P.                                   1.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                      12.50
    North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett                            10.00
    Norwalk. Mrs. Wm. B. St. John                              3.00
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                         12.50
    Prospect. Dea. Benj. B. Brown, $10;
      Mrs. E. B. Brown, $10                                   20.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       28.50
    Quinnebaug. —Bbl. of C.
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                      58.61
    Somers. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                29.16
    Southington. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                              2.10
    Stanwich. Wm. Brush                                      300.00
    Stonington. R. Town                                        1.50
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      23.09
    Thompson. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._        9.00
    Washington. F. A. F.                                       1.00
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. WILLIAM A.
      JONES and LAURA N. DAYTON, L. M’s.                      75.00
    Weatogue. T. J. W.                                         1.00
    West Meriden. Edmund Tuttle, $30, to const. MRS.
      IRA H. MERRIMAN, L. M.; E. K. Breckenridge, $5          35.00
    Westminster. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    West Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.60
    Wethersfield. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                             2.00
    Windsor Locks. Mrs. L. P. Dexter                           6.00
    Winsted. Mrs. M. A. Mitchell, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Woodbury. Mrs. Elizabeth L. Curtiss                       10.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             17.50


  NEW YORK, $642.73.

    Antwerp. Cong. Sab. Sch., by Mrs. Ira H. Abell            25.00
    Batavia. Mrs. A. D. L.                                     1.00
    Binghamton. Sheldon Warner                                10.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., $10, _for the
      poor in Plym. Sab. Sch., Charleston, S. C._;
      —Mrs. H. Dickinson, $2; O. W., 50c.                     12.50
    Canastota. E. B. Northrop, $5; Mr. and Mrs. R. H.
      Childs, $5                                              10.00
    Clear Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     1.50
    Clifton Springs. MRS. ANDREW PEIRCE, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                      5.00
    Coxsackie. Rev. M. Lusk                                    5.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $35.57;
      Mrs. E. S. $1                                           36.57
    Ellington. Cong. Ch.                                       7.50
    Felts Mills. Joel A. Hubbard and family                   30.00
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch.                                 29.58
    Fredonia. Mrs. Thos. W. Stevens                            5.00
    Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                     5.00
    Fulton. J. C. Galispie, Almon Bristol, and T. W.
      Chesebro, $5 ea.; F. S., 50c.                           15.50
    Gouverneur. Mrs. H. D. S. $1; Miss B. R. S., 50c.          1.50
    Hopkinton. First Cong. Ch.                                 3.00
    Hudson. Mrs. D. A. Jones                                  15.00
    Jamesport. L. I. “Friends”                                10.00
    Locust Valley. Mrs. Sarah Palmer                           5.00
    Marcellus. First Ch., $20; Mrs. L. H., 45c.               20.45
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    Millbrook. Mrs. J. W. C.                                   1.00
    New York. Broadway Tab. Sab. Sch., $50, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._;—Holman Liver Pad Co., 7.75, _for
      Emerson Inst._; E. S., 50c.                             58.25
    New York Mills. H. N. Porter, D. D.                       10.00
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    North Franklin. Mrs. Mary P. Foote                         5.00
    Oneonta. Mrs. L. J. S.                                     1.00
    Perry Centre. Ladies Benev. Soc., $16.35 and Bbl.
      of C. by Mrs. G. K. Sheldon                             16.35
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Rochester. Gen. A. W. Riley                               25.00
    Sag Harbor. Mrs. A. E. Westfall, $10; A. E. W., 50c.      10.50
    South Stockton. Adelia Eaton                               4.00
    Success. Sab. Sch. by J. H. Benjamin, Supt.               20.00
    Syracuse. Miss A. W. D.                                    0.50
    Tompkinsville. Mrs. Maria Snyder                           2.00
    Victor. Mrs. Emeline Lewis                                50.00
    Walton. First Cong. Ch., $58.53; Agavine Miss.
      Soc., $10;—Chas. S. Fitch, _for Mendi M._, $5           73.53
    West Chazy. Daniel Bassett, $5;
      Rev. L. Prindle, $2                                      7.00
    West Farms. J. A.                                          1.00
    Westfield. Mrs. J. B. S.                                   1.00
    West Greece. S. B. B.                                      0.50
    Whitesborough. J. Symonds                                  5.00
    Whitney’s Point. Mrs. E. Rogers                            2.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             25.00


  NEW JERSEY, $108.50.

    Belleville. J. B.                                          0.50
    Camden. James E. Simpson                                   2.00
    Clayton. “A Friend,” _for Lady Missionary, Nashville,
      Tenn._                                                  25.00
    Colt’s Neck. Reformed Ch.                                  5.00
    Newfield. Rev. Chas. Willey                               10.00
    Newark. Belleville Av. Cong. Ch., J. H. Denison, $30,
      to const. MISS CARRIE DENISON, L. M.;
      Miss H. Miller, $4, _for Student Aid, Raleigh,
      N. C._; Mrs. R. W. S., $1;—$1                           36.00
    Paterson. Benj. Crane                                     20.00
    Roseville. Ladies of Home M. Soc., by Mrs. L. Hannah      10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $36.62.

    Allentown. C. M.                                           0.50
    Centre Road Station. J. A. Scovel                         10.00
    Cowdersport. Mrs. John S. Mann                             5.00
    East Brook. James H. Patton                                5.00
    Hermitage. W. F. Stewart, $5; Miss Ellen Porter, $1        6.00
    Philadelphia. W. P. F. and Mrs. S. D.                      1.00
    West Alexander. John McCoy and Wife                        5.00
    Wurtemburg. Mrs. T. E. Liebendorfer, $2;
      Others, $2.12                                            4.12


  OHIO, $428.24.

    Ashland. John Thomson                                      2.28
    Austinburgh. N. A.                                         1.00
    Bellefontaine. Mr. and Mrs. John Lindsay                  10.00
    Bellevue. J. S.                                            1.00
    Berea. James S. Smedley                                    5.00
    Burton. Miss E. E. P.                                      0.50
    Chatham Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 18.81
    Claridon. Cong. Soc.                                      13.50
    Cleveland. Franklin Ave. Cong. Ch., $13.20;
      John Foote, $10; Rev. H. Trautman, $5                   28.20
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Elyria. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                40.00
    Four Corners. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    Geneva. Mrs. S. Kingsbury                                 10.00
    Granville. Thomas D. Williams                             10.00
    Kingsville. M. Whiting                                    20.00
    Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                           9.25
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           17.88
    Madison. Ladies Benev. Soc., $14.75, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._; “Old Friend,” $5; W. H. S., $1       20.75
    Moss Run. M. B. F.                                         0.50
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $25.50, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._; Harris Lewis, $3.             28.50
    Orwell. Rev. W. T. Richardson                              5.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $25, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._;
      First Cong. Ch. $18.57                                  43.57
    Parisville. Rev. D. D.                                     0.50
    Ruggles. Mrs. J. T.                                        0.50
    Saybrook. Rev. A. D. Barber and Family                    20.00
    Seville. Julia Hulburt                                    10.00
    Sharonville. J. H.                                         1.00
    Sicily. Julian F. Cumberland                               5.00
    Springfield. W. A. F.                                      1.00
    Tallmadge. Mrs. Harriet Seward                             5.00
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed,$10; By E. P. B., $1           11.00
    Wellington. E. W.                                          0.50
    Willoughby. Miss Mary P. Hastings                         10.00
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  23.00


  INDIANA, $17.50.

    Fort Wayne. Cong. Ch. _for Chinese M._                     6.75
    Madison. G. W. Southwick                                   5.00
    South Vigo. Cong. Ch.                                      2.75
    Sparta. Mrs. L. R.                                         1.00
    Versailles. J. D. Nichols                                  2.00


  ILLINOIS, $1000.32.

    Albion. Mrs. Martha Skeavington                            5.00
    Avon. Mrs. Cylinder Woods, $5; “A Friend,” $5             10.00
    Aurora. New Eng. Cong. Ch., $9.65;—Mrs. J. D.
      Pike’s Sab. Sch. Class, $7; _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._; N. L. J., 50c.                                17.15
    Batavia. “W. E. M.”                                       20.00
    Belvidere. ESTATE of Olney Nichols, by H. W. Pier,
      Ex.                                                     59.61
    Byron. I. S. K.                                            1.00
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, $112.50, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._;—Union Park Cong. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._;
      —New Eng. Cong. Ch., $10                               147.50
    Danville. Mrs. A. M. Swan                                  5.00
    Denver. Thomas Graham                                      5.00
    Farmington. Phineas Chapman                               44.00
    Galesburgh. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., $50, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._;—J. G. W., 50c.                   50.50
    Genesco. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              135.92
    Hamlet. L. C.                                              1.00
    Jacksonville. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                         10.00
    Lyndon. First Cong. Ch.                                   11.00
    Kankakee. F. S. H. and J. H.                               1.00
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch., $102.73;—Cong. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., $25, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                  127.73
    Knoxville. W. A., $1; Mrs. A. B., $1                       2.00
    Mendon. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                               16.00
    Milan. By Mrs. J. M. L. D.                                 1.00
    Oak Park. J. W. Scoville                                 100.00
    Ottawa. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Paxton. “A Friend”                                        20.00
    Peoria. Mr. and Mrs. J. L. Griswold, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                          100.00
    Polo. Penny Contribution, _for Lady Missionary,
      Nashville, Tenn._                                        1.00
    Port Byron. A. F. Hollister, $6; Ladies’ Miss.
      Soc., $5.50; Emma Hollister, $2.00                      13.50
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               10.00
    Rockford. Mrs. A. H. Perry                                20.00
    Roseville. Cong. Sab. Sch. (ad’l)                          4.54
    South Bend. R. Burroughs                                  10.00
    Tonica. V. G. Lutz                                         5.00
    Wauponsee Grove. Cong. Ch.                                 5.87
    Woodburn. Nickel Miss. Soc., by Miss E. M.
      Hollister, Treas.                                        5.00


  MICHIGAN, $112.61.

    Calumet. Robert Dobbie                                    10.50
    Covert. F. C.                                              0.57
    Cross Village. Rev. A. A. C.                               1.00
    Detroit. F. M. S.                                          0.50
    Dexter. Dennis Warner                                     10.00
    East Saginaw. Mrs. Miriam Seymour                          2.00
    Flint. H. Whittlesey                                       2.00
    Jackson. Mrs. R. M. Bennett                                1.50
    Kalamazoo. Mrs. M. J. Kent                                 5.00
    Lowell. Mrs. E. A. Yerkes                                  5.00
    Marshall. D. H. Miller                                     5.00
    Olivet. “A Friend,” _for Talladega C._                     0.25
    Owasso. Mrs. F. G. D.                                      0.50
    Romeo. Miss T. S. C., $1; Miss M. A. J., $1                2.00
    Saint Johns. A. J. B.                                      0.50
    Somerset. Cong. Ch.                                       18.87
    Stockbridge. W. B. C.                                      1.00
    Summit. Missionary Society, by Mrs. A. Vansickle           6.67
    Union City. First. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                       24.75
    White Lake. Robert Garner and wife                        15.00


  WISCONSIN, $227.26.

    Appleton. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.20
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch. $30, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._; Mrs. B. D. $1; W. P. 51c.                31.51
    Brandon. Rev. H. W. C.                                     0.50
    Bristol. Wis. Branch of W. B. M. S.                       10.00
    Cheboygan. A. D. and D. B. 50c., ea.                       1.00
    Clinton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Selma, Ala._               15.79
    Fond du Lac. H. S. M.                                      0.50
    Geneva. Presb. Ch. Quar. coll., $19.25; W. H. H.,
      50c.                                                    19.75
    Kenosha. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.27
    La Crosse. First Cong. Ch.                                15.44
    Mazomanie. R. L.                                           1.00
    Mukwanago. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 3.00
    Sparta. Cong. Ch., $52; Cong. Sab. Sch., $29.34;
      Mission Band, $8.96, to const. MISS LYNTHA FRANCK,
      MRS. O. L. IRWIN and J. R. SKILLMAN, L. M’s             90.30
    ————. By L. S. Bingham                                     2.00
    Racine. Mrs. D. D. N.                                      1.00
    Rockland. Thomas H. Eynon                                 10.00


  IOWA, $444.27.

    Anamosa. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    Bowensburgh. ESTATE of Eliza B. Spencer, by Richard
      Eells, Ex.                                             100.00
    Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                     70.36
    Clay. Cong. Ch.                                            4.50
    Cleveland. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                            10.00
    Des Moines. Plymouth Sab. Sch., $10;
      “Friends,” $13, _for Student Aid_;
      —T. E. Brown, $10; Mrs. A. W. Rollins, $5, _for
      Repairs, Talladega C._                                  38.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. S. N. M. and Mrs. J. B., 50c. ea.            1.00
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                         26.66
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch. and Boys’ S. S. Class, $26.22;
      Miss S. Whitcomb’s S. S. Class, $5, _for Student
      Aid_, and A. Steele, $5, _for Repairs,
      Talladega C._                                           36.22
    Marion. Mrs. A. W. Shedd, $5, _for Student Aid_;
      J. T. S., 50c.                                           5.50
    McGregor. Ladies’ Miss. Soc.                              17.70
    Monticello. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                            5.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch., $36.05, and a Sewing Machine,
      _for Talladega C._                                      36.05
    New Hampton. Dea. Gideon Gardiner, $5; Ladies’ Miss.
      Soc., Quar. Coll., $1.60                                 6.60
    Newton. Rev. S. A. A.                                      0.50
    Osage. Cong. Ch., $10.75; Woman’s Miss. Soc., $5.50;
      Mrs. G. W. Smith, $1.50                                 17.75
    Rockford. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., by Mrs. O. J. Green,
      Treas.                                                   2.68
    Sherrills Mount. Rev. J. R.                                1.00
    Tabor. J. F. S.                                            0.50
    Traer. Rev. C. H. Bissel, $5; Infant Class Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $2.25; Mrs. Ames, $2                               9.25
    Waterloo. Leavett & Johnson, _for Talladega C._           40.00


  KANSAS, $16.00.

    Leavenworth. Prof. L. A. Stone ($1 of which _for
      Chinese Mission_)                                        3.00
    Meriden. “A Friend of Missions”                           10.00
    Topeka. Justin Hillyer                                     3.00


  MINNESOTA, $86.41.

    Audubon. Cong. Ch.                                         2.40
    Austin. Union Cong. Ch.                                   25.77
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Medford. J. W. Powell’s Sab. Sch. Class                    2.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch., $19.64; Second
      Cong. Ch., $1.60                                        21.24
    Northfield. “Friends,” $7, and Bbl. of C. _for
      Talladega C._; A. L., $1                                 8.00
    Plainview. Primary Class Cong. Sab. Sch.                   2.00
    Saint Paul. Plymouth Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              10.00
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                            5.00


  NEBRASKA, $29.00.

    Freemont. Cong. Ch., $5; and Sab. Sch., $8                13.00
    Lincoln. J. G. E.                                          1.00
    Nebraska City. “A Friend,” $10; Woman’s Missionary
      Soc. of First Cong. Ch., $3.50; Individuals, $1.50      15.00


  CALIFORNIA, $5.00.

    Chico. Lewis H. Moss                                       5.00


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $8.01.

    White River. Cong. Ch.                                     8.01


  TENNESSEE, $587.25.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   117.15
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition, $245.10; Prof. A. K.
      Spencer, $200, _for Fisk U._;—Soc. for Evan. of
      Africa in Fisk U., $25, _for a Pupil, Mendi M._        470.10


  NORTH CAROLINA, $131.36.

    Dudley. Tuition                                            6.45
    Raleigh. Washington Sch. Tuition                          16.25
    Wilmington. Normal Sch. Tuition, $82.50; Sales,
      $22; Cong. Ch. $4.16                                   108.66


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $320.50.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition, $317.50;
      —Plymouth Cong. Ch., $3, _for Mendi M._                320.50


  GEORGIA, $550.69.

    Atlanta. Storrs School Tuition, $185.60; Rent, $3;
      Atlanta U., Tuition, $97; Rent, $16.50                 312.10
    Athens. J. G. H.                                           0.51
    Hawkinsville. M. B. C.                                     0.50
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, $48.15; Rent, $4;
      First Cong. Ch., $8                                     60.15
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, 118.50; Sales,
      $58.93; Rent, $10                                      187.43


  ALABAMA, $418.14.

    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $179.45; Cong. Ch.,
      $2                                                     181.45
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Talladega. Talladega Col., _Tuition_, $61.19;
      Rev. J. W. R., 50c                                      61.69


  MISSISSIPPI, $57.97.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $47.77; Rent, $10.20      57.97


  MISSOURI, $18.00.

    Bridge Creek. I. R. W.                                     0.50
    Index. W. B. Wills, $10; P. M. Wills, $5; F. P. M.,
      $1; Others, $1.50                                       17.50


  LOUISIANA, $96.25.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                         96.25


  ———— ——, $25.00.

    Jubilee Singers, _for Dept. Natural Science, Fisk U._     25.00


  INCOME FUND, $195.50.

    Interest _for Mendi M._                                   45.50
    Graves Library Fund                                      150.00


  CANADA, $20.00.

    Guelph. First Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Sherbrooke. Thomas S. Morey                               10.00


  LABRADOR, $10.00.

    Labrador. Rev. S. R. Butler                               10.00


  BULGARIA, $10.00.

    Bulgaria, Samokov. “Wanderer”                             10.00
                                                           ————————
                Total                                     15,665.32
         Total from Oct. 1st to Jan. 31st                $58,823.19

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Exeter, N. H. Mrs. Augusta F. Odlin                      100.00
    Hartford, Conn. Mrs. Henry A. Perkins                    100.00
    Worcester, Mass. John B. Gough                            50.00
    New York, N. Y. Mrs. C. P. Stokes                        100.00
                                                             ——————
                Total                                       $350.00
    Previously acknowledged in Dec. receipts                 867.00
                                                            ———————
                Total                                     $1,217.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR SCHOOL BUILDINGS, ATHENS, ALA.

    Charlotte, Mich. Cong. Ch.                                36.00
    Minneapolis, Minn. “Friends”                             300.00
                                                             ——————
                Total                                       $336.00
    Previously acknowledged in Nov. receipts                  83.00
                                                             ——————
                Total                                       $419.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Newton, Mass. Elliot Ch. and Soc.                        117.50
    Sing Sing, N. Y. Mrs. Harriet M. Cole, to const.
      REV. ALBERT P. MILLER, L. M.                            30.00
    Union City, Mich. Mrs. Sarah B. Clark, $5; Mrs. L.
      W. Clark, $5; Mrs. Lee, $3; Juv. Miss. Soc., $3         16.00
                                                             ——————
                Total                                        163.50
    Previously acknowledged in Dec. receipts                  17.00
                                                             ——————
                Total                                       $180.50

       *       *       *       *       *

                Receipts for January                      16,514.82

                Total from Oct. 1st to January 31st      $62,255.03
                                                          =========

  H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
  56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct Christian
missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries which are destitute of
them, or which present open and urgent fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slave-holder, or in the practice
of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds, may become a
member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty dollars, a life
member; provided that children and others who have not professed their
faith may be constituted life members without the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of September,
October or November, for the election of officers and the transaction
of other business, at such time and place as shall be designated by the
Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting, and
of delegates from churches, local missionary societies, and other
co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory, and
the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting and
disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining and
dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and agents;
the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the transaction of
all such business as usually appertains to the executive committees of
missionary and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to
be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall,
by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference shall
be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call, in
all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and general
conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the diffusion of
the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous promotion of the
missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing officers,
agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor, and
conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold their
fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular annual
meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been submitted to
a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in season to be
published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if so submitted) in
the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with the
almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its main
efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens and
Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely related
to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE in America,
and to co-operate with the Government in its humane and Christian
policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va.,1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 6.
_Africa_, 2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 70.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.—_Chartered_:
Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville,
Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and Austin, Texas, 8.
_Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington, Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston,
Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile,
Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 24. Total 44.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 253;
among the Chinese, 21; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
296. STUDENTS—In Theology, 86; Law, 28; in College Course, 63; in
other studios, 7,030. Total, 7,207. Scholars taught by former pupils
of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care of the
Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for the
new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for
these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK     H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON       Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO      Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen who
take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of Sabbath
Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries; to Societies
of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does not prefer to
take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year not less than five
dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in their
last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States three
are required—in other States only two], who should write against
their names, their places of residence [if in cities, their street
and number]. The following form of attestation will answer for every
State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published and declared by the
said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament, in presence of us,
who, at the request of the said A. B., and in his presence, and in
the presence of each other, have hereunto subscribed our names as
witnesses.” In some States it is required that the Will should be made
at least two months before the death of the testator.


       *       *       *       *       *


                             GET THE BEST.


                              The “OXFORD”

                            TEACHERS’ BIBLES

                       IN SEVEN DIFFERENT SIZES,

                     At prices to suit everybody.

            Apply to your Bookseller for Lists, or write to

                          THOS. NELSON & SONS,

                     42 Bleecker Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          Meneely & Kimberly,

                       BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N.Y.

            Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.
            Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.

            ☛ Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            SABBATH READING.

                       Superintendents & Teachers

            Should examine this Paper, it is so well suited
            for the UPPER CLASSES in the Sunday-school.

                             A WEEKLY PAPER

            In schools where papers are distributed once a
            month, the subscription can be for one-fourth
            the number required. Thus, if you want twenty
            copies a month for the Bible classes, subscribe
            for 5 copies of

                            SABBATH READING.

         You will thus have a variety which is very desirable.

                          Only 50 Cts. a Year.

                                5 COPIES,

                         260 Papers, $2 a Year.

            Three sample copies sent to any Minister or
            Teacher FREE. Apply in letter or postal card.

            Address,
                           JOHN DOUGALL & CO.
                       7 Frankfort St., New York.

                            ONLY $1.25 MORE

                         WILL SECURE A COPY OF

                                  THE

                     National Sunday-school Teacher

                                FOR 1880.

            The clear and analytical =Class Outlines=, the full
            and attractive =Bible Readings=, and the rich and
            suggestive =Notes and Comments=, make =The Teacher=
            one of the best helps in the =Study=, the =Prayer
            Meeting=, and the =Sunday-school=. As a Superintendent
            lately wrote us, “The =Class Outline= alone is worth
            the price of the magazine.” Regular price reduced to
            =$1.25= per year. Clubs of =5= or more =$1.00= each.
            Sample free.

                    Adams, Blackmer & Lyon Pub. Co.,
                             CHICAGO, ILL.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       1850.              1880.

                                  THE

                               MANHATTAN

                                  LIFE

                          _Insurance Company_,

                                   OF

                                NEW YORK.


            An entire generation of successful business
            management.

            _One Thousand Dollars paid out_ EACH BUSINESS
            DAY _for thirty years to families of deceased
            members_.


                         Policies Incontestable.


                     Accumulation, - - - - $10,000,000
                     Surplus, over - - - - - 1,750,000


                        SEND FOR RATES AND TERMS.

            _New form of Policy, comprehensive and very
            liberal to insurers._

                             AGENTS WANTED.

            HENRY STOKES, President.
                                    J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


       *       *       *       *       *


                                PAYSON’S
                             Indelible Ink,

                     FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                         COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                              PREPARATION.


            It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                         _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

                 Sales now greater than ever before.

            This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at
            Centennial over all rivals.

            Report of Judges: “For simplicity of
            application and indelibility.”


                              INQUIRE FOR
                         PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

            Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News
            Agents, and by many Fancy Goods and Furnishing
            Houses.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            ☛ CRAMPTON’S ☚
                                PURE OLD
                               PALM SOAP,
                                  FOR

                  The Laundry, the Kitchen, and
                        For General Household Purposes,

                             MANUFACTURED BY
                            CRAMPTON BROTHERS,

                  _Cor. Monroe & Jefferson Sts., N. Y._
                    Send for Circular and Price List.


            Crampton’s old Palm Soap for the Laundry, the
            Kitchen, and for general Household purposes.
            The price of the “Palm Soap” is $4.20 per box
            of 100 three-quarter pound bars—75 pounds in
            box. To any one who will send us an order for
            10 boxes with cash, $42, we will send one box
            extra free as a premium. Or the orders may be
            sent to us for one or more boxes at a time,
            with remittance, and when we have thus received
            orders for ten boxes we will send the eleventh
            box free as proposed above. If you do not wish
            to send the money in advance, you may deposit
            it with any banker or merchant in good credit
            in your town, with the understanding that he is
            to remit to us on receipt of the soap, which is
            to be shipped to his care.

            Address,

                                         CRAMPTON BROTHERS,
                   Cor. Monroe and Jefferson Sts., New York.

                              ☛ FOR SALE ☚
                                  BY ALL
                                MERCHANTS.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          Brown Brothers & Co.
                            59 WALL STREET,
                                NEW YORK.

            =Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great
            Britain and Ireland, France, Germany, Belgium
            and Holland, =Issue Commercial and Travelers’
            Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part
            of the world, and in =France= for use in
            Martinique and Guadaloupe.

                  Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

            Between this and other countries, through
                           London and Paris.

            =Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad= on all
            parts of the United States and Canada, and of
            =Drafts drawn in the United States= on Foreign
            Countries.

            =Travelers’ Credits= issued either against
            cash deposited or satisfactory guarantee of
            repayment: In Dollars for use in the United
            States and adjacent countries; or in Pounds
            Sterling for use in any part of the world.
            Applications for credits may be addressed as
            above direct, or through any first-class Bank
            or Banker.


                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                        26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                   Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


       *       *       *       *       *


                           BUY THE BEST GOODS


                             BOGLE & LYLES,

            Nos. 87 & 89 Park Place . . . . . . . NEW YORK,

                              Dealers in
                         CHOICE CANNED FRUITS
                    VEGETABLES, POTTED MEATS, ETC.,
                           Sole Agents for
                         RICHARDSON & ROBBINS’
                         Extra Yellow Peaches.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       “IMPORTANT TO CLERGYMEN.”

                    Prince’s Improved Fountain Pen.

                             [Illustration]

               As now improved, saves one-third the time.

            “If I were bereft of it, I should feel myself
            bereft of my right hand.”—REV. LYMAN ABBOTT,
            _Ed. Ch. Union_.

            Can be sent by mail in a registered letter.
            Send for circulars. Manufactured by

                             JOHN S. PURDY,
                212 Broadway, Cor. Fulton St., New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       The Perfected Type-Writer.

                             [Illustration]

                     THE MINISTER’S BEST ASSISTANT.

            Writes faster than the pen, making beautiful
            manuscript for the pulpit, or copy for the
            printer.

              EQUALLY VALUABLE FOR ALL BUSINESS PURPOSES.

            Machines Improved and Prices Reduced. Send for
            Circular and Terms to

                            FAIRBANKS & CO.,

             Agents for the World.      311 Broadway, N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


                             J. & R. LAMB,
                         59 Carmine St., N. Y.
                           CHURCH FURNISHERS

                  [Illustration]

                  Memorial Windows, Memorial Tablets,
                  Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                           SEND FOR CIRCULAR.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       Every Man His Own Printer.

                     Excelsior =$3= Printing Press.

                           [Illustration]

            Prints cards, labels, envelopes, &c.; larger
            sizes for larger work. For business or
            pleasure, young or old. Catalogue of Presses,
            Type, Cards, &c., sent for two stamps.

            KELSEY & CO., M’f’rs, Meriden, Conn.


       *       *       *       *       *


                                MARVIN’S
                             FIRE & BURGLAR
                                 SAFES

                     COUNTER PLATFORM WAGON & TRACK

                                 SCALES

                        _MARVIN SAFE & SCALE CO._
                          _265 BROADWAY. N. Y._
                        _627 CHESTNUT ST., PHILA._


       *       *       *       *       *


                            W. & B. DOUGLAS,
                           Middletown, Conn.,
                            MANUFACTURERS OF
                                 PUMPS,

                  HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP
                  CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS, YARD
                                      HYDRANTS, STREET
                  [Illustration]      WASHERS, ETC.

                                      Highest Medal awarded
                                      them by the Universal
                                      Exposition at Paris,
                                      France, in 1867; Vienna,
                                      Austria, in 1873; and
                                      Philadelphia, 1876.

                                         Founded in 1832.

                                        Branch Warehouses:
                                          85 & 87 John St.
                                             NEW YORK,
                                                AND
                                          197 Lake Street,
                                              CHICAGO.

                   _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


       *       *       *       *       *




                         THE THIRTY-FOURTH VOLUME

                                 OF THE

                          American Missionary,

                                  1880.


We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the
increasing appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the past year,
and purpose to spare no effort to make its pages of still
greater value to those interested in the work which it records.

Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for
1880?

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making
their own remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in
forming Clubs, will easily double our list, and thus widen the
influence of our Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our
work.

Under the editorial supervision of Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, aided
by the steady contributions of our intelligent missionaries
and teachers in all parts of the field, and with occasional
communications from careful observers and thinkers elsewhere,
the AMERICAN MISSIONARY furnishes a vivid and reliable picture
of the work going forward among the Indians, the Chinamen on
the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in the South
and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters
affecting the races among which it labors, and will give a
monthly summary of current events relating to their welfare and
progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and
Christianizing of these despised races are asked to read it,
and assist in its circulation. Begin with the next number and
the new year. The price is only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 94.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                                 H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                           56 Reade Street, New York.


                            TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department
of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are
thousands of Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors
and Teachers in Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools;
it is, therefore, a specially valuable medium for advertising
Books, Periodicals, Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of
Learning, Church Furniture, Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged
for space in its columns, considering the extent and character
of its circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month,
in order to secure insertion in the following number. All
communications in relation to advertising should be addressed to

             THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                          56 Reade Street, New York.


☛ =Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department
of the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by
mentioning, when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised
in our Magazine.=


     DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.


  1. Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by
     =equal signs=.

  2. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors have been
     silently corrected.

  3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.

  4. Ditto marks have been replaced by the text they represent in
     order to facilitate alignment for eBooks.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 34, NO. 3, MARCH, 1880 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.