VOL. XXXIV.                                                   No. 8.

                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             AUGUST, 1880.




                              _CONTENTS:_


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETINGS                                              225
    FINANCIAL NOTICE                                             225
    PARAGRAPHS                                                   226
    HARD CASES                                                   228
    TEACHER OR MISSIONARY, WHICH?                                229
    WRONGS OF THE PONCAS                                         230
    THE NEGRO ON THE INDIAN                                      231
    EADLE KEAHTAH TOH                                            232
    BLACK MISSIONARIES FOR AFRICA: Rev. G.
      D. Pike, D. D.                                             235
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                         237
    AFRICAN NOTES                                                238


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ATLANTA UNIVERSITY—TALLADEGA COLLEGE                         239
    BEREA COLLEGE: Secretary Strieby                             242
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY: Pres’t De Forest                        243
    BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL: J.D. Backenstose                       244
    STORRS SCHOOL, ATLANTA, GA.—WOODBRIDGE, N. C.                245
    ALABAMA: Rev. W. H. Ash                                      247


  THE CHINESE.

    MISSION WORK AMONG THE MINERS                                248

  RECEIPTS                                                       250

  CONSTITUTION                                                   253

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS                                         254

                  *       *       *       *       *

                               NEW YORK.

           Published by the American Missionary Association,
                       ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                   Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

  Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




                    American Missionary Association.

                         56 READE STREET, N. Y.


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    ANDREW LESTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    HORACE HALLOCK, Esq., Mich.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    SAMUEL D. PORTER, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    DAVID RIPLEY, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. J. W. STRONG, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    PETER SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. WM. T. CARR, Ct.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    GEO. M. BOYNTON,
    WM. B. BROWN,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    EDGAR KETCHUM,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN,
    G. B. WILLCOX.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. C. C. PAINTER, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                    VOL. XXXIV. AUGUST, 1880. No. 8.

                   *       *       *       *       *


                    American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING.

The next Annual Meeting of the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION will
be held in Norwich, Ct., in the Broadway Church, commencing Tuesday,
October 12, at 3 P. M.

Rev. Wm. M. Taylor, D.D., of New York City, will preach the Sermon.
Other addresses and papers will be announced hereafter.

The time is fixed to meet the convenience of those who wish to
attend our meeting as well as those of the American Board, the State
Conference, and the National Council.


FINANCIAL NOTICE.

Only two months remain of our fiscal year. We regret to say that a debt
of nearly $20,000 is impending. This arises from the encouragement
which the prosperity of the country at the beginning of our fiscal year
gave us to make some additional appropriations to meet the most urgent
calls that pressed upon us from the field. A decline in that prosperity
has been intensified by the drought in many parts of the country, and
our receipts for our regular work have fallen off.

We give the notice thus early that pastors and churches who sympathize
with us and in our work, and in our effort to avoid a debt, may take
immediate steps to avert the danger. We are confident that if the
collections of churches that are behind in their offerings, and those
that are set down for August and September, are promptly and generously
made, the deficiency will be covered; but, fearing this may not in all
cases be done, we venture to ask individuals having our cause at heart
to assure the certainty by additional contributions.

The pastors and officers of the churches can be our most efficient
helpers by securing collections and making remittances promptly. We
earnestly invoke the aid of our friends. A debt at the close of this
year (September 30) will compel harmful retrenchment for the next. The
field has never been more fruitful in good results. The command of the
Master is, “Go forward.” We cannot go into the Red Sea of debt. Will
our friends wield the rod of Moses and open the waters for us?


PARAGRAPHS.

_Mrs. Sarah Spees_, who died at York, Nebraska, June 10th, was for
many years one of our faithful workers among the Indians at Red Lake,
Minn. Born in 1832, at Nelson, Ohio, she was converted at the age of
fourteen years, and took at once strong and decided grounds for Christ.
She was for a time a pupil of Mr. Sturgis, of Micronesia, who inspired
her with missionary zeal. Soon after her marriage to the Rev. Francis
Spees, she went with him to his missionary field among the Chippewas of
Minnesota, bearing the severest privations. The journey required great
fortitude. The Indians were in the rudest state of heathenism, and
life itself was not secure. Amid scenes of danger and peril, she never
shrank or wavered, or regretted that she had entered on so arduous a
work. For three years, Mr. and Mrs. Spees labored among these people,
and then left them for a quieter work at Tabor, Iowa. Ten years later,
the way was opened for their return, and no sooner were they back among
the red faces than a precious revival was enjoyed among the Government
employees. In addition to her work as missionary, Mrs. Spees added the
care of the Girl’s Boarding School. This was too great a tax upon her,
and after a few years her strength gave out, and she was obliged to
rest. For three years she waited by the river. Her pastor says that
often, when visiting her in her feebleness, he found her wearied with
the slow progress of the work of Christ on earth, and turning over in
her mind how money could be raised for the spread of the Gospel. Her
work well done, she has now entered upon the “rest that remaineth to
the people of God.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Pastor of the Central Congregational Church_ of Brooklyn must take
a great deal of solid satisfaction in the noble missionary work of its
Sunday-school. Thoroughly imbued as he is with the mission spirit, he
does not fail to impart something of it even to the lambs of his flock.
This school is also blessed with one of the most earnest and successful
Christian workers of the city as its superintendent, and, therefore, it
is not surprising that, in addition to its own local missionary work,
it supports, this year, _four_ missionaries—one in the foreign field,
and three among the Freedmen. We take great pleasure in referring to
this school, whose example might be followed by many others with great
benefit to the cause of missions, and, also, to the schools themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the person who sent us a card, post-marked “Hartford, Conn., June
24,” but _without name or signature_, will send us his name, we will
gladly answer his inquiry.

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Burst of Patriotism._—On the Confederate Decoration Day, at
Montgomery, Alabama, this year, the Memorial Address was delivered by
Tennent Lomax, Esq., son of Gen. Lomax, who fell at the battle of Seven
Pines, and whose monument, the principal one in the cemetery at the
capital, received the special floral attentions of the day. We give an
extract from the oration as printed in the local daily:

  “Let us again to-day, standing upon this sacred spot, extend the
  hand of perfect reconciliation to our fellow citizens of the North,
  and ask them to clasp that hand in the true spirit of fraternal
  love, and to live with us as a band of brothers, united in one grand
  enterprise, the advancement of the honor, the interest, and the
  glory, of our common country; and to pray with us to almighty God
  to hasten the advent of that day, for it must surely come, when
  the star-spangled banner, ‘with not a stripe erased or polluted,
  nor a single star obscured,’ shall float, not over ‘a country
  dissevered, discordant, belligerent,’ but over a union of co-equal
  States, re-united and bound together by a golden chain of unbroken
  friendship.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_At the meeting_ of the North Carolina Conference at Dudley, in May,
one of the delegates, Deacon Stevens, of Beaufort, as he was preparing
his pipe, heard the little children of his host remarking to themselves
about the poison of tobacco, and the bad practice of using it. His
thought was started. He went out to get away by himself for a smoke. He
observed that the people about him were not indulging in that habit.
At the end of the three days’ meeting, he searched about the audience
room to see if there were any of the defilements of tobacco. He found
none. That church, (Rev. D. Peebles, pastor,) and its Band of Hope
eschew tobacco as well as all intoxicating drinks. The deacon went
home convinced, as he said, that it was a “dirty, ugly, mean habit.”
He joined in starting a Band of Hope, and told his experience as above
narrated. “A little child shall lead them.” The little ones did not
address him, but he thought that they intended their remarks for his
benefit.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mr. Spurgeon_ finds caste even in England. He says: “I know several
half-sovereign people who would not think of asking a half-a-crown to
tea, and there is a very strong aversion on the part of the half-crowns
to the three-penny pieces; and, perhaps, a stronger aversion still on
the part of the three-pennies to anything coppery. I have heard of a
Christian minister in this country now, who, I am told, is humble and
useful and talented, but there is not a congregation that will have him
for its minister. He was nearly starved to death a few years ago, and
the great sin he has committed is that he married a black wife. Now,
you would not like a minister’s black wife; you know you would not. Up
comes the caste feeling directly. We condemn it in the Hindoo, and here
it comes in this country. We like a negro if he has been a slave, and
we raise money for him when we would not for a white man. Now, I do not
think a black man is any better than a white man, and I do not think
that because a man is green he is at all superior. I believe that we
are all pretty nearly equal, and that God made of one blood all nations
on the face of the earth. But we want to hear these stories about caste
in India that we may be taught to avoid it here; and if it were not for
these follies, vanities, and prides of human nature, carried out to
extremity abroad, we might not so readily see them to be evils in what
is thought to be a mild form at home”.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWO CONVENTIONS.

During the sitting of the Virginia Republican Convention at Staunton,
the members were as free from molestation as they would have been at
Worcester, Mass., and the hotels were open for their entertainment,
white and black alike. For three days, colored men took their meals in
common with white men and women in the public dining-rooms of houses
kept by life-long democrats. One day, at the principal hotel, a black
man was seen dining with representatives of some of the oldest families
of the State; other colored men sat at different tables around the
room; while a large number of staunch democrats, men and women, went
on with their meals as if the scene was not an unusual one. Whether
this is due to a change of sentiment, or to policy induced by fear of
the re-adjusters, may be open to doubt, but the fact is significant.
No less so is the fact that not a single colored man had a seat in
the Convention at Cincinnati. If the unusual treatment of the negro
voter in Virginia is due to a change of sentiment, this change is
not so observably great in the Union at large. If due to fear, this
fear is not so great in other States as in this where the colored
line has been broken. This would seem to indicate that a solid front
will be maintained longer on national than on State issues. We have
discharged our duty in regard to these facts when we have simply stated
them. Their cause and significance we leave to others; while we take
the opportunity for saying, that not until the negro voter, by his
intelligence and virtue, commands the respect of his fellow-citizens,
can he be other than an object of contempt and abuse when weak, and of
fear when strong; and a source of danger, whether weak or strong.

       *       *       *       *       *


HARD CASES.

“The destruction of the poor is their poverty.” This is illustrated
not alone in the history of families, but of missionary enterprises.
Poverty, long continued and excessive, breeds a thousand evils more
destructive and more difficult to overcome than poverty itself. The
very features of a given case which constitute its strongest appeal
for help, are the ones which render it almost impossible to afford
relief, however much help is given. This, the experience of all
philanthropists, is many times repeated in the history of our work, and
the wisest discrimination is necessary to ensure that our efforts shall
be made where the greatest good can be done; not necessarily where
misery and ignorance utter their loudest wail.

One of our missionaries writes from a field where the people are
living very near the line of absolute starvation. They are as ignorant
as could be inferred by the most logical mind from their whole past
history; they are as bigoted and superstitious as their training can
legitimately make them; they are as much in need of what the missionary
offers them as a people can be. If he partially educates the children,
the Stygian darkness of their homes seems to blot out what they
have learned; if he enrolls them in the temperance army, they lose
step when they pass the boundary of childhood; if a hopeful revival
comes to cheer his heart, causing him to forget his past toils and
despair, the converts over whom he rejoiced are swallowed up by the
old churches about him, which teach salvation through loud shouting or
semi-occasional feet-washing; and his hopes would die, only that there
are a few bright ones among the children who have twined themselves
about his heart.

Amid the almost universal chorus of rejoicing from all parts of the
field over abundant and cheering results, there comes, once in a while,
a note like this from one who labors, not less abundantly or acceptably
than others, but with more doubtful success.

From another field, the missionary tells of a revival commencing among
his own people, which was the signal for desperate _rival_ as well as
revival efforts in the other colored churches, directed largely to
the end of drawing away from him the results of his labors. He notes
a fact which seems to him strange, but one which, we apprehend, is
destined to repeat itself with great frequency as the work of education
goes on. The colored people seemed less responsive to the efforts
which the church, unusually active, puts forth. As the negro becomes
more intelligent, we hope and believe that he will prove less highly
inflammable; and he should comfort himself with the assurance that the
results of all genuine religious revivals belong to the Lord, and we
will rejoice in it all, under whatever banner the new recruit marches.
The bigotry of sectarianism, which is of ofttimes so trying, should be
classed with other sins which the Gospel, rightly preached and broadly
illustrated, will in time remove; and, if under educational influence,
the negro kindles more slowly to religious zeal, he will doubtless burn
more steadily, and in the end yield more light and heat.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEACHER OR MISSIONARY, WHICH?

The _Natal Mercury_, South Africa, paints a dark picture of the
Caffres, even of those who have professed Christianity. Many fathers,
it says, still sell their daughters in marriage for cattle as in years
past, and many practice polygamy, which still has a very strong hold
upon those of whom better things ought to be expected.

This is, indeed, cause for deep regret, but ought not to be of great
surprise. It may be true, that by one supreme exercise of faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the results of a whole life of debauchery can be
corrected in a single moment; that impure imaginations and dominant
appetites and perverted tastes may all be utterly eradicated, and the
degraded slave of many years restored to the normal condition of an
uncorrupted child. This may be, for men assert that it has been done;
but, most assuredly, it is not so common as to be expected ordinarily.

The prodigal who has gone into a far country has a long journey to
retrace, and he comes back with many swinish tastes and habits of
thought which he masters, if at all, by most persistent, prayerful and
painful efforts.

The grace of Christ comes in as most stimulating and efficient aid
in these efforts; but it comes as aid to effect, and not in the form
of accomplished result. What the exact, literal truth may be in the
poet-prophet’s prediction, that “a nation shall be born in a day,”
we do not know; what new forces may be called into play, or what
added efficiency may be given to those now employed, when the kingdom
advances with millennial power and celerity, we know not; but as
yet, no labor-saving machinery is known to the Church militant. The
Gospel has still to be carried by laborious, self-denying effort into
the homes of the degraded, and it gains its victories, if surely yet
slowly, over the vices and evils of man’s corrupted heart and life, and
he comes to the stature of a perfect man in Christ Jesus by a gradual
growth.

The Sandwich Islands afford the striking illustration of the prophecy
to which allusion has been made. But, in this case, the “day” covers
more than half a century, and has not yet reached its meridian, and
even there deplorable facts prove that the mass of the people might
be “born again and again,” as the good colored preacher has it, with
advantage. We are told that in the homes of the people are yet to be
found many of the fruits of their long degradation—much impurity of
life, little of the spiritual strength and elevation of character which
the Gospel produces as its ripened fruit.

The question comes, and often with a pressure from our friends, as
to the multiplication of missionaries, and, of course, because of
our limited means, corresponding diminution of educational work. Our
work is limited by the money put into our hands, and, therefore, we
are compelled to choose between them, when we cannot do both of
two desirable things. It would be pleasant, and a source of great
spiritual comfort and social advantage every way, if we could send an
excellent Christian woman into every negro cabin of the South, who
should bring her refined womanhood into loving and sympathetic contact
with the ignorant and lonely aunties, who never see a cultured white
woman socially. It were easily possible to organize an evangelistic
movement which would set the religious nature of the negro ablaze, and
gather the people by tens of thousands into the churches which could
be erected with the money now employed to sustain our schools; but all
this would leave the negro helpless, at the mercy of the bulldozer or
debaucher, and still under the control of his licentious and dishonest
habits.

The work must be more thorough, and, therefore, more tedious than this.
The negro _character_ needs to be created in germ, and then developed
into a worthy manhood and womanhood by thorough Christian culture, and
the best and only adequate missionaries are the Christian teachers in
our schools.

Conversion, as the negro in his ignorance understands it, is not the
most important or desirable thing to be accomplished. We must first
secure an enlightenment of the understanding, a toning up of the moral
constitution, which shall give value to conversion when it does occur.
Conversion is but the beginning of a new life—a beginning which is
utterly worthless except in connection with an adequate conception
of what that life is, and unless that life follows. No one who at
all comprehends the nature of the work to be done, will advocate
other policy than the one we now pursue of “hastening slowly.” We
must enlarge, equip and multiply our educational facilities through
the South. When this has been done, the number of missionaries may
be multiplied manifold with advantage; but to displace or weaken
educational agencies for those that aim at conversion and spiritual
comfort, would prove utterly disastrous.

       *       *       *       *       *


WRONGS OF THE PONCAS.

The removal of the Poncas from their reservation, and the failure of
Congress to pass the bill for their relief, illustrate the facility
with which crimes, and blunders which have all the fateful results
of crime, have been committed by us against the Indians; also, the
criminal tardiness with which we correct such blunders.

The Government in 1868 made a new treaty with the Sioux, and settled
them upon reservations in Dakota, which included 96,000 acres of land
belonging to the Poncas, one of the most peaceable of all the Indian
tribes, who had held and had been dwelling upon this land ever since
they were known as a tribe—held it, too, as an absolute grant from
the United States, under a guaranty of peaceable possession during
good behavior. Without their knowledge or consent, as also without a
shadow of complaint against them as a tribe, their reservation was set
apart and given into possession of the Sioux. Failing to gain their
consent to a removal, the Government forced them, without compensation,
for their homes and fields, or other losses, to abandon their own and
settle upon a reservation in the Indian Territory, where the climate
was to them inhospitable. As a result of this, their numbers have been
greatly diminished, they have become discouraged and disheartened, and
are making no progress toward self-support. This alienation of their
lands was an acknowledged blunder, due to ignorance of boundaries on
the part of Congress; but their arbitrary and cruel ejectment from
their homes, without charge of crime, and in violation of most solemn
pledges, is more than a blunder; it is an act of high-handed injustice
and robbery.

The bill reported by Senator Dawes, of the Senate Select Committee,
to investigate their removal, requires the Secretary of the Interior
to return the Poncas without delay to their Dakota reservation, and
provides that their title to the same shall be deemed valid, anything
in the Sioux treaty to the contrary notwithstanding. It also requires
the Secretary of the Interior to restore to the Poncas “use and
enjoyment in the same condition, as nearly as may be, when left by
them, all houses and other improvements and personal property belonging
to the tribe when removed from Dakota, and for all the foregoing
purposes provides an appropriation of $50,000.” The minority report
proposed simply to compensate them for losses sustained by removal, but
hints at no remedy for the wrongs they have suffered in this removal.

And now Congress has adjourned without action of any kind for their
relief, and they are left to brood over their wrongs, and mature such
plans of revenge as suggest themselves to savage minds.

The appointment of a commission to China to investigate, report upon,
and adjust the difficulties growing out of Chinese immigration,
suggests the propriety of a commission of like character, as regards
its members, to take into consideration the agitating questions
relating to the Indians. There is nothing which more nearly touches
our honor, or more intimately affects our peace and prosperity, than
does the condition of these people. We believe that a commission of
statesmen would devise some solution of our difficulties, and suggest
a remedy for the wrongs and injustice which have characterized our
treatment of them, and thus bring to an end their wild and lawless mode
of life.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO ON THE INDIAN.

The negro teacher of the Indian boys at Hampton pithily says some
things which go right to the heart of his subject, and are well worth
repeating and remembering. The following extracts are from Prof.
Robbins’ Report to the Trustees of Hampton Institute. The much-abused
negro, forgetful of his own wrongs, stands before the Anglo-American
to plead for the Indian and urge a more excellent treatment of him.
We commend the whole report to the thoughtful consideration of those
who yet doubt the capacity of either the negro or Indian for Christian
civilization:

“The Indian problem which the people of the United States have so long
been trying to solve may be briefly stated thus: Shall we be able to
teach the Indians to surrender their lands and their houses to us, when
we want them, without fighting? It is a singular fact that the American
people require more Christian charity from the Indians than they
themselves are ready to give.”

“The question is not, can the Indian learn, but will he put his
knowledge to practical use? The answer to this question depends
upon the future policy of the Government. The white man, to put his
knowledge to the most practical and profitable use, has a choice of
location. He goes where his services are most demanded, and where he
can get the best returns for his labor. Are these Indians to be bound
to get their living on one reservation, or will they be left free to
choose homes for themselves?”

“Unless education is made to mean more than brain culture, it may yet
prove the curse of the Anglo-Saxon race. Thousands of young men and
women who leave our high schools, seminaries and colleges, all over
the land, graduate a degree higher than their social surroundings.
The majority of them return to their homes unprepared to put their
philosophy and literature into every-day practical life. With them,
life becomes one continued grind, and the long list of intelligent
criminals is only a sad sequel of it. The education which will nerve
and strengthen a man for his calling in life is the most practical, and
is the most needed to-day.”

“The condition of the Indian is unlike that of any other people in
the world at present. He is not only banished from the best contact
with civilization, but he is hated, hunted, envied, and yearly the
boundaries of his place of exile are growing smaller; his rights are
conferred by a superior power, and are so limited that his gun is his
only defence, for the awful judgment of the nation is always against
him.”

“It should not be asked, how can we avoid war, but how can we introduce
the arts of peace and throw the Indians on their own resources? Every
man should be made to supply his own wants. The Indian question can
only be solved by meeting and conquering its difficulties.”

“We want to make savages Christians in a day, and after a short trial
we see that it cannot be done. Christianizing is not the work of a day
or a year, or a spasmodic effort in any direction; it is a continued
and constant effort.”

“The Indians should be allowed to assimilate with, and become a part
of, our nation’s life. Are there always to be national prison pens for
them; or will they some day enjoy those ‘certain inalienable rights’?
It is wonderful how slow the Anglo-American has been to perceive that
this Declaration refers to no particular race or color, but speaks of
‘all men.’”

“It takes a higher degree of civilization than all Anglo-Saxons
possess, to give up an opinion to which one stands committed, even
when he knows it is false. But it is grand to think that neither
fears nor prejudice can be a final obstacle to the work. The greatest
revolutions in popular opinion which the world has ever known have been
the outgrowth of a few strong hearts that have believed in, and have
achieved, success.”

“We can afford to wait; the American public cannot be educated in a day
any more than the Indian. The people will be ready by and by to lay
aside legends two hundred years old, and accept facts as they are. The
ideal Indian is dead; the true Indian is living and progressing. It is
time to concede that he is a man. Take from him what you will in the
scale of civilization, but do not subtract his manhood; it is his by
Divine right.”

“The answer to the Indian question must be broader than his reservation
and broader than his territory; it must be as broad and as long as
these United States; with all their rights and privileges.”

       *       *       *       *       *


EADLE KEAHTAH TOH.

What this means we do not know, but lack of room alone prevents a
reprint in these pages of the entire contents of the second number of
this charming little paper, published at Carlisle Barracks, Pa., in
the interest of the Indian Training School, and to some extent by the
Indians, since we are told that a Pawnee boy set up about one-half of
the type, and much of its contents was written by them. There is a
letter from White Thunder to his son in Capt. Pratt’s school, in answer
to some complaints he had made, telling him: “Your letter did not
please me. I am ashamed to hear from others in the school that you act
bad, and do not try to learn. I send you there to be like a white man,
and I want you to do what your teacher tells you. Remember the words
I told you. I said if it takes five or ten years, if you do not learn
anything you should not come back here.”


OUR PROGRESS.

Under “Our Progress,” the declaration is made that, so far, results
show “that these boys and girls have come to a determination to throw
aside the Indian’s mode of thought and feeling with the old dress and
way of life. This seemed apparent in the beginning, but we feared that
the older ones, at least, would soon grow weary of the restraint, which
they must find very irksome. We have between sixty and seventy pupils
over sixteen years of age. With few exceptions, these young men and
women are helpers in discipline, as they are in all the manual labor
necessary for their mutual comfort.

“Some time ago, one of the young men came to the girls’ quarters and
asked to see his sister. The interview was in the presence of an
interpreter, who reported that he gave the little girl a kind but very
serious talk. He told her that he had noticed that she was noisy and
idle, and that she laughed too loud on the playground. Said he, ‘We
came here to learn. I do not know the white man’s way very much yet,
but if I do wrong it is because I do not know what my teachers want me
to do.’ Several instances of the same kind have occurred since, showing
that these boys consider themselves the guardians of their sisters.
These are Sioux boys just from their tribes. The interpreter tells us
that among the Sioux, the boys and girls of the same family seldom or
never speak to each other; this makes it the more remarkable. They are
far from indifferent to each other’s comfort and happiness, however,
as is invariably shown in time of sickness or any kind of trouble. The
letters received by the children from their parents almost invariably
counsel obedience to teachers and submission to all the regulations of
the school.

“An intimate acquaintance with these children, and through them a
better knowledge of their people at home, have increased our respect
and deepened our sympathy for the Indians.

“We believe that the beginnings of a new life are stirring in many
hearts. What outward developments this life may assume, time will show.
The good seed is germinating. The air is full of promise. We can afford
to wait.”


OUR GIRLS.

Again, how like “our girls” these promise to be under Christian culture:

“It is gratifying to watch the interest manifested by the little girls
in the new arrivals. They are so anxious for them to be washed and
dressed anew, and want to loan their own clothing until new can be made.

“Ruth, Grace and Rebecca seemed to feel themselves especially called
upon to watch over and teach the ways of the family to the little Nez
Perces girls, ‘strangers in a strange land’. They went with them to
put them to bed, and then got up early in the morning, to show them
how to dress themselves and put their room in order. For several days
these little girls watched over them, even leading them by the hand to
their meals, when the bell rang to call them together. They could not
understand one word of each other’s language, but they chattered away
like little birds; and yet six months ago, these same children were
quite as wild and uncivilized as the little Nez Perces, Harriet and
Sophia.”


TSAIT-KOPETA.

Hear what Tsait-Kopeta has to say of his old life and new, showing that
Indian nature, both old and new, is human nature:

“My life was pretty rough and sharp before I came this way, just like
the waves of the ocean, unsteady and not sure. I always was stumbling,
but again I would get up. I was a very smart servant for Satan. I was
like an ox with his yoke on me; but I worked for him willingly, just
same he was my father. But what kind of pay did he give me? Nothing,
only shame and danger, and I think when I suffered he laughed at me. I
hope now I am free from him, and I think he is sorry he lost me, but he
can’t help; and now I have found the Great Master, the Rock of Ages;
and I saw His words, and He says, ‘Come unto me, all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy and my burden is light.’ And
therefore I shall fall at His feet and worship Him, and have confessed
Him before men, and want to serve Him only all life long.

“Now I can boast, Satan is my enemy. I return to him the shame he give
me. He used tell me, ‘You do what you want in earthly life, nothing
hurt you; you only got this life, by and by you die; so anything you
want good or bad you do.’ Oh, poor Tsait-Kopeta, how Satan kept me
down and tempted. I don’t want something to hurt or do bad and he
ridicule me and lie. He said, ‘Ah, you coward! only women feel that
way.’ Satan made me prisoner; but Christ was sorry for me and picked
me out of his hand. He give me free, and told me go and no more sin. I
think very strange, Capt. Pratt, why I not know more then, why I did
not ask myself who make me and all the wonderful things. My life is
very strange and different from my past life. Little good at that time;
often I hungry, thirsty and cold, sorrowful, all the time I restless,
and afraid of the enemies or trouble; but this part of the Indian life
I like sure, riding and hunting.”


SUSETTE LA FLESCHE.

Susette La Flesche (Bright Eyes), in the following extract from a
letter to a friend, illustrates what culture has done for an Indian
girl, and discovers the fountains of yearning and of hope in the heart
of her people:

“I am coming more and more to the conclusion that the surest and almost
the only way of reaching the parent is through the children. Almost
the only comforts they have in their lives consist in their children.
For them they are willing to lay aside their arms and take up the plow
and mower, all unused as they are to labor. For them they are willing
to pass over injuries, lest the wrath of the Government be aroused and
their children slain. For the sake of their children they are willing
to break up their nationality, their tribal relations, and all that
they hold dear, to become citizens. Said one man to me, ‘I wish I had
had the advantages in my youth which you have. I could then have had a
chance to become something other than I am, and could have helped my
people. I am now helpless and ignorant; but I shall die content if my
children after me live better than I have done.’”


INDIAN MOTHER-LOVE.

We are in danger of quoting the whole of this paper after all, but must
give the following extract from a letter from the wife of one who was
stationed at what is now Post Fort Sill. The incident occurred in 1869.
We do not envy him who can read this without shame, that during the
260 years of our contact with these people we have done so little to
call forth their finer qualities, glimpses of which we catch in such a
scene. We have done much to degrade and brutalize them; almost nothing
to save them:

“One bright spring morning I had just dressed my fair girl-baby in her
first short dress, then carefully placing her upon the bed, stood back,
mother-like, to admire. The outer door of my room was wide open, and I
saw approaching what seemed to me then the most miserable-looking squaw
I had yet seen. On she came with the grace and tread of an elephant;
and oh, how revolting she looked as she stood in the doorway! Her hair
was cut short and hung over her forehead to her eyes. Her face, neck
and breast were painted in narrow stripes of different colors. About
her waist was fastened a short skirt made of a part of a buffalo robe.
She saw my darling, and before I knew what she intended she had her in
her arms. What did I do? Why, I sprang forward, saying, ‘You horrid,
dirty thing,’ and took my baby into my own arms. The poor miserable
woman looked at me in the most pitiful manner, and then gathering up
the corner of her blanket, she held it in her arms as one would hold a
sick infant, and at the same time with a mournful cry, she made a sign
that her baby had died; and to show how great her grief had been, she
held up her hand so that I could see she had cut off her little finger,
which is one of the extreme mourning customs of the Kiowas, and she
also pointed to the deep scars on her breast and arms. Tears ran down
her cheeks, and my sympathies were so moved that almost unconsciously I
placed my baby back in her arms. How carefully she handled her, and how
tenderly she passed her hands over her plump limbs. After some minutes
she handed her back to me, and with a grateful look and smile, giving
me a hearty hand-shake, she departed. In a week she came again, and
placed in my lap about a peck of ripe wild plums, which ripen there in
the early spring. They had been freshly washed, and were brought to me
in a piece of new pink calico. Again she held the baby, and this time
with signs asked permission, and got it, to kiss our darling, for she
was no longer disgusting to me. She left me as before, and in another
week she came again, this time bringing two buffalo tongues. All she
wanted in return was the pleasure of holding baby. This was her last
visit. Where she came from or where she went, I never knew. She came
and went alone.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BLACK MISSIONARIES FOR AFRICA—THE BISHOP CROWTHER PLAN.

REV. G. D. PIKE, D.D.

If God “hath set bounds to the habitations” of the different races
of men, or to any race, that fact should enter into our plan of
missionary work. It is our duty to succeed. How to do it, is worthy of
our greatest thought and most earnest prayer. When we take the road
to success in God’s work, we find heavenly attendants all along the
way, and abundant supplies of grace and every needful thing. Just now
the great question before the Christian world is, “How to succeed with
missionary work among the recently discovered Pagans in Equatorial
Africa.” Attempts have been made on the borders of this country for
hundreds of years, but no permanent success has been achieved inland.
We have learned, however, two things. One is, that white men and
mulattoes are, as a rule, incapable of preserving their health and
lives in the climate of tropical Africa; and the other, that the
genuine negro has a constitution entirely fitted for its vicissitudes.
“Negroes for Negroland” must be emblazoned on the banner of the
successful missionary army, as it goes forth to battle against sin
through the Dark Continent.

The history of every missionary endeavor of long continuance among the
negroes in tropical Africa warrants this conclusion. But have negroes
succeeded as missionaries? They have not had much opportunity for doing
so, as but few missions have been committed to their care. Public
sentiment has been against them. The theory of manning stations by
black men is comparatively recent. Our great societies, however, are
forced by the unfolding of providential events to weigh the evidence in
favor of the theory. The only question left to be settled pertains to
the negro’s aptitude and capacity. Can he achieve success in the domain
of missions? We are fortunate in having an illustration which enables
us to answer this question in the affirmative.

In 1821, an African lad was captured in a village about 100 miles from
the Bight of Benin, and put on board a slave-ship, from which he was
subsequently rescued by the English government and landed at Freetown.
Here he was received into a mission school under the care of Mr. Weeks.
In 1825, when 15 years of age, he was baptized, and sent to England
to study. Soon after, a Bible-school for training native students to
preach was established at Sierre Leone, and the young African, who had
been named Samuel Crowther, was recalled and placed in this school,
where he remained as student and teacher until 1841. At this time,
Lord John Russell’s famous Niger Expedition selected Mr. Crowther as
interpreter, and while exploring the territory on the west bank of
the Niger, he became exceedingly interested in the people living in
the villages of the country. When the purpose of that expedition was
abandoned, Mr. Crowther gave himself to missionary work in the towns
he had visited. To fit him more thoroughly for this, he was sent to
England, where he remained till 1843. He then returned to his chosen
field, reduced the language of the people to writing, and preached
the Gospel to them in their native tongue. At one of his preaching
stations, he discovered his mother, brother and two sisters, who had
been held in slavery for many years, and procured their ransom. Among
his first converts in the great town of Abeokuta, was his own mother.
At this place, he commenced preaching in 1845. In 1861, there were
reported to be 1,500 converts as the result of his labors. In 1864
he was consecrated “African Bishop of the Niger.” Since then he has
proceeded with his great work with many additional facilities.

Some friends in England have secured for him a steamboat, valued at
more than $22,000, by which he is able to visit his mission stations,
now nine in number, located along the river, and superintend some 22
native preachers and helpers under his charge. At an early age he
married Asano, a girl delivered from bondage at the same time with
himself, and instructed in the same school. Several children were born
to them, and some of these, at least, are very worthy and helpful to
their father.

Here we have in a nut-shell an illustration of how the work may be
done. Representatives of the inland tribes may be gathered into
suitable schools, taught the things which pertain to the Christian
faith, and practiced in the arts of teaching and preaching, under the
supervision of wise and experienced missionaries, and then returned to
their tribes to declare the good news of a salvation which, through the
blessing of God, they have experienced. The illustration we have chosen
would indicate that it were wise to establish the training-school in
Africa itself; and the fate of scores of white missionaries and others
of our race, who have perished on account of the climate of Africa,
points to the wisdom of selecting black men as teachers in these
training-schools, whenever suitable persons for the position can be
found among the colored people.

The venerable Dr. Moffat affirms that black missionaries for Africa
is the “Divine plan.” Dr. Blyden tells us that the climate of Africa
recognizes only pure negroes with favor. It conforms to no prejudices
or customs of society in assigning mulattoes to the negro race. Unmixed
black men alone are welcomed with long life and happiness.

God sets bounds to habitations, but the love of Christ in God is
unbounded. The good tidings of great joy has no metes. The heathen and
the uttermost parts of the earth are within the borders of the kingdom.
The elect and precious are separated by no climate or partition
walls. They shall come up from the North, South, East and West. We
can only hope to succeed in doing our part towards hastening the
consummation when we have fallen into line with the logic of events,
and have accepted the new phases of work for the negro as they are
providentially unfolded.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

SAVANNAH, GA.—The pastor of the church at this place writes: “The
standard of piety among the colored people about us is so low that
it is difficult to create a moral conscience in our own people, and
this fact shows the great need there is for our churches.” There has
been an unusual work of grace among his people, and the “meetings
have been quiet and orderly, as with a New England congregation.” A
number have been brought into the church whose experience has been most
satisfactory; none of them have had dreams or visions, but all tell
of simple faith in the Saviour, and express the purpose of a new life
of intelligent obedience to Him. “We are beginning to rise above the
superstitious notions which once prevailed.”

ATLANTA, GA.—June 20th, Rev. M. E. Strieby, D.D., preached the
dedication sermon of the First Congregational Church. The dedicatory
service had been delayed until all debt should be cleared off the
house—a beautiful structure in brick, with slate roof and tower,
having cost more than $5,000. This done, and a $300 Troy bell secured,
all was ready. In the afternoon, a thanksgiving service was held,
consisting of music, the responsive reading of appropriate Psalms, and
addresses by the pastor, Pres. Ware, Prof. Francis, Supt. Roy, and
Mayor Calhoun. The latter, referring to the early days of trial, said
that he had always been glad that this people had friends, wherever
they came from, who were willing and able to help them.

—Rev. T. E. Hillson, of New Orleans, has been located at Flatonia and
Luling in Texas, to have charge of the two churches in those places,
which are far out upon the “sunset” route to San Antonio. Miss M. E.
Green is in charge of the school in Flatonia.

—Rev. Mr. Roberts, a recent graduate of the Talladega Theological
Department, has been appointed to take the pastoral charge of the
church at Paris, Texas. Mr. White, another student of Talladega, will
probably take the school at Paris.

—Rev. L. C. Anderson, of Fisk, is teaching and preaching near Austin,
Texas.

—Rev. B. A. Jones, a recent student in the Theological Department at
Oberlin, will take the pastorate of our church at Memphis, Tenn., in
September. Mr. Williams, whose health is not equal to the permanent
charge, will continue as a supply until that time.

—Rev. G. W. Moore, of the Fisk University, is supplying at Florence,
Ala., for the vacation; while Rev. S. N. Brown, another student,
supplies the Howard Chapel in Nashville.

—Rev. J. W. Strong, of Talladega, takes the place of Pastor O. W.
Crawford at Mobile during the vacation.

—Mr. Geo. Clark, of the Divinity School in Howard University, is
supplying Pastor Lathrop’s pulpit at Macon, Ga.

—Rev. J. W. McLean, of Ogeechee, is filling Rev. R. F. Markham’s place
in Savannah, Ga., during vacation.

—Rev. H. W. Conley is supplying at Marion, Ala., during the absence of
the pastor, Rev. Geo. E. Hill.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICAN NOTES.

—Col. C. E. Gordon, who was for a time Governor-General of Soudan
for the Khedive of Egypt, made strenuous and successful efforts to
suppress the slave-trade in those parts of Equatorial Africa which came
within its influence. He was forced, as our readers know, to resign
his position, and in a pamphlet, published by the British Anti-Slavery
Society, states that the Khedive has permitted the resuscitation of
the slave-trade in Central Africa, and “every order he gave for the
suppression of this abomination has been cancelled.” He thinks that a
decided message from the French and English governments to the Egyptian
ruler would have great effect, but that the slave-trade will never be
put down voluntarily by the Khedive.

This slave-trade is one of those evils which time alone will not cure.
Nothing but bringing all the influences of Christian missions and
Christian governments to combine for its destruction, will overthrow
it. We are glad that the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society
continues its holy war against it.

—The Church of Scotland Mission at Blantyre, on the Shiré River,
Africa, has opened another station. The new station is at Zomba, on
the west side of the Shiré River. It is a very elevated and secure
spot, where thieves could be barred out. The station is on the borders
of Chemlumbe and Malemia, whose respective chiefs are hostile to each
other. The design is to reach both tribes. The neighborhood is quite a
populous one, and 4,000 people have asked the missionaries to become
their protectors. The Arabs carry on their nefarious trade between
Blantyre and Zomba, and frequently kidnap people from the latter place
to fill out their gangs. Refugees are almost constantly coming in at
Blantyre, but none are received at Zomba. A school has been opened at
Zomba, and it has forty scholars. The people are very attentive to the
preacher, and sit a long time unwearied.

—Encouraging news continues to come from Bishop Crowther’s mission on
the Niger. The station at Bonny, which was founded fourteen years ago,
and which for some years past has encountered opposition and severe
persecution, now is become a bethel. Archdeacon Crowther says the voice
of prayer is heard in nearly every house, night and morning. Several
persons have been baptized and there are over 200 candidates for the
sacrament.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

=Baccalaureate—Commencement—Visit of the State Board—Report of Local
Paper.=

On Sunday, June 20, the baccalaureate of Atlanta University was
preached by Rev. M. E. Strieby, D.D., of New York. His subject was the
path of the just and the way of the wicked, the forming of character,
good and bad.

The examinations lasted three days.

The Commencement exercises, June 24, came off the same hour with the
nomination of Gen. Hancock. Orations were pronounced by six young
men, and essays read by ten young women, all of whom showed a fine
scholarship and a good degree of the art of elocution. The most
gratifying feature in these productions was a zeal to help their people
by precept and example in the way of economy, thrift, and moral reform.
The degree of A. B. was conferred upon three young men, and that of B.
S., with the certificate of graduation from the higher normal course,
was given to twelve students, male and female. The music, which was of
a high order, was by the students. One captivating piece was, “I am in
a strange land.” The college address was delivered by Rev. J. E. Roy,
D.D., and the diplomas presented by Rev. M. E. Strieby, D.D.

The State Board of Examiners, ten in number, came over, fresh from
the inspection of the State University at Athens, and gave four days
of faithful attendance upon the examinations and Commencement of
this Institution. Their Report is to be made to the Governor and the
Legislature, but it was understood that they were greatly delighted
with the thoroughness of the scholarship evinced, and the general
_morale_.

The _Constitution_, which reported each day, said: “The examinations
were heard by many visitors who showed great interest in all the
proceedings. The various questions were, as a rule, aptly answered, and
each student gave evidence of the progress achieved in this excellent
and yearly growing Institution. The familiarity with Greek which
was shown by the class, which was called upon to construe and parse
selections from Demosthenes, was quite astonishing. Everybody who has
grappled with the Greek language knows how difficult it is to render
the “Oration” properly. Special proficiency was shown in the several
other branches upon which the students, both male and female, were
subjected to rigid questioning. Our citizens are cordially invited to
visit the Atlanta University, and see for themselves the great good
which the management is doing for the colored people in our midst.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

=Commencement Exercises—Standard of Instruction—Literary
Society—Needs.=

REV. O. W. FAY, MONTGOMERY, ALA.

The friends and patrons of Talladega College have great occasion for
encouragement and congratulation, in view of the present condition and
future prospects of that Institution, as evinced by the examinations
and exercises connected with its Tenth Annual Commencement.

Those exercises opened grandly on Sunday, June 6th, at 10.30 A. M.,
with a baccalaureate sermon by President De Forest from the text (1
Tim. i. 12), “And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me,
for that he counted me faithful putting me into the ministry,” which
was a clear and inspiring argument for entering upon the work of the
Gospel ministry especially appropriate for the occasion, as it was
addressed particularly to the class of eight young men who this year
graduate from the Theological Department. At 4 o’clock P. M., a Union
Prayer Meeting of the Sunday-school classes was held in the College
Chapel, after which Prof. T. N. Chase, of Atlanta University, gave an
intensely interesting detailed account of his recent experiences while
visiting the Mendi Mission on the West Coast of Africa. The evening was
given to the missionary sermon by the Rev. O. W. Fay, of Montgomery,
on “The Divine Economy in the Gospel,” or the plan according to which
God has been working, and is destined to work for the redemption of
mankind. Text, Isa. xiii. 4: “He shall not fail nor be discouraged,
till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for
his law.”

On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday occurred the regular examinations
which, for impartiality, thoroughness, and general familiarity with
the subjects considered, reflected great credit upon both teachers
and pupils. To one not familiar with the standard of instruction and
scholarship in the colleges of the American Missionary Association,
it might seem a little surprising to find examinations in moral
science, geometry, history, pastoral theology, and all higher branches,
conducted _topically_ and well sustained; but, when it is known that
Pres. De Forest and Profs. Andrews and Ellis, with their able corps of
lady associates, represent Yale, Olivet, Oberlin and Mt. Holyoke, he
is prepared to expect and find all that is standard and best, both in
theory and practice, at Talladega. There was no evidence of special
“cramming” on the part of the students, or of special favoritism on the
part of the instructors. On the other hand, the evidence was abundant
that all had been doing good work, thorough, honest and true. Ex-Gov.
Parsons, one of Alabama’s most distinguished citizens and a trustee
of the College, honored the examination of the graduating class with
his presence, and expressed intense gratification with what he saw
and heard. A few other white citizens of Talladega were present at
the various exercises from time to time through the week. It is to be
regretted, however, that so few were inclined, even by their presence,
to show their appreciation of what the College is doing for their
community and the State. While there was no great throng of colored
people in attendance, there was a goodly number present throughout the
week, who, by their remarkable appreciation of the exercises, showed
that the occasion was to them “a feast of fat things.”

The public exhibition of the “Adelphic Literary Society,” on Monday
evening, was an occasion of interest. The exercises consisted of
declamations, original essays, and a discussion of the question,
“Should capital punishment be inflicted for murder?” The essays were
good, the declamations and the discussion were presented with spirit
and a good show of ability, while the music was excellent, all showing
careful preparation and a laudable ambition to excel.

On Tuesday evening, the Annual College Address was given by Rev. J.
E. Roy, D.D., Field Agent of the A. M. A., on the “Incompleteness of
individual talent.” In his own inimitable style, the doctor entertained
his audience with happy illustrations, amusing anecdotes and solid
thought, showing the mutual interdependence of society, and how God
has really and practically given “to every man his work.” In the
afternoon of Wednesday, came the prize-speaking. The contestants for
prizes in declaiming and reading were eight young men and one young
woman. Two prizes were contended for; the first was tuition at the
College for one year, and the second, tuition for half a year. A good
deal of commendable ambition was aroused, and the contest was so sharp
that the Committee found some difficulty in awarding the honors, which
were finally conferred by giving the first prize to H. L. Bradford, of
the Normal Department, and the second prize to Spencer Snell, of the
Theological Department. Miss Dorcas White was also awarded a second
prize for an essay on education. At 8 P. M., as a part of the programme
for the week, was held the regular Wednesday evening prayer-meeting,
led by the pastor, Prof. G. W. Andrews—full, fresh, spiritual and
refreshing in its character. The subject of the hour was “Christian
education.”

The graduating exercises of Thursday were, indeed, a fitting
culmination of all that had preceded them. The orations of the eight
young men who graduated were in happy accord with the expectations
raised by their examinations the day before. They were all thoughtful
and manly efforts, well conceived and well delivered. As an
illustration of what _can_ be done as well as of what _is being_ done
for the colored race, the proficiency and promise of these young men
is highly encouraging. They all go forth with enthusiasm for their
work. They all have fields for immediate labor. It is quite confidently
hoped that at least one of this class will decide to go to the Mendi
Mission on the “Dark Continent.” But when we look about us and see the
almost innumerable fields already white for the harvest, the inquiry
involuntarily comes. What are these few “among so many”?

In accordance with her new motto, Talladega College is doing a grand
work “Pro Christo et Humanitate.” Her facilities and prospects were
never good as at present. She was never so well deserving of support
and patronage as now. Her location among the mountains of Alabama is
delightful. The long blue ranges of mountains, as seen in the distance
from the College campus, along with the bracing mountain air, strongly
remind one of New England. The only institution of its grade for
colored people in the State, its constituency is simply immense.

With a farm of nearly two hundred acres, her facilities are rare indeed
for aiding young men to obtain an education, who are disposed to help
themselves. She has an efficient corps of instructors, enthusiastic in
their work. Particularly is she fortunate in her new President, under
whose wise administration the College has assumed a new character
and taken a new position in the State. No one could listen to the
earnest yet tender and eloquent words of counsel addressed to the
graduating class by Pres. De Forest on presenting the diplomas, without
the feeling that he is just the large-hearted, scholarly. Christian
gentleman who is needed in the place which he occupies.

But notwithstanding all this, Talladega has very pressing needs. Her
accommodations for young men are altogether inadequate to the demand,
and such as she has are of a very indifferent character. A donation of
$15,000 from the Stone Estate, however, gives cheering prospects that
during the coming year this sore need will be met.

But $10,000 more is needed just as much for furnishing the new
dormitory, improving the College grounds, and making necessary repairs
on “Swayne Hall,” which, though originally costing $30,000, and a very
stately building, is literally going to ruin from lack of means to
repair it.

These facts being known, may it not reasonably be hoped that in the
near future, friends of humanity and of Christian education may be
found, who will recognize this rare opportunity for investments, and
come to the rescue of a worthy and suffering College? Who will be the
first?

       *       *       *       *       *


BEREA COLLEGE.

Busy and Varied Scene—Range of Topics—Stirring
Addresses—Brotherhood—Pioneers.

BY SECRETARY STRIEBY.

The little village of Berea, Ky., presented a busy scene on the 16th
day of June. Commencement day brought together a crowd that for numbers
and variety is seldom collected on such an occasion. The gathering
began early in the day. Fine buggies and carriages came filled with
people, and with them were wheeled vehicles of almost every variety of
construction and in almost every stage of decay. But the larger part
of the crowd came on horseback in true Kentucky style, frequently two,
and in some cases three persons riding on the same animal. The College
campus comprises many acres, covered quite uniformly with a fine growth
of large trees. On the day before, I had noticed little slats nailed on
these trees, and their use was explained to-day by the horses hitched
to them. There must have been 800 or 900 horses on the campus.

The audience numbered probably 1,800 or 2,000 persons of both sexes,
both colors, and of every stage in social position. I judged that
two-thirds were of the white race, representing the well-to-do classes
as also the poorer farmers from the mountains. The dresses were not
uniform in style, nor always after the most recent fashion plates. I
noticed many old-fashioned sun-bonnets on the heads of the colored
women. There was a full supply of babies in the audience, with the
usual evidence of good lungs and voices—the essentials for future
public speakers. I particularly noticed that the white babies carried
off on this day the palm in this incipient oratory, yet I drew no
inference as to the future. The assemblage gathered in the Tabernacle,
a roughly built structure somewhat in the style of the tabernacles at
Martha’s Vineyard and other watering places, though, of course, less
expensive.

The public exercises of the forenoon were very creditable to the pupils
as well as their teachers in the essays and speeches. The range of
topics was wider than is usual in our institutions in the South, and
with less reference to the peculiar position and struggles of the
colored race. This was easily explained by the fact that about half the
pupils are white. The afternoon was occupied with addresses by Rev.
J. A. R. Rogers, Secretary Strieby, Pres. Fairchild, of Oberlin, and
two colored ministers of the vicinity. The previous evening was taken
up with a stirring address in the chapel by a Kentucky gentleman of
prominent position, the son of a former slave-holder. It was in hearty
sympathy with the work in Berea College, and concluded with some very
timely and practical advice to the colored people, which they heartily
applauded.

Berea College is doing, as may be seen, a peculiar work. No institution
in the nation approaches it in uniting the two races in the same
school. As a pioneer in the breaking down of caste prejudice, it has no
rival; nor is this purchased by lowering the one race at the expense
of the other, nor by any approach to the blending of the races in
marriage. It is simply a quiet, unpretentious and practical working out
of the brotherhood of man in educational and religious co-operation.

The pioneers and principal workers in founding and carrying forward
this noble Christian enterprise were present—John G. Fee, J. A. R.
Rogers, E. H. Fairchild, and others. It is seldom that men live to
see with their own eyes so great a revolution as that which Berea
witnessed in the contrast of this Commencement day with the dark days
of persecution, banishment and danger. Tales were told me at quiet
tea-tables, of times of trial and deliverance, that moved the heart
over scenes that occurred not in old historic times, but on spots
within eye-glance, and participated in by the narrators.

Berea College is well equipped with buildings and a good corps of
teachers. The Ladies’ Hall is modeled after, and about the size
of, the similar building in Oberlin. Howard Hall gives excellent
facilities as a boys’ dormitory. The new chapel is a model of neatness
and convenience. Other and smaller buildings meet other wants, and
while another edifice could be well used, yet Berea’s great need now
is _endowment_; and to those who have the means, and are looking for
a place to use it for the nation’s welfare and the advancement of
the Redeemer’s kingdom, we can safely and unhesitatingly turn their
attention to this worthy and growing institution.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

African Macedonia—Usefulness and Needs—Work of Grace—Waiting for
Supplies.

REV. H. S. DE FOREST, TALLADEGA, ALA.

A run into Mississippi, and two days spent at Tougaloo, have given me
a fresh sense of the importance of our work in its entirety, and a
special interest in Tougaloo. This institution, in the centre of the
great cotton State, where the black soil seems the natural home of the
black man, has a field as large, as needy and as hopeful as can well be
desired. From Marion, Ala., at the east, to far beyond the Mississippi
on the west, north from New Orleans and south from Holly Springs, each
about two hundred miles away, Tougaloo sits alone, and has undisputed
possession of a great, a populous, and a waiting African Macedonia,
crying out, “Come over and help us.” The University, with meagre
equipments and limited accommodations, is trying to answer that cry. It
is doing much, very much; but how little compared with what might be
done and ought to be done!

Tougaloo is seven miles from Jackson, the State capital, on the railway
from New Orleans northward, having a location of wonderful beauty, and
advantages peculiar to itself. The farm of five hundred acres is now
under good cultivation. The facilities for marketing produce are good,
and under judicious management it is believed the work of students may
do much towards paying their expenses. The mansion house, built with
great taste and care by a planter who was never to occupy it, crowns
a gentle slope; while in front is a native grove, or forest, of as
weird-like and enchanting beauty as can well be found on this rounded
earth. The oaks are of the giant order, almost colossal in their
proportions, while from the great arms hang abundant tassels of Spanish
moss. Here, on June 3d, under this witchery of shade, on improvised
seats, the exercises of Commencement were held. Horses, mules, and
vehicles of all kinds, at an early hour, were hitched under the trees.
Visitors came by the tens and the scores; but finally, a special train
put down its brakes at the station, and hundreds, with lunch baskets in
hand, were swarming through the woods, and massing themselves near the
platform. Seven young men, after the ordeal of a searching examination,
if I may judge from the little I was in time to hear, pronounced their
orations and received their diplomas. The addresses of the graduates
were thoughtful, full of moral earnestness, well delivered and well
received by the great audience, among whom were representatives of
the clergy at Jackson, the Board of Trustees, and the Superintendent
of Education. Several of these visitors added words of hearty and
well-deserved commendation. The impress of the instructors was manifest
throughout the exercises. This thought pervaded all the speeches:
_there is work to be done, and we wish to have a hand in it_. Back of
the stage, as the class motto, hung the old, but not outworn, “Labor
omnia vincit.” The motto suggested the theme of the first speaker. The
address in the afternoon was on “The field and the victories of work,”
and idleness had no mercy that day. Apparently, there is not much of it
about the institution. Under the direction of the Principal, Rev. G.
S. Pope, a man of long experience in this Southern field, singularly
fitted for his post and well sustained by earnest co-laborers, both
in-door and out-door industries have been greatly promoted. The farm
and garden are beginning to show what good husbandry can do. Blooded
cattle are taking the place of the native lean kine; improved groves
are disclosing their richness; while the garden not only supplies the
large family at the University, but is affording some surplus for
others. Strawberries from nearly an acre of land have been picked this
year, and largely sent to Chicago. This industry promises well, and
will be increased in the future.

The needs of Tougaloo are as apparent as its present usefulness.
Besides the mansion and the out-buildings, many of which are old,
there is a chapel with a second story containing rooms for young
men, and also a boarding hall, with dormitories for young women
above. These three principal buildings are of wood, the mansion house
occupying the centre. These accommodations are far too small. To meet
a present necessity, a rough barrack has been put up, giving nine
additional rooms. The attendance during the past year has been about
two hundred, and nearly all have been boarders in the family. Increase
the accommodations and the attendance might be doubled at once; but
what would a school of four hundred be among the tens of thousands
in this great State who are hungering for education? At mid-winter a
work of grace pervaded the school, and not far from thirty, it was
thought, of these pupils became Christ’s disciples, and they go forth
with new purposes. The influences for good from Tougaloo are not easily
computed; its grand possibilities reach out towards the infinite.

It seems strange to us who are on the ground, glad to man these
out-posts and give what we have of life and vigor to the work, that
needed supplies are not forthcoming. Give us adequate appliances, and
we can greatly multiply our usefulness. We wish to be re-inforced,
not relieved. Our commissariat is insufficient. We are glad to give
ourselves to this work, but we need supplies. And we cannot think that
life is cheaper than lucre; that men at the rear can afford to neglect
those who are allowed to go to the front; and if America has any front
in this nineteenth century, it is still down South. We wish to advance
all our lines, and are simply waiting for supplies.

       *       *       *       *       *


BREWER NORMAL SCHOOL.

J. D. BACKENSTOSE, GREENWOOD, S. C.

The work of Brewer Normal Institute, for the past scholastic year,
closed very successfully, and, as far as we know, to the satisfaction
of all its patrons, on June 24th.

The two days’ examinations were unusually thorough and very
satisfactory.

The Annual Address was delivered on the morning of the 24th, by Prof.
J. Wofford White, of the Yorkville Academy at Yorkville, S. C., on “The
benefits of an education.”

The address was worthy the man and the subject, and will doubtless be
long remembered by the very large audience. On the rostrum beside the
speaker were clergymen of three different denominations.

At 3 P. M. the audience again assembled, and was addressed by several
of our former students, who have been engaged during the present year
in teaching.

The annual exhibition took place in the evening, and long before the
hour of commencing arrived, our large hall, (which was tastefully
decorated with wreaths and flags for the occasion,) was crowded to its
utmost capacity, so that we could hardly make our way to the rostrum.

By competent judges, the declamations were pronounced superior to any
heard on former occasions of a similar character, and not inferior to
many exercises presented in regular college commencements.

The school has been larger this year than ever before, and it has been
difficult for us to accommodate all who have applied for admission.

We have had much for which to be thankful during the past year
connected with this Institute; but let this be an inspiration leading
us to greater achievements during the year to come.

       *       *       *       *       *


STORRS SCHOOL.

The Storrs School at Atlanta, Ga., closed one of its most successful
years, on the 23d of June, with an examination that gave great
satisfaction to Sec. Strieby, Prof. Chase and Supt. Roy, who were
present. A large number of the parents and patrons were present to
rejoice in that evident progress of their children. This school has had
for the year a total of 543 pupils; the largest number at any one time,
356, and an average of 333. The course of study is that of the Grammar
School.

It is recognized by the school authorities of Atlanta as a school of
the very first quality. Miss Amy Williams, who has been at the head
of the Storrs for more than a dozen years, and whose qualifications
as an instructor and a disciplinarian are truly admirable, has had
associated with her this year Misses Julia Goodwin, Amelia Ferris, M.
E. Stevenson, F. J. Norris, and Abbie Clark.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA.

The Year’s Work at Woodbridge.

REV. WILLIAM H. ELLIS.

During the whole of last year, it seemed impossible to make any deep
religious impression on the community. Very few attended our services.
The children attended theirs and the grown people theirs, and it often
happened that we could not get enough together at either to make “a
meeting.”

During the summer, generous friends contributed a good supply of
clothing, which was bestowed only on temperate persons. This caused a
good deal of complaint and some ill-will; but we insisted that articles
contributed by industrious, temperate persons, many of whom were in
straitened circumstances, should not be given to the intemperate or
unworthy. I am glad to report that I found in all 160 persons, old
and young, whom I judged worthy. We succeeded in making temperance
respectable in clean clothes. Our Band of Hope had been organized five
years, but was not yet really a power. We now clothed our members,
overhauled our books, expelled the unworthy, elected new officers, and
went ahead.

For a few weeks, we spent all our time in trying those who had broken
their pledges. We also passed laws that members might be brought to
trial for anything dishonorable to the Band, and that all on trial must
stand on the platform during trial. So each Sabbath every member is
asked, “Have you broken your pledge, and do you know any one who has?”
They were shown the evil of having broken God’s holy law, the guilt and
danger of sin, their own personal responsibility to God and need of a
Saviour, the dying love of Christ, His willingness to forgive and power
to save, and they were especially encouraged to trust Him for strength
to overcome every sin. The fact that they were “sinners before the Lord
exceedingly” met them at every turn, but was enforced so lovingly that
a closer bond drew all together as one. No gloomy views of religion
were inculcated, but the Christian life was placed before them as
something to be longed for and striven after. They were often called
aside by themselves, perhaps for discipline, perhaps to be commended
for good behavior, and then personal faith in Christ was explained to
them, often with prayer. We saw the signs of a mighty work at hand
in their endeavors to leave off all sin, the evident desire to know
and do the right, and the almost breathless attention when religious
subjects were spoken of. Some meetings were held especially for those
who desired to become Christians.

Meanwhile, the Christian people were appealed to over and over again.
In fact, our main teaching this year has been “Bring forth fruits, meet
for repentance.” Sin has been rebuked, publicly and privately, the
Lord’s people have been urged to deeper consecration, and shown that if
they brought their little ones to the Lord in faith, He would receive
them.

On the first Sabbath in February we had our Sixth Temperance
Anniversary. The children fairly astonished everybody by their
enthusiasm and ability. The Band then made its reputation, and the
number has since been increased from 90 to 116, and we are glad to say,
most of the new members are grown people, who have joined under full
conviction of the usefulness of our Band, and of their own duty to it
and themselves.

The drill and excitement attendant upon the anniversary having passed
away, the minds of the scholars were free to think again. They could
not study or play, and some would be often in tears in school time. We
were careful not to encourage any sudden hopes which might prove false.
The work was evidently of the Spirit, who was sure to finish it. So we
allowed time in each case to settle the great question. Fourteen in all
believed during the week. Some were forbidden to pray at home. When
they came to school they might go out in the woods to pray, and not get
punished, so they went home too happy to care for whippings.

In time the work reached the grown people in the neighborhood, and
nightly meetings were held for weeks.

Our own people were quiet enough. We had a little confusion from other
churches represented, but nothing serious. The number, hopefully
converted on the first of March, was 31. Twelve have been added since,
and still there are seekers. I am glad to say that every one, so far as
I know, still holds out well.

As the people think that to omit washing feet at the communion would
endanger their title to heaven, we can form no church. The Band of Hope
is practically our church, with one thing in its favor—we have 100
more members than we could have in a church. Almost everybody around
belongs to it, except some of the old people, and they are coming. Our
members are bound by voluntary covenant. Christ is the corner-stone,
and obedience to Him the standard by which all are judged. We warn,
exhort, discipline and expel according to Bible rules, and draw
sanction from it for all proceedings. There are only seven unconverted
members, old enough to know themselves, and they are under conviction.
We lack only the name and ordinances of a church.

It is most pleasant to see the evident affection shown by the young
towards the teacher, and our theological student, Brother Scott, on
whom a large share of the work has fallen, and who, if he can be
assisted to an education, bids fair to be a power in the land. The
children come early and stay late; they crowd around us, and do all
they can to please us. They have the freedom of the house, but we never
miss even a button. Such a school full of honest, truthful, obedient
and affectionate children is rare anywhere. What shall be said of a set
of _very dark_ colored children, in a community where the ignorance is
simply appalling, and many of them go hungry?

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

REV. W. H. ASH, FLORENCE.

The work in Florence for the last two years has been comparatively a
new one. The exodus of the colony from here not only took from the town
some of the best citizens, but it robbed our church of its strength,
both in a temporal and spiritual sense, leaving behind the weakest
spiritually and the poorest financially. My first endeavor was to
impress upon the people in their discouraged condition, the necessity
of having faith in God.

Since that time the church has grown in religious life and character;
members have been added to it such, I hope, as shall be saved.

We have had a revival which served as a great quickening influence,
though there were not the number of conversions we had hoped for.
Within these two years, we have built a beautiful house of worship,
which helps greatly as an attraction to our service; as also does our
organ, sent by friends, being the only organ in the colored churches.

The Sunday-school has grown in interest and numbers, and has been able
to pay for its lesson papers this year. The school has been built up
almost entirely out of new material. My wife and self have taught a
day-school in connection with the church-work, which has given strength
to the church. Outside of the primary and intermediate classes, we have
a class in United States history, one in English composition, and one
in algebra. Up to this time forty-six scholars have been enrolled. Last
year we began with three scholars, closing with thirty-five. We have
had quite a number of applications for boarding scholars, but had no
accommodation for such, with the exception of one girl whom we felt
almost bound to take. Some of the others found places with difficulty,
because they wanted to go to the Congregational school (so-called,
while the public is called the Methodist school).

Strange to say, in this community the country people are more able to
sustain a “pay-school” than are those in town. But there is a reason
for it: wages are very low, and it really takes what is needed for
their absolute wants to pay dollar a month, particularly if a family
numbers six or seven, which is really the case in my parish. A woman’s
wages average from four to five dollars a month. I sigh, and wonder how
these poor people ever will rise.

The Christian people who give so liberally, and those who are intrusted
with the responsibility of this work, do not know the difficulties and
trying circumstances under which Congregationalism has grown, and is
growing, in some parts of the South. Past experience has taught that
tardiness in the appropriation of ample facilities for the work in some
fields has caused the loss of rich results. If those who have gone to
Kansas had seen the present condition of the church, I believe it would
have been a great check upon their going, although there were other
reasons which helped to drive them from the South aside from a lack of
proper facilities for the education of their children.

Since the dedication of the church, I have been anxious that our lot
should be inclosed, and on April 9th we gave an entertainment whose
results surpassed our most sanguine expectations, as we made $64 above
expenses.

We have put up a neat fence in front, well painted, which improves the
looks of the church, and have ordered lumber for the other sides of the
lot, and by next week the whole will be fenced.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L. Stone,
D. D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low,
Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey, D. D.,
Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D. D., Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball, E.
P. Sanford, Esq.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond, TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSION WORK AMONG THE CHINESE MINERS.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

Can it be done? That is the question. That it needs to be done, there
can be no question. There is scarcely a mining camp in the State but
has its Chinese quarter, and there are many small camps where the
entire population is Chinese, because Americans view the placers as
worked out. Close upon every advancing wave of Caucasian emigration,
these follow into Nevada, Utah, Idaho, Montana, and, just now, Arizona
especially. Thither all but two of those in Santa Barbara, of whom we
hoped that they were born of God, have gone, and one of the last two
writes me that he is soon going. On the other hand, two of our best
brethren in Oakland have just migrated to Montana; one of them, Lee
Haim, who was our excellent helper at Oroville till taken from our
work by a peremptory summons to return to China. This doom has been
commuted, but only upon his undertaking to remit amounts larger than he
could possibly save out of a helper’s salary. The other of the two is
Len Soon, a man of fine presence, good judgment, warm heart and earnest
Christian spirit, whose ever-ready volunteer aid made him a pillar in
our Oakland work.

These losses at the points already occupied, suggest one way in which
God, taking the matter into his own hands, is sending the Gospel to the
Chinese in the mines. They afford a partial solution of the problem
before us. A portion of our scattered seed is made to fall upon those
moral wildernesses. We follow these brethren with our prayers; and I
have ventured to pledge to them our practical co-operation if they
should settle in any place where a hopeful missionary work could be
begun.

But a hopeful work of this sort, anywhere in the mines, could scarcely
be conceived of but for faith. The difficulties are unique, and are
very great. Our Home Missionary Society finds no other service so
fraught with discouragements, as that in these regions. The toil
required is very hard, and the returns are very scanty. Some churches
have been thrifty, and one or two are thrifty still; but outside a less
number of points than you could count on the fingers of one hand, they
are either dead or perpetually dying; preserved from utter extinction
only by persistent pastoral service, sustained mainly by missionary
aid. But the difficulties encountered in such work among our own
people, will be greatly enhanced in labor among the Chinese. Miners are
always migratory, but the Chinese miners most of all; and migration
tends to barbarism, among the Chinese most of all. Miners depend upon
luck. There is no possibility of knowing what there is in a piece of
ground till you have worked it through, and gotten it out. A single
day may show your season’s work to be a success, or may doom it as a
failure, and what that day will disclose no sagacity will enable you
beforehand to determine. Such occupations nurse the gambling spirit,
favor spendthrift habits, and tend almost irresistibly to poverty.
And this is specially true of the Chinese. In certain seasons of the
year, miners are apt to be waiting and idle; in others, when the golden
harvest must be gathered, if at all, working to excess; and in either
case, the moral effect is evil, not less so with Chinese than others.
American miners, with a few noble exceptions, seem to know little about
the Christian Sabbath. It used to be, and in some parts of California
it still is, the day for cleaning-up, for coming to the central village
for trading, for gambling, for getting drunk; but even this distinction
in the more prominent mining districts is passing away, and the wheels
of labor roll remorselessly over the laborer’s best boon, the weekly
day of sacred rest. How much less can we hope for the help of Sabbaths
in reaching with the Gospel the Chinese?

And yet, there they are, by the hundreds and the thousands, precious
souls, bought with the blood of Jesus. Must we let them die, without a
single hand stretched out, a single voice uplifted for their rescue?

The mission at Oroville was our first attempt to deal with this problem
of work among the Chinese miners. It was begun, so far as downright and
determined effort was concerned, February 1st, and continued till June
1st. The school is closed during the hot months, but will be resumed, I
trust, about October 1st. In some respects it has fulfilled our hopes,
and abundantly repaid our somewhat large expenditures. Six Chinese are
reported as converted, but we did not reach many of the miners through
the school, as such. They would come to hear Lee Haim or Lem Chung
preach, thronging the little mission house sometimes, and listening to
the Gospel, as, indeed, news, good news possibly, with eyes fixed and
ears and even mouths wide open, to receive the words. But coming and
going, here to-day to trade at the temple for luck and at the stores
for “grub,” to-morrow gone we know not where, we could learn but little
of the work that good news wrought within their hearts.

It is evident, however, that if we are to reach our Chinese mining
population it must be mainly through evangelistic service—a mission
school at some central point, as a headquarters, and a well-trained
helper to go forth from it, preaching here and there on Sundays and
on week days, in the cabins or on the streets, wherever he can induce
his countrymen to lend him a listening ear. And in order to this, we
ought to be training helpers by the dozen where now we are training
one; not by sending them to Academies or opening for them a Theological
Seminary, but by putting them to work and letting them learn to preach
by preaching. This was Wesley’s method for those half heathen among
whom his victories were gained in England, and I am persuaded that it
is the beat method for these whole heathen for whom our struggle is
going on to-day. Do not educate the helpers up out of the range of easy
sympathy with those from whom they spring and among whom they go, but
let teaching and working, lesson and practice, go hand in hand. I am
eager to do more of this next year than we have ever done. I am greatly
encouraged respecting it, by the results vouchsafed to us already; but
how to do it aright, with the resources now at command, I do not, and
I fear, I cannot see, for the rules of arithmetic are against it, and
those rules are stubborn things. You cannot, in this case, reduce the
multiplicand (_i. e._ the helper’s salary, for it is at the lowest
point that justice will admit already), and you cannot increase the
multiplier (the number of helpers) without enlarging the product (_i.
e._ the expense to be met and the drafts to be made). What shall we do
about it?

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR JUNE, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $55.00.

    Bethel. First Cong. Ch.                                  $15.00
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           20.00
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $10; Rev.
      A. L., $1.                                              11.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. Dummer                                     5.00
    Minot. Mrs. B. Jones                                       1.00
    Waterfowl. Central Cong. Sab. Sch.                         3.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $205.82.

    Boscawen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.50
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.43
    Candia. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    Colebrook. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                12.58
    Concord. H. A. D.                                          0.50
    Canterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            15.00
    Exter. “A Friend,” _for Chapel, Wilmington, N. C._         5.00
    Fisherville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.00
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                19.70
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.22
    Jaffrey. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          4.15
    Keene. Mrs. E. C. W.                                       0.51
    Littleton. Cong. Ch., $5.54; Ira Parker, $5; Mrs.
      B. W. L., 50c                                           11.04
    Meriden. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl. to const. MRS.
      SUSAN E. BURROWS, L. M.                                 13.19
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $23, and Sab. Sch., $10       33.00
    Orfordville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               13.00
    Wentworth. “Friends,” Bbl. of Bedding and Books,
      _for Macon, Ga._


  VERMONT, $197.12.

    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc., (ad’l)                      0.60
    Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $18.58, and S. S.,
      $11.42                                                  30.00
    East Hardwick. Cong. Soc.                                 18.41
    Newbury. Judge P. W. Ladd                                  5.00
    New Haven. Cong. Soc.                                     19.85
    Pawlet. A. F.                                              1.00
    Putney. Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Foster                           4.00
    Saint Albans. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                54.00
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Wells River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.08
    West Randolph. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         16.68
    Williston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.50
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,076.13.

    Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              39.46
    Amesbury & Salisbury. U. E. Ch. and Soc.                  12.50
    Ashburnham. M. W.                                          1.00
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $45; Henry Taylor, $5       50.00
    Ashland. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid
      Talladega. C._                                          25.00
    Ayer. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding                                30.00
    Belcherton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            33.00
    Billerica. R. K. Underhill                                10.00
    Bolton. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._         15.00
    Boston. Immanuel Cong. Sab. Sch.                          15.26
    Brockton. Mrs. Nathan and Barzilia Carey, $4, _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._;—Mrs. Lucy Sanford, $2,
      _for Freight_;—C. M. B., 25c                             6.25
    Bridgewater. “Thank Offering”                             10.00
    Brookfield. “Aged Woman in Evan. Cong. Ch.”               25.00
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. S. S., $12.56; Pilgrim
      Cong. Ch., $7.05                                        19.61
    Chelsea. Cent. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $16.72;—Mrs. A.
      D., $1, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                 17.72
    Chicopee. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       24.65
    Coleraine. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Conway. Cong. Soc. to const. HARRIS D. PEASE, L. M.       56.51
    Danvers Centre. Sab. Sch. and “Friends,” _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              71.00
    Dorchester. Second Parish Sab. Sch.                        4.00
    Douglas. A. M. Hill                                       25.00
    Easthampton. ESTATE of Hiram J. Bly, by Mrs. Maria
      L. Bly, Exec’x.                                        500.00
    Easton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.25
    Fitchburg. Rollstone Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    Framingham. “A Friend in Plymouth Church,” $20;
      Mrs. Sally N. Brewer, $5                                25.00
    Foxborough. D. Carpenter                                  50.00
    Grantville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.51
    Greenfield. First Ch., $8.17 and S. S., $12               20.17
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.79
    Housatonic. Housatonic Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 42.76
    Hubbardston. “A Friend”                                    4.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.09
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch., Box of C., _for Macon,
      Ga._ Longmeadow. Ladies Benev. Soc.                     19.20
    Lowell. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          46.04
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $33.82; “A lover
      of the cause,” $10; Miss Mary Kent, $3                  46.82
    Maynard. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               50.00
    Millbury. M. D. Garfield                                   5.00
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                31.50
    Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                       16.12
    New Bedford. Trinitarian Bible School Concert             17.06
    Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         22.00
    Newburyport. “Friend” Cask, and Bbl. of C., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                50.00
    North Abington. Ladies of Freedman’s Aid Soc., $5;
      “A Friend,” $5, _for Nashville, Tenn._                  10.00
    North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    81.90
    Northampton. Miss Elizabeth Jewett, to const. MISS
      MARY A. JEWETT, L. M.                                   30.00
    Northfield. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      20.00
    Norfolk. ESTATE of Lucy M. Clark by Elisha
      Rockwood, Ex.                                          124.33
    Norfolk. W. E. C.                                          0.50
    Oakham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                60.75
    Paxton.——, _for Freight_                                   1.70
    Royalston. Joseph Estabrook                               10.00
    Rowley. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        10.00
    Sandwich. “M. N. C.,” _for Missionary Horse at
      Macon, Ga._                                              1.00
    Salem. ESTATE of Mrs. Harriet E. Smith, by Chas.
      H. Bates, Ex.                                          300.00
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc., $258.28; So. Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $56.20; Miss S. L. E., 60c               313.08
    Shelburne. First Ch.                                      33.36
    Somerville. Prospect Hill Ch.                              5.01
    South Abington. Bbl of C., and $2 _for Freight, for
      Nashville, Tenn._                                        2.00
    South Deerfield. Mrs. M. C. Tilton.                        2.00
    South Hadley. Mt. Holyoke Sem.                            16.00
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    25.00
    South Natick. John Eliot Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            7.00
    Southville. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                      3.64
    Springfield. “A Friend,” $200; Memorial Ch., $30.54;
      Olivet Cong. Ch., $20.54; “E. M. P., South Ch.,”
      $20                                                    271.08
    Sutton. Two Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         9.00
    Templeton. L. R. and E. C. D. Shattuck                     5.00
    Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              12.00
    Upton. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Macon.
    Ga._ Wakefield. Four Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           16.00
    Waltham. Individuals _for A. M._                           3.00
    Watertown. Mrs. N. W. D.                                   0.50
    Wenham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.71
    Westborough. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
    West Cummington. B. B.                                     0.25
    Westminster. F. Lombard                                    5.00
    West Springfield. Park St. Ch. and Soc.                   30.00
    Weymouth and Braintree. Union Cong. Ch.                   17.31
    Wilbraham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.74
    Winchendon. N. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                           10.00
    Woburn. Mrs. Simon Holden, $5; H. Whitford, $5;
      — Mrs. Dimmick, _$3 for Student Aid, Atlanta U._        13.00
    Worcester. Union Ch.                                      25.00


  CONNECTICUT, $1,422.98.

    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  19.53
    Bethlehem. H. B.                                           0.25
    Colchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. and Sab. Sch.        90.00
    Derby. N. J. B.                                            1.00
    East Hartford. First. Ch.                                 20.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch.                                      15.83
    Gilead. Mr. and Mrs. Hinman Lord                          10.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                30.00
    Greeneville. Cong. Ch., to const. JAMES SERVICE,
      L.M.                                                    36.37
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    9.00
    Hebron. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.07
    Hanover. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  12.00
    Hartford. Roland Mather, $500; Mrs. L. C. Dewing,
      $50; —-“Friend,” $5, _for Nashville, Tenn._            555.00
    Kent. First Cong. Ch.                                     26.67
    Mansfield Centre. Charles H. Learned                      10.00
    Middletown. Mrs. J. D.                                     1.00
    Milford. Mon. Con. Coll., _for Student Aid_                9.00
    New London. First Ch. of Christ                           45.44
    New Haven. Mrs. S. S. T.                                   1.00
    North Cornwall. Benev. Ass’n.                             18.16
    North Madison. Cong. Ch.                                   9.00
    Plantsville. Dea. T. Higgins, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch. S. S., _for Student Aid_              75.00
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                  61.48
    Sherman. Christian Ch.                                     1.00
    Stamford. First Cong. Ch. (of which $57, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._), $102.46; “Cash,” $5;
      —Mr. R., $1, _for Student Aid_                         108.46
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 3.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., Mon. Con., $11.56;—Mon. Con.
      Coll., $10.31, _for Student Aid_                        21.87
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      43.90
    Thompson. Cong. Ch.                                        7.57
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.85
    Union. ESTATE of Rev. Samuel I. Curtiss, by Geo.
      Curtiss, Ex.                                             9.00
    West Meriden. W. E. Benham                                10.00
    Westport. Cong. Ch., $8.84, _for Student Aid_;—Mary
      I. Woodworth, $4                                        12.84
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch.                                  17.00
    West Winsted. Mrs. J. C. Stillman                         10.00
    Willington. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from Mrs. Sarah
      Bowers)                                                  7.69


  NEW YORK, $1,254.52.

    Antwerp. Cong. Ch.                                        31.15
    Brooklyn. Clinton Ave. Cong. Ch., Julius Davenport,
      Treas., $250; —Central Cong. Sab. Sch., $75, _for
      Missionary in Florida_                                 325.00
    Cazenovia. Mrs. Mary Woodward, _for Woman’s Work for
      Woman_                                                  20.00
    Champlain. Lorenzo Kellogg, $10; —Presb. Ch., $2.09       12.09
    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                        3.16
    Cortland. C. E. Booth, Pkg. of Papers.
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                                25.00
    Spencerport. S. Vannest                                   10.00
    Sackets Harbor. Mrs. A. H. Barnes, _for Indian M._        40.00
    Syracuse. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Plymouth Ch., by
      Mrs. Sarah I. Salisbury, Sec., $25; “Member of
      Plymouth Ch.,” $20                                      45.00
    Ithaca. Cong. Ch.                                         20.25
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
    Munnsville. ESTATE of Mandana Barber, by Hall &
      Barber, Executors                                      300.00
    New York. Mr. and Mrs. Wm. E. Dodge, $300; Mrs.
      Elisha Gray, $5, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._;
      —“A Friend,” $10                                       315.00
    New Haven. Cong. Ch.                                      17.87
    Ogden Centre. Miss Mary E. Dyer                            5.00
    Onondaga Valley. A. L. G.                                  1.00
    Owasco. Mrs. A. S.                                         1.00
    Pitcher. N. W.                                             1.00
    Penn Yan. W. M. Taylor                                     3.00
    Randolph. ESTATE of Mrs. D. C. Bush, by Mrs. F. A.
      Fitch                                                   40.00
    Rochester. Miss E. L.                                      1.00
    West Bloomfield. Chapin Taft                               5.00
    ——. “A Friend,”                                           25.00


  NEW JERSEY, $78.88.

    Bernardsville. J. L. Roberts, $25; J. P. R., $1           26.00
    Hackettstown. Rev. A. Proudfit, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Jersey City. “S. E. H.”                                    6.00
    Montclair. Cong. Ch.                                      25.65
    Newark. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid_                 8.73
    Paterson. Cong. Ch., ad’l                                  2.00
    Roselle. A. A.                                             0.50


  PENNSYLVANIA, $8.89.

    East Springfield. Mrs. E. J. Cowles                        2.50
    Gibson. “Sisters,” $5.89; L. G., 50c.                      6.39


  OHIO, $377.46.

    Akron. Julia A. Upson, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                     10.00
    Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         2.55
    Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.95
    Brownhelm. O. H. Perry                                     5.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. E. R. Shipherd, deceased, by James
      R. Shipherd                                              2.00
    Delaware. G. H. C.                                         1.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch., $27.50;—Mrs. M., $1, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U_.                                   28.50
    Harmar. Cong. Ch.                                        111.55
    Hudson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Lindenville. John Thompson                                10.00
    Mansfield. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.          21.00
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    North Amherst. Rev. H. C. Haskell                          5.00
    Oberlin. Mrs. W. and “A Friend,” $1 ea., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    2.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Randolph. W. J. Dickson, $10; Cong. Ch., $5               15.00
    Ravenna. Young People’s Ass’n of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk. U._                                  25.00
    Rootstown. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Sandusky. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                27.91
    South Toledo. Mrs. J. H. North                             2.00
    Springfield. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                      5.00
    Sulphur Springs. “B. F.,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                      4.00
    Toledo. Mrs. P. G. H.                                      1.00
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00


  MICHIGAN, $180.02.

    Armada. Miss Lydia A. Jackman                             10.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. S. S., _for Rev. J. H. H.
      Sengstacke, Savannah, Ga._                              30.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         14.70
    Joyfield. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. WM. A. BETTS, L.
      M.                                                       3.00
    Northville. Daniel Pomeroy                                 5.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch., Mon. Con. Coll.                         6.82
    Romeo. Mrs. T. S. Clark, (of which $50, _for
      Indian_, and $10, _for Chinese Missions_), $110,
      to const. E. W. CLARK, GEO. C. CLARK and JOHN
      HEVENER, L. M.’s; “Friends,” Box of C., _for
      Memphis, Tenn._                                        110.00
    St. Clair. S. F. H.                                        0.50


  ILLINOIS, $723.77.

    Bondville. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Chicago. Ladies of N. E. Church, $75, _for Lady
      Missionary_;—N. E. Church, in part, $35.25; South
      Church, $30.35;—C. B. Bouton, $25;—“A Friend,”
      $25, _for Church and School Building, Marietta,
      Ga._;—“A Friend,” $5; W. S., $1;—“Friends,” Bbl.
      of C., _for Macon, Ga._                                196.06
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         19.10
    Elgin. Cong. Ch., $22.45; Mrs. Gail Borden, $5            27.45
    Englewood. First Cong. Ch.                                 7.50
    Galesburg. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                26.32
    Geneseo. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     53.50
    Hutsonville. C. V. Newton                                  2.00
    Maywood. Mrs. C. C. Thayer                                 5.00
    Milburn. Cong. Ch.                                        10.75
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                          3.03
    Normal. Cong. Ch.                                          2.70
    Oak Park. Girls’ Miss. Circle, _for Girl in Fisk U._      50.00
    Payson. J. K. Scarborough, to const. MISS LUCY H.
      PURVIS and MISS MARY A. BETTS, L. M’s                   60.00
    Port Byron Cong. Ch.                                       9.14
    Princeton. Cong. Ch., $32.11; Mrs. Polly B. Cores,
      $10; Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $7.07, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           49.18
    Quincy. J. Perry, $10; L. Kingman, $5                     15.00
    Rockford. Mrs. David Penfield, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Sycamore. J. H. Rogers, _for Stud. Aid, Fisk U._         104.00
    Tiskilwa. Mrs. H. Bacon                                    2.00
    Tonika. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Wilmette. Mrs. A. T.                                       0.50


  WISCONSIN, $165.60.

    Arena. Cong. Ch.                                           7.00
    Blake’s Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                 5.25
    Hammond. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Hudson “A Friend.” _for Mendi M._                         10.00
    Janesville. First Cong. Ch.                               50.00
    Manitowoc. Mrs. M. W. Mabbs, _for Woman’s work for
      Woman_                                                   5.00
    Milwaukee. “Life Member” (77th birthday)                   5.00
    Monroe. “Our Family Missionary Box”                        5.85
    New Richmond. “A Friend”                                   5.00
    Racine. Sab. Sch. of First Presb. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Superior. “Friends”                                        5.50
    Union Grove. Cong. Ch.                                    15.00


  IOWA, $161.84.

    Cincinnati. W. T. Reynolds                                 5.00
    Chester Centre. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           12.00
    Des Moines. Plymouth Ch., Mon. Con. Coll., $4.22,
      and Woman’s Miss. Soc., $2.28, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 6.50
    Exira. Lyman Bush                                         10.00
    Grinnell. “M. C. G.,” $5, Prize Money for Essay on
      Missions; “A Friend,” 50c                                5.50
    Humboldt. Mrs. L. A. W., $1; L. K. Lorbeer, $2             3.00
    Maquoketa. Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                        27.59
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
    Ogden. Mrs. A. M. Palmer, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans_                                                10.00
    Polk City. Cong. Ch.                                       3.00
    Tabor. “Friends,” by Miss J. E. Williams, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    5.00
    Waterloo. Cong. Ch. and Soc                               59.25


  KANSAS, $5.50.

    Junction City. Rev. I. Jacobus                             5.00
    Stockton. H. W.                                            0.50


  MISSOURI, $6.60.

    Neosha. Cong. Ch.                                          6.60


  MINNESOTA, $49.48.

    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch., Quar. Coll.                         1.08
    Minneapolis. Plym. Ch., $31.07; Pilgrim Ch., $2.33        33.40
    Waseka. “C. and K.”                                       10.00


  NEBRASKA, $60.00.

    Crete. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Tremont. ESTATE of Mrs. Sophia Hughs, by Rev. I. E.
      Heaton                                                  50.00


  COLORADO, $16.46.

    Colorado Springs. Cong. Ch.                               16.46


  WASHINGTON TER., $13.88.

    S’kokomish. Cong. Ch.                                     13.88


  OREGON, $32.20.

    Albany. Cong. Ch.                                          7.20
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                 25.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $10.00.

    Washington. “Willing Workers,” First Cong. Ch., by
      Pauline Whittlesey, Sec.                                10.00


  TENNESSEE, $295.00.

    Memphis. Le Moyne School, Tuition                        159.50
    Nashville. Fisk University                               135.50


  NORTH CAROLINA, $235.58.

    Dudley. Pub. Fund, $105; Tuition, $8.70                  113.70
    Raleigh. Washington School, Tuition                       26.13
    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition, $70.75; Sales,
      $20;—Cong. Ch. $5                                       95.75


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $1,308.80.

    Charleston. Avery Institute, Tuition                   1,308.80


  GEORGIA, $580.44.

    Atlanta. Storrs School, Tuition, $340,48; Atlanta
      U., Tuition, $95;—Rev. J. E. Roy, $10, _for Church
      and School Building, Marietta, Ga._                    445.48
    Macon. Lewis High School, Tuition, $52.65; Rent, $7       59.65
    Savannah. Mr. Lovell, _for Church Building at
      Woodville, Ga._                                          5.00
    Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, $10; Wm.
      Williams, James H. Watson, Sen., James H. Watson,
      Jr., Cudjo King, and Jordan Loyd, $2 ea.; Mary
      Gaskins, $1.25; 28 Individuals, $1 ea.; Others,
      $11.45, _for Woodville, Ga._;—Pilgrim Ch., $9.61        70.31


  ALABAMA, $419.68.

    Montgomery. Public School Fund                           175.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           126.53
    Selma. Cong. Ch., $37.65.; Ladies of Cong. Ch. $30;
      —Woman’s Miss. Assn., $10, _for Mendi M._;—Cong.
      Ch., $8.10                                              85.75
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition                     32.40


  LOUISIANA, $142.40.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        142.40


  MISSISSIPPI, $126.30.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $116.30; Rent, $10       126.30


  TURKEY, $10.00.

    Van. Dr. Geo. C. Reynolds and Wife                        10.00


  INCOME FUND, $290.00.

    ———— Avery Fund                                          190.00
    ———— General Fund                                         50.00
    ———— C. F. Dike Fund                                      50.00
                                                          —————————
                    Total                                $11,510.35


                    Total from Oct. 1st to June 30th    $126,982.10

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INST., AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Hartford, Conn. Roland Mather, $100;—Mrs. Ellery
      Hills, $100                                            200.00
    Stanwich, Conn. Wm. Brush                                100.00
                                                             ——————
                    Total                                   $300.00
    Previously acknowledged in May Receipts                4,307.00
                                                           ————————
                    Total                                 $4,607.00

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR NEGRO REFUGEES.

    Greenfield, Mass. Mrs. L. A. Newell, Bbl. of C.
    Stamford, Conn. First Cong. Ch.                           13.20
    Romeo, Mich. “Friends,” $15.50, and 4 Bbls. of C.,
    by Mrs. E. F. Fairfield                                   15.50
                                                              —————
                    Total                                    $28.70
    Previously acknowledged in April Receipts                403.80
                                                             ——————
                    Total                                   $432.50

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR SCHOOL BUILDING, ATHENS, ALA.

    Hudson, Mich. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Previously acknowledged in May Receipts                  670.59
                                                             ——————
                    Total                                   $680.59
                                                          —————————
                    Receipts for June                    $11,849.05
                    Total from Oct. 1st to June 30th    $137,451.95
                                                         ==========


  H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
  56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct Christian
missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries which are destitute of
them, or which present open and urgent fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slave-holder, or in the practice
of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds, may become a
member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty dollars, a life
member; provided that children and others who have not professed their
faith may be constituted life members without the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of September,
October or November, for the election of officers and the transaction
of other business, at such time and place as shall be designated by the
Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting, and
of delegates from churches, local missionary societies, and other
co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory, and
the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting and
disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining and
dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and agents;
the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the transaction of
all such business as usually appertains to the executive committees of
missionary and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to
be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall,
by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference shall
be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call, in
all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and general
conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the diffusion of
the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous promotion of the
missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing officers,
agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor, and
conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold their
fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular annual
meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been submitted to
a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in season to be
published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if so submitted) in
the regular official notifications of the meeting.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.


       *       *       *       *       *




                  The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with the
almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its main
efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens and
Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely related
to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE in America,
and to co-operate with the Government in its humane and Christian
policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N. C., 5; S. C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 7; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 12; Miss., 1; Kansas, 2; Texas, 6.
_Africa_, 2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 70.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.—_Chartered_:
Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville,
Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and Austin, Texas, 8.
_Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington, Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston,
Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile,
Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 24. Total 44.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 253;
among the Chinese, 21; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
296. STUDENTS—In Theology, 86; Law, 28; in College Course, 63; in
other studies, 7,030. Total, 7,207. Scholars taught by former pupils
of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care of the
Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for the
new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for
these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK..... H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON....... Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO...... Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen who
take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of Sabbath
Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries; to Societies
of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does not prefer to
take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year not less than five
dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in their
last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States three
are required—in other States only two], who should write against
their names, their places of residence [if in cities, their street and
number]. The following form of attestation will answer for every State
in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published and declared by the said [A.
B.] as his last Will and Testament, in presence of us, who, at the
request of the said A. B., and in his presence, and in the presence of
each other, have hereunto subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some
States it is required that the Will should be made at least two months
before the death of the testator.


       *       *       *       *       *


                     1850.                    1880.

                                 THE

                              MANHATTAN

                                 LIFE

                          _Insurance Company_,

                                  OF

                               NEW YORK.


         An entire generation of successful business management.

     _One Thousand Dollars paid out_ EACH BUSINESS DAY _for thirty
     years to families of deceased members_.


                         Policies Incontestable.


                   Accumulation, – – – – $10,000,000
                   Surplus, over – – – – – 1,750,000


                        SEND FOR RATES AND TERMS.

                 _New form of Policy, comprehensive and
                       very liberal to insurers._

                             AGENTS WANTED.

                        HENRY STOKES, President.

                        J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          =W. & B. DOUGLAS=,
                          Middletown, Conn.,
                       =MANUFACTURERS OF PUMPS=,
                 HYDRAULIC RAMS, GARDEN ENGINES, PUMP
                 CHAIN AND FIXTURES, IRON CURBS, YARD
                                     HYDRANTS, STREET
                                       WASHERS, ETC.


                            [Illustration]

                         Highest Medal awarded
                         them by the Universal
                         Exposition at Paris,
                         France, in 1867; Vienna,
                         Austria, in 1873; and
                         Philadelphia, 1876.

                           Founded in 1832.
                          Branch Warehouses:
                           85 & 87 John St.
                              NEW YORK,
                                 AND
                           197 Lake Street,
                               CHICAGO.
                 _For Sale by all Regular Dealers._


       *       *       *       *       *


                         J. B. WILLIAMS & CO.,

                          GLASTENBURY, CONN.,

                            MANUFACTURERS OF

                       Shaving and Toilet Soaps.

       *       *       *       *       *

  For over 30 years this firm has made the manufacture of =Shaving
  Soaps= a specialty, and their Yankee Barber’s Bar, and other
  Soaps, enjoy a reputation among Barbers, as well as those who shave
  themselves, unequalled by any other.

  To all of our readers who are seeking for the =very best Shaving
  Soap=, we would say, be sure and get some of the following
  (_carefully avoiding counterfeits_):

                         =GENUINE YANKEE SOAP=,

                        =BARBER’S FAVORITE SOAP=,

                         =CLIPPER SHAVING SOAP=,

                         =VERBENA CREAM TABLET=,

                         =POCKET SHAVING SOAP=,

                            =TONSORIAL SOAP=,

                          =BARBER’S BAR SOAP=,

                           =MUG SHAVING SOAP=.

       *       *       *       *       *

    These Soaps can be found in every State, and nearly every town
    in the United States.


       *       *       *       *       *


                    CLINTON H. MENEELY BELL COMPANY,

                    Successors to Meneely & Kimberly,

                       BELL FOUNDERS, TROY, N. Y.

                Manufacture a superior quality of BELLS.

               Special attention given to =CHURCH BELLS=.

             Catalogues sent free to parties needing bells.


       *       *       *       *       *


                            J. & R. LAMB,
                        59 Carmine St., N. Y.
                          CHURCH FURNISHERS

                             [Illustration]

                  Memorial Windows, Memorial Tablets,
                  Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                           SEND FOR CIRCULAR.


       *       *       *       *       *


                    Every Man His Own Printer.

                         [Illustration]

        Excelsior =$3= Printing Press.

        Prints cards, labels, envelopes, &c.; larger sizes for
        larger work. For business or pleasure, young or old.
        Catalogue of Presses, Type, Cards, &c., sent for two
        stamps.

        KELSEY & CO., M’f’rs, Meriden, Conn.


       *       *       *       *       *


            [Illustration: BRADFORD ACADEMY, BRADFORD, MASS.

                          =INCORPORATED 1804.=]


  TRUSTEES.

    Rev. JAMES H. MEANS, D.D., Pres., Boston.
    Hon. GEORGE COGSWELL, M.D., Vice-Pres. and Treasurer, Bradford.
    Rev. JOHN D. KINGSBURY, Sec., Bradford.
         RUFUS ANDERSON, D.D., LL.D., Boston.
    Rev. RAYMOND H. SEELEY, D.D., Haverhill.
         SAMUEL D. WARREN, Boston.
         EZRA FARNSWORTH, Boston.
    Hon. WILLIAM A. RUSSELL, Lawrence.
         JAMES R. NICHOLS, M.D., Haverhill.
         FREDERICK JONES, Boston.


  BOARD OF INSTRUCTION.

    MISS ANNIE E. JOHNSON, Principal.

    [Illustration: PARLOR OF A SUITE.]

      =MISS SARAH M. DAWSON=,
        Natural Sciences.

      =MISS MARY E. MAGRATH=,
        Latin and Greek.

      =MISS MARY F. PINKERTON=,
        English Literature and Language,
        and Modern History.

      =MISS ELIZABETH M. BENSON=,
        Literature and Ancient and
        Mediæval History.

      =FRAUL ANTONIE STOLLE=,
        French and German.

      =MISS MARGARET C. LORING=,
        Mathematics.

      =MISS MARY C. BARSTOW, Piano.=

      =PROF. SAMUEL M. DOWNS=,
        Piano, Organ and Vocal Music.

      =MISS JENNIE E. IRESON=,
        Elocution and Gymnastics.

      =REV. JOHN LORD. LL.D.=,
        Lecturer on History.

      =PROF. CHARLES A. YOUNG=,
        Princeton Coll. Lecturer on Astronomy.

  CALENDAR, 1880-81.

    FIRST TERM opens September 7th, 1880
    FIRST TERM closes November 24th, 1880
    SECOND TERM opens November 30th, 1880
    SECOND TERM closes March 4th, 1881
    THIRD TERM opens March 22d, 1881
    THIRD TERM closes June 22d, 1881

  Recess at Christmas-time.

  TUITION.

    FOR THE COURSE, which includes English branches, Latin and
      French, Greek or German, Vocal Music in Classes, per term, $20.00

    Academic Expenses for the year, including all charges.
      No extras. $320.00

    Instructions on Piano, per quarter of 24 lessons, $20.00 to $40.00

    Use of Piano one hour a day, per quarter, 3.00

    Instructions in Perspective Drawing, per quarter, 12 lessons, 5.00
    Instructions in Painting in Oil or Water Colors, per quarter,
      12 lessons, 8.00

    Reduced rates to daughters of Missionaries in the home or foreign
    field.

    Application for circulars may be made to Miss ANNIE E. JOHNSON,
    Principal, Bradford, Mass.


       *       *       *       *       *


                                PAYSON’S

                             Indelible Ink,

                      FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                          COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                              PREPARATION.


            It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                         _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

                   Sales now greater than ever before.

                    This Ink received the Diploma and
                   Medal at Centennial over all rivals.

                   Report of Judges: “For simplicity of
                      application and indelibility.”


                              INQUIRE FOR

                         PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

                  Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and
                  News Agents, and by many Fancy Goods
                         and Furnishing Houses.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         Brown Brothers & Co.

                             59 WALL STREET,

                                NEW YORK.

          =Buy and Sell Bills of Exchange= on Great
          Britain and Ireland, France, Germany, Belgium and
          Holland, =Issue Commercial and Travelers’
          Credits, in Sterling=, available in any part of the
          world, and in =Francs= for use in Martinique and
          Guadaloupe.

                   Make Telegraphic Transfers of Money

            Between this and other countries, through London
                                 and Paris.

          =Make Collection of Drafts drawn abroad=
          on all parts of the United States and Canada, and of
          =Drafts drawn in the United States= on Foreign
          Countries.

          =Travelers’ Credits= issued either against cash
          deposited or satisfactory guarantee of repayment: In
          Dollars for use in the United States and adjacent
          countries; or in Pounds Sterling for use in any part of the
          world. Applications for credits may be addressed as
          above direct, or through any first-class Bank or Banker.


                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                       26 Chapel St., Liverpool.

                         BROWN, SHIPLEY & CO.,
                   Founder’s Court, Lothbury, London.


       *       *       *       *       *




                          THE THIRTY-FOURTH VOLUME

                                 OF THE

                          American Missionary,

                                  1880.


We have been gratified with the constant tokens of the increasing
appreciation of the MISSIONARY during the past year, and purpose to
spare no effort to make its pages of still greater value to those
interested in the work which it records.

Shall we not have a largely increased subscription list for 1880?

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs, will
easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our Magazine,
and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under the editorial supervision of Rev. C. C. PAINTER, aided by the
steady contributions of our intelligent Missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from careful
observers and thinkers elsewhere, the AMERICAN MISSIONARY furnishes a
vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward among the Indians,
the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the Freedmen as citizens in the
South and as Missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting the
races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of current
events relating to their welfare and progress.

Patriots and Christians interested in the education and Christianizing
of these despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its
circulation. Begin with the next number and the new year. The price is
only Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the persons
indicated on page 254.

Donations and subscriptions should be sent to

                                  H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


                             TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Among its regular readers are thousands of
Ministers of the Gospel, Presidents, Professors and Teachers in
Colleges, Theological Seminaries and Schools; it is, therefore,
a specially valuable medium for advertising Books, Periodicals,
Newspapers, Maps, Charts, Institutions of Learning, Church Furniture,
Bells, Household Goods, &c.

Advertisers are requested to note the moderate price charged for space
in its columns, considering the extent and character of its circulation.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

  THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ☛ Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department
  of the “American Missionary” can aid us in this respect by
  mentioning, when ordering goods, that they saw them advertised
  in our Magazine.


       *       *       *       *       *



DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, Printer, 101 Chambers Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES.


1. Italic script is denoted by _underscores_ and bold script by =equal=.

2. Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors have been silently
     corrected.

3. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 34, NO. 8, AUGUST, 1880 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.