VOL. XXXV.                                            NO. 5.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            MAY, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    DEDICATION OF CHURCH AT WILMINGTON, N.C.                   129
    PARAGRAPHS                                                 130
    PROF. BLAIKIE’S LIFE OF LIVINGSTONE                        132
    WHAT THE SOUTHERNERS ARE BEGINNING TO THINK                133
    BENEFACTIONS                                               135
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese                     135
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                       137


  THE FREEDMEN.

    GEORGIA—Those Atlanta Apples                               138
    GEORGIA, ATLANTA—Twenty-eight New Disciples                139
    ALABAMA, MARION—Temperance—First Fruits                    140
    LOUISIANA, NEW ORLEANS—Examination of Law Department
      at Straight University                                   141


  AFRICA.

    OFF FOR AFRICA: Rev. H. M. Ladd                            142


  THE CHINESE.

    A GENTLE GROWL: Rev. W. C. Pond                            143


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N

    MONTHLY REPORT                                             145


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    CLAUDIE’S COLOR LINE: Miss M. L. Sawyer                    147


  RECEIPTS                                                     149


  LIST OF OFFICERS                                             155


  CONSTITUTION                                                 156


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                 157


       *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK.

         Published by the American Missionary Association,
                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y. as second-class matter.




[Illustration: CHRIST CHURCH, WILMINGTON, N.C.]




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXV.      MAY, 1881.      NO. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEDICATION OF CHURCH AT WILMINGTON, N.C.

The new meeting-house for the First Congregational Church of
Wilmington, in connection with the work of the A. M. A., was
dedicated on the evening of March 12th. (See picture on opposite
page.) The history of the house and the services of dedication are
of sufficient interest to warrant a notice in these pages.

Something like a year ago, a gentleman who signed himself
“_Howard_,” and whose real name was only known at the Boston
office, gave $3,000 to build the house. Rev. D. D. Dodge, our
Superintendent at Wilmington, was charged with the duty of securing
a site, of procuring plans and estimates, and of building the house
within the sum appropriated. This work Mr. Dodge duly undertook,
intending to build of wood, but, after the foundations were laid
and the frame was up, “Howard” signified his wish to have the frame
“jacketed” with brick, and for that purpose added $600 more to his
donation, thus making the entire coat $3,600.

The house will seat 450 people, is 72 feet in length by 36 in
width, and measures 22 feet in the clear. It has a corner tower
rising 100 feet from the street below, and is the highest object in
the city, and the first seen on approaching the city from the Sound.

The brick is of a deep red, and, though not pressed, looks as if
it were. The proportions of the building could not well be more
perfect or more pleasing to the eye. Both the local press and
the people speak of it as an ornament to the city, and express
surprise that it could have been built for a sum less than eight
or ten thousand dollars. It should be said, however, that all the
parties on the ground of whom the material was bought, sold at
the lowest rates; those furnishing the lumber, sashes, doors and
iron, throwing off the entire local profit; and Mr. Barstow, of
Providence, R.I., 65 per cent. from the two furnaces to heat the
house. Mr. Dodge, also, gave his time to the work; and Mr. Weston,
of Nashua, N.H., who laid the brick, a part of his. This will
account in part for so fine a building at so moderate an outlay
of money. A large, dry and light cellar extends under the whole
building, which will furnish needed room for storing coal, wood,
&c., for the mission.

The services of dedication occurred in the following order: 1.
Anthem, by the Choir. 2. Prayer, by Rev. Mr. Dodge. 3. Reading of
the Scriptures, by Rev. Dr. Taylor, of the First Baptist (white)
Church of the city. 4. Singing. 5. Sermon, by Rev. C. L. Woodworth,
from Luke xiv. 23. 6. Dedicatory Prayer, by Rev. Dr. Wilson, of the
First Presbyterian Church (white).

After the dedication proper, “_Howard_”—who turns out to be the
Hon. James J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, Mass.—was introduced as
the giver of the house. In an address full of feeling and of good
sense he offered the salutations and the fellowship of the Northern
Congregational Churches. Drs. Wilson and Taylor followed with words
of kindly greeting, and assurances of sympathy and co-operation
from their respective churches: the former slyly saying that
the only thing he wished different was that the church was
Presbyterian, and the latter responding that the thing he wished
different was that the church was Baptist. Two others, laymen,
spoke from the floor in a similar strain. The addresses were, in
every sense, genial and hearty.

The house was entirely filled, and among the audience were forty or
fifty of the best white citizens of the city, all of whom showed
interest and some of whom expressed warm sympathy.

Thus ended a scene in which Christian feeling and fellowship seemed
to have conquered prejudices and differences on all sides, and
the workers from the North and from the South clasped hands in
fraternal regard, and pledged each other hearty good will.

As growing out of this, and, perhaps, a happy finale, it may be
of interest to say that Dr. Taylor very cordially invited Mr.
Woodworth to preach in his pulpit the next Sabbath morning. The
offer was accepted, and the occasion proved one of great pleasure
to the speaker, and, if judged by the greetings at the close, not
less so to the large audience which listened.

At the proper time we shall take occasion to state the further
good which Mr. Gregory intends for the “Christ Church Mission” at
Wilmington.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 27th ult., Secretary Strieby presented the cause of this
Association in Dr. R. S. Storrs’ church, Brooklyn, N.Y., and
after a full and earnest endorsement by the pastor, a collection
was taken, amounting to $3,200, one gentleman giving $2,500 of the
amount. On the same Sabbath, Dr. Wm. M. Taylor, of the Broadway
Tabernacle, New York, presented our cause with his usual marked
ability, and his appeal was followed by a contribution of $1,500,
an increase of about fifty per cent, over last year’s donations
to the same object. In connection with the many good words that
have been recently uttered in behalf of Christian education at
the South, it is exceedingly cheering to record such reports of
increased interest and liberality. Shall we not have many more to
follow?

       *       *       *       *       *

We have alluded repeatedly to the unanimity now prevalent as to
the remedy for the radical troubles in the South—the education of
the Freedmen. President Garfield’s message sets it forth again in
forcible terms. But ever since Gen. Grant’s military policy became
intolerable to the South and a weariness to the North, and was
abandoned by President Hayes, the conviction that moral and not
military forces are needed has deepened, and has found distinct
utterance by representative men in all sections of the country.
President Hayes, in his address to his comrades in arms at Canton,
O., and Senator Brown of Georgia, in his speech in the Senate,
may stand as the exponents of the two sections of the country and
the two political parties on that subject, while Dr. Ruffner,
Superintendent of Public Instruction of Virginia and Rev. Dr.
Haygood of the M. E. Church South, may represent two influential
States in the South, and two great religious denominations. The
popularity of Judge Tourgee’s book at the North, in which the same
thought is fully and eloquently set forth, may be taken as another
evidence of the views held here.

The thing that remains, as Paul says, is to “_perform the doing
of it_.” President Garfield refers not only to the duty of the
national and State governments, but also to “volunteer forces”
in the great work. To these with churches in the South must be
committed the essential _Christian_ efforts—which neither the
general nor State authorities can do.

It is all-important that the nation should not content itself with
the simple utterances of these noble declarations. Good people,
patriotic people should act, and act promptly and liberally. We
exhort our patrons earnestly to step forth, not spasmodically,
but to inaugurate regular and enlarged measures of assistance. To
this end we venture to suggest regular and steadily increasing
collections in the churches with favorable seasons in the year
for taking them, and that individuals feel more their personal
responsibility in the case and that by liberal gifts in life,
and by remembering the cause in their wills they provide for the
pressing work of the age, and for its progress after they have
passed away.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are indebted to Dr. L. T. Chamberlain, of Norwich, Conn., for
a copy of a valuable missionary concert exercise prepared for the
use of his church and Sabbath-schools. The exercise is separated
into three divisions, each of which forms a series of responsive
readings. 1. Responsive Scripture readings. 2. Statements of the
object of the concert—missions and the world’s conversion. 3.
Missionary agencies. Under this latter division is outlined a
series of questions and answers showing the work carried on by
the American Home Missionary Society, the American Missionary
Association and the American Board. We commend this missionary
concert exercise as suitable for general use, and eminently
fitted to bring the Sabbath-schools especially into more intimate
relations with the work of our great missionary societies.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New York, Madeira and West Coast of Africa Steamship Company,
which has been recently projected, is likely to be of much service,
both to commerce and to Christian missions. The names of the
incorporators include those of Wm. E. Dodge, John D. Fish, Joseph
W. Yates, Robert Porterfield, and other well-known capitalists.
These gentlemen have both the means and the experience requisite,
and we have a right to conclude that the company will have its
ships ready for service at an early day. The capital stock is
$100,000, with a proviso allowing an increase of capital to
$4,000,000, and the company is to continue for twenty years. The
President, Mr. James W. Yates, of the firm of Yates & Porterfield,
has been for years engaged in the West African Trade, and the
missionaries of this Association have frequently passed on their
way to and from our Mendi Mission in his vessels.

The recent impulse that has been given to commerce by the activity
in promoting internal improvements, such as telegraph and railway
systems, from the mouth of the Gambia to the Niger, together with
the rapid development of industries, especially those pertaining
to gold mining, the production of palm oil, and the culture of
coffee, give promise of large trade between New York and this
portion of Africa. The number of missionaries, as well as the
number of colonists for Liberia and elsewhere, will be sure to
multiply with the increase of wealth among the colored people of
America, and the improved facilities for reaching the land of their
fathers.

We regard this enterprise as auspicious, and one of the many
providential events looking toward the early evangelization of the
vast tribes of people in Central Africa. May God speed this new
steamship company in His own good way!

       *       *       *       *       *

We have seen the report of the Fourteenth Street Presbyterian
Sabbath-school of this city, which is at once suggestive and
most encouraging as to what may be done in the way of systematic
giving. The Creed of the school, if heartily accepted, would secure
such results in all our Sabbath-schools and churches. This Creed
contains the following articles:

_We believe_, I. That every one should help others to the Gospel.

II. That every one should _help as much as he can_.

III. That every one should find this work for others blessed and
helpful to himself.

Three rules are drawn from this Creed:

                {  I. Regularly each Lord’s day.
  We will give: { II. Consecutively, according to our ability.
                {III. Joyfully, because a privilege and blessing
                      to ourselves.

The result has been that in the intermediate and senior
departments, 31 classes made 8,037 out of a possible 8,070
offerings; that is, there were only 33 failures to keep the whole
number of promises made for the year, though because of vacation,
sickness, etc., there were 2,004 absences from school.

In the infant department, 11 classes brought 3,355 out of 3,403
offerings promised for the year; that is, there were only 48
failures.

The average attendance in the main room was 201–3/4, of whom
200-37/40 brought their offerings.

The average in the infant department was 85–3/40 of whom 83–7/8
brought their offerings.

If this same conscientious regularity could be secured in all our
churches and Sabbath-schools, the work of the A. M. A. would never
suffer for want of funds. What _has_ been done, _can_ be done.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROF. BLAIKIE’S LIFE OF LIVINGSTONE.

This volume, published by Harper Bros., is a book of extraordinary
interest. In it two great and good minds meet and yield practical
thought and valuable instruction. They also give us a rare
combination of wise and spiritual truths, calculated to fill the
soul of the reader with great aspirations for a richer experience
in things that pertain to Christ’s kingdom. If the book were read
by Christians everywhere the effect could scarcely be less than
a reformation. It is what is needed, under God, to counteract
the flood of secular things that evermore threaten to quench the
missionary spirit in the hearts of believers. The consecration,
perseverance, enterprise, skill, heroism, fidelity and charity of
Livingstone’s life are dwelt upon by Dr. Blaikie with such grateful
emotions as prompt him to say—“The author could wish for no higher
honor than to have his name associated with that of Livingstone,
and can desire no greater pleasure than that of conveying to other
minds the impressions that have been left on his own.”

Among the many favorable impressions made by this book are
those that relate to Livingstone’s superb faith. This was quite
discoverable in his early life. Talking with his father—“They
agreed that the time would come when rich men and great men would
think it an honor to support whole stations of missionaries instead
of spending their money on hounds and horses.” When he became great
and moderately rich, he illustrated his own faith by his gifts for
missions, and his devotion to the success of the laborers who went
forth at his instance. All this flowed naturally from his life-long
purpose. “I will place no value on anything I have or may possess,
except in relation to the kingdom of Christ.”

Upon this followed his exquisite trust for Divine protection. “If
God has accepted my service, then my life is charmed till my work
is done.” But his faith and works were rounded out by all that was
needful to make them complete. “It was in front and not in the rear
that he expected to find the pillar of cloud and the pillar of
fire,” and it was unto the Lord of Hosts he looked for victory, and
unto Him his prayer ascended unceasingly: “O, Almighty God, help
and leave not this wicked people to the slave-dealer and Satan!”

He not only kept at work answering his own prayer, but was given
to see, as he thought, how all things were working together
for the wished-for consummation. “Viewed in relation to my
calling,” he says, “the end of the geographical feat is only
the beginning of the enterprise. We are all engaged in very
much the same cause—geographers, astronomers and mechanicians
laboring to make men better acquainted with each other—promoters
of Niger expeditions, soldiers fighting for right against
oppression, and sailors rescuing captives in deadly climes, as
well as missionaries, are all aiding in hastening on a glorious
consummation to all God’s dealings with our race. In the hope that
I may yet be honored to do some good to this poor long down-trodden
Africa, the gentlemen over whom you have the honor to preside,
will, I believe, cordially join.”

That the millions who are interested in the negro race may
“cordially join” in the endeavors promoted by this man for “poor
down-trodden Africa,” is our most earnest wish, and, with this in
view, we heartily welcome and commend Dr. Blaikie’s book.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT THE SOUTHERNERS ARE BEGINNING TO THINK.

The following extracts taken from an editorial which appeared
in the _Memphis Daily Appeal_, March 18th, contain so much true
appreciation of what ought to be done for the Negro under the
circumstances, that we are glad to give them a place in our
columns. We believe they indicate that the South is on the eve of a
great revolution of sentiment respecting the importance of popular
education, and that if the friends of the A. M. A. will assist us
in pushing forward with our present and proposed work, the time
will come speedily when the recognition of the vital importance of
our principles and institutions will be well nigh universal.

After commenting upon an article which appeared in the _North
American Review_ from the pen of Chief Justice Chalmers, quoting
from him the assertion that the negroes’ “right to vote as a race
is as fixed and irreversible as their freedom,” and that “the
ballot box must speak the unbiased verdict of all lawful electors,”
the editor says: “No sane man doubts it; there is but one thing
left for the people of the South to do, and that is to throw
themselves into the work of educating the negro, of lifting him
out of the deplorable condition of brutality which slavery left
him in, and elevating him to a plane where he can not only stand
alone and see for himself, but where he can not be reached by the
arts of demagogues, of which, unfortunately for the country, there
are too many in all parties. In this work, a man of culture, like
Judge Chalmers, can do a great deal. He can by personal example
induce the leading men of his State to come to the front as eager
defenders of a thorough system of public education. They have, as
most of those of the other Southern States have done, too long
stood aloof and allowed the stranger to do for the negro what they
should have done themselves as willing workers, instead of making
mouths at a fate which after fifteen years of effort they find is
superior to anything they can put forward against it.

“Thirteen years ago the Jackson _Clarion_ warned the people of
Mississippi, as the leading papers of the South everywhere did,
that ‘there was but one way out of the wilderness, and that was
as plain as the road to market. It was to recognize the rights
the Federal Government had bestowed upon the negro; to treat him
kindly, and to point him the way he should go.’ This plan was not
generally pursued. But it is never too late to mend. We can begin
now the work that should have been done in 1867. We can rescue the
negro from the ignorance that threatens him and us by establishing
good public schools—not grudgingly, as if we were conferring an
unwilling charity—but in a broad, cheerful, earnest and good
neighborly spirit, as if we were performing a duty—a paramount
and most important duty. Under God this is the only remedy for
negro suffrage. It is a waste of time to talk of abridging it.
Revolutions never go backward. The best answer to that sort of talk
is that the United States never were so strong or so prosperous
as they are at this moment, when public sentiment is in all the
States demanding the most absolute assertion of democratic life
and living. Instead of looking back, we must look forward; nay, we
must go forward, and we must take the negro by the hand and make
him feel that he is a part of the great column of the people; that
his destiny is interlaced with ours; that we must not stand apart,
isolated and at enmity, but go forward, each doing what he can to
strengthen the community at all points, moral and physical, to
uphold and defend our democratic form of government and perpetuate
unsullied the liberties which have survived the chaos of civil war
and reconstruction.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We are glad to add to the other testimonials from able and
intelligent Southerners, a few words from the remarkable
Thanksgiving Sermon of Rev. Atticus G. Haygood, D.D., President of
Emery College, Oxford, Ga.:

“There is a vast mass of illiteracy among us. There is white as
well as black illiteracy. There are multiplied thousands who can
neither read nor write. They must be taught.

“Let us wake up to our want of educational facilities. Our
public-school system is painfully inadequate. Our colleges and
universities are unendowed, and they struggle against fearful odds
in their efforts to do their work. We are one hundred years behind
the Eastern and Middle States. We are also behind many of the new
States of the West.

“For the negroes themselves. * * * * Much depends on those who,
under God, set them free. By every token this whole nation should
undertake the problem of their education. That problem will have
to be worked out on the basis of co-operation; that is, they must
be helped to help themselves. To make their education an absolute
gratuity will perpetuate many of the misconceptions and weaknesses
of character which now embarrass and hinder their progress. Much
also depends upon the Southern white people, their sympathy, their
justice, their wise and helpful co-operation. This we should give
them, not reluctantly, but gladly, for their good and for the
safety of all, for their elevation and for the glory of God.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Three Israelites in Germany devoted 1,400,000 marks to charitable
purposes without distinction of faith.

Mr. J. H. Wade of Cleveland, O., has given $92,000 to the City
Orphan Asylum, $12,000 of which is to be applied for a school-house.

The late John M. Pinkerton, Esq. left about $300,000 to Pinkerton
Academy at Derry, N.H. Mr. Pinkerton was a native of that town,
and the Academy was founded by his grandfather.

The late E. R. Harris, of Preston, England, left over £300,000 for
the establishment of public institutions for the town, of which
£100,000 will be expended for an orphan home, and £50,000 for a
science and art school.

The late Hugh Meharry, of Paxton, Ill., left the following
bequests: To the Central Tennessee College, $10,000; to the Parent
Missionary Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church, $10,000; to
the American Bible Society, $10,000.

If the executors of A. T. Stewart carry out the proposed plan of
a college for educating 1,500 young men—with an endowment of some
three to four million dollars—it will doubtless be the largest
donation to education from any one estate.

The late Herr Isador Kraft, of Berlin, a wealthy philanthropist,
has left behind him a will which would have rejoiced the soul of
Tom Hood. He has ordered that half of his fortune of 1,000,000
marks be expended in the foundation of a fund for the assistance of
poor needlewomen, without regard to sect.

Mr. Amasa Stone has given $500,000 for the removal of Western
Reserve College to Cleveland, O. The citizens have raised $100,000,
with which a site of 40 acres has been purchased on Euclid Avenue,
opposite Wade Park. It is proposed to locate the College and the
Case School of Applied Science, with its endowment of $1,250,000,
on these grounds, and to designate the different schools as Western
Reserve University. The combined endowment funds exceed $2,000,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


Africa.

—The Sultan of Zanzibar has put in irons three slave-owners
prominent in the late disturbances at Mombasa.

—M. Callisto Legnani has been named as consular agent of the
kingdom of Italy, with his residence at Khartoum.

—Mr. Mackay, missionary of the Church Missionary Society at Mteza’s
kingdom, has completed his translation of St. Matthew’s Gospel into
the language of Uganda.

—Lieutenant Dumbleton and the military physician Browning embarked
the last of December at Liverpool to penetrate by the Gambia into
the valley of the Niger, and if possible as far as Timbuctoo.

—The journal _Nature_, of London, announces that M. J. Thomson, the
explorer of the region between the Dar-es-Salam, the Nyassa and the
Tanganyika, has been called to direct an expedition from Sierra
Leone to Timbuctoo.

—Capt. Neves Ferreira, Governor of Benguela, and some officers of
the Portuguese army, have offered to the Geographical Society of
Lisbon to undertake a scientific exploration across Africa, setting
out from the Western side.

—A conference has been held at Madeira by the Church Missionary
Society respecting West African missions. Bishop and Arch-deacon
Crowther, two native Africans, were invited to be present. A
deputation from London had arrived safely at the island some time
since, and the report of proceedings will be looked for with
interest.

—More than nineteen years since, the daughter of Archbishop Whately
established a mission in Cairo which she is said to have supported
with her own private means. It includes a large mission school for
Copts and Moslems, and is attended daily by more than 500. It has
also in connection with it a medical mission, book depot and Bible
women.

—Mr. Mackay writes from Kagei, on the southern shore of the
Victoria Nyanza, on November 1st, that canoes had arrived from
Uganda, and he was about proceeding thither together with a
re-inforcement for the Romanist mission. The canoes, however,
having been three months coming across the lake, there was no news
later than July 29th. Affairs were then no brighter and Mr. Pearson
found it difficult to obtain food.

—It is reported that the women at the Livingstonia Mission, Eastern
Africa, attend the services respectably clothed, and have learned
to make dresses for themselves. The native young men have acquired
many industrial arts, and can make furniture, bricks, etc., and
even work the engines of the steamer belonging to the mission. Over
100 children are on the school-roll, and their attendance is very
regular.

—Mouchot, an ingenious mechanic, has succeeded with an experiment
in Algiers which is likely to attract much attention among those
interested in the development of the manufacture of industries in
Africa. He has contrived an apparatus by which he is able to pump
and boil water by solar force. With abundance of force, cotton and
working people, the unclad millions of Ethiopia, among whom already
cloth is the most valuable currency, may become both respectable
and rich.

—A new company of missionaries from Algiers has set out to found
between that side and the great lakes a station which will render
communication easier with the missions of Uganda and Ouroundi, and
from whence they can come to their aid, according to circumstances.
The missionaries of Ouroundi will also establish a new station
to the west of Tanganyika, so that they may advance towards the
Manyema and the Upper Congo by a shorter route than that they have
hitherto followed.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—Six new converts were received by the church of Odanah, Chippewa
Mission, during the last year.

—Congress has appropriated $165,000 for indemnity to the Ponca
Indians, and to secure their lands in severalty on either the old
or new reservations, in accordance with their wishes.

—A few hundred of the Iowas and Sacs are still in the north-eastern
part of Kansas, and the Rev. S. M. Irwin, one of their early
missionaries, has agreed to spend some months in missionary labors
for them. This is regarded as somewhat an experiment, but it is
hoped that it may result in permanent arrangements for their
benefit.

—Rev. G. L. Deffenbaugh writes from Lapwai, Idaho Territory, of
the very encouraging progress of the Presbyterian mission at that
point. It appears from his statement that thirty-four united with
the church there during the past year, and that now they have a
total membership of 178. Of these three were licensed to preach,
while the ordinance of infant baptism was administered to seven.
Good work was also done at Kamiah, where the church numbers 200.
Seventeen children were baptized at this place during the year
ending Jan. 1st, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—A Christian hospital has been erected at Tientsin, with funds
provided by the viceroy Li Hung Chang, in connection with the
successful treatment of his wife by a female medical missionary.

—The Chinese Methodist Mission in San Francisco reports as good
results from their religious endeavors as those attained by like
labors among the whites. There are ninety-seven full members and
ten on probation.

—The American Baptist Missionary Union, Tremont Temple, Boston, has
issued a valuable map of China, including Siam, Burmah and Japan.
It is about six feet by five in dimensions, and will be furnished
at $1.25 cloth, or 75 cents paper.

—A new Chinese church was dedicated at Honolulu, Jan. 2d. The
building, commodious and attractive, cost with the land $10,700,
the Chinese contributing $4,470. The King and the Attorney-General
were at the dedication. Drs. Damon and Hyde assisted in the
exercises, while the principal parts were taken by Chinese, and the
benediction was pronounced by a native Hawaiian.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

MCLEANSVILLE, N.C.—On the 4th of March the school observed the day
by giving in the forenoon some account of each of the Presidents.
In the afternoon they set out Garfield shade trees. At night there
was a prayer-meeting, in which the central thought was—pray for the
new President.

WOODVILLE, GA.—The Pilgrim Church had a very interesting service
March 6th. The building was crowded; three persons were admitted to
membership; one brother was ordained deacon, after which the Lord’s
supper was celebrated. The Sabbath-school is well attended, taking
the place of the forenoon sermon. Twichell school is growing, and
some of the scholars walk eight miles every day to attend.

NASHVILLE, TENN.—Pres. Cravath in a recent letter says: “This is
a time of special religious interest. Daily prayer-meetings have
been held for several weeks, and there have been a few recent
conversions. Yesterday Dr. Earle, who has been laboring in the city
in connection with the First Baptist Church, came out at eleven and
held a meeting with the students. The audience was deeply moved,
and a large number rose to express a desire to become Christians.
There was deep interest at the night prayer-meeting, and this
morning our opening exercises were changed to a prayer-meeting.
Prof. Bennett held an inquiry meeting all the forenoon in the
parlor. Fourteen think they have found peace, and a large number
are anxious and inquiring. We expect to have the inquiry meeting
again to-morrow. The interest seems very deep and genuine.”

CHATTANOOGA, TENN.—On last Sabbath evening the Sunday-school held
its quarterly concert, which consisted in reciting the golden texts
of the quarter and the lessons of the same, by topics, with a short
talk on the great missionary work Christ came into this world to
do. Quite a number of people were present and seemed interested in
the services. At the close a contribution of $5.64 was taken for
the A. M. A.

PARIS, TEXAS.—“Our work is growing. The members are all doing
nicely. All our meetings are full of interest. We are holding
neighborhood prayer-meetings for those who cannot get to the
regular prayer-meeting. One united with us last Sabbath by
profession. Sunday-school is full of interest.”




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Those Atlanta Apples.

Missionary statistics are sometimes thought to be dry. I propose to
give some that all will concede to be juicy.

In the good old Massachusetts towns of Amherst, Danvers, Lincoln,
Newton, Norfolk, and Walpole, there grew last summer a choice
collection of forty thousand apples. These apples were choice not
only because of their beauty and flavor, but also because of their
missionary destiny. Scorning to waste their precious substance in
the cellars, and attics, and barns of a region already over-stocked
by their orchard companions, they resolved to put themselves
where they would do the most good. So by the aid of willing hands
and generous hearts they found their way into eighty good-sized
barrels, a goodly half thousand in each barrel. Rail-cars and
steamers brought them to the sunny South, and they were soon
provided with ample accommodations in one of the basements of
Atlanta University.

It must be confessed that when the barrels were opened some of
the apples had a very green appearance, as though they had never
been on a mission before; while others of them were blushing
violently, as if greatly agitated by the responsibilities of their
new vocation. Subsequent acquaintance, however, proved that these
indications of weakness were wholly upon the surface, and that,
with the exception of a very few who had been suffering from their
long journey, the new comers were sound to the core and fully
prepared for missionary service.

This service, it must be added, was one which called for nerve
on the part of the missionary recruits in proportion to their
realizing sense of what they were coming to. Many times companies
of two hundred each were summoned from the barrels and placed in
long picket lines around the edges of a dozen large dining tables,
one standing guard at each plate. But scarcely had this been done
when two hundred hungry boys and girls and missionary teachers
appeared upon the scene, and, after bestowing upon the red and
green sentinels many a complacent smile through a long meal of meat
and vegetables, finally attacked them with six thousand (more or
less) sharp ivory weapons, and subjected them to that fate which
other missionaries are said to have suffered among the Cannibal
Islands. Others, after being flayed, drawn and quartered, were
placed in boiling cauldrons, and their indistinguishable remains
were afterwards served up on the same tables in sauce dishes or
concealed under the crust of pies.

Yet these missionaries of Pomona uttered no complaint, but met
their fate with a calmness that was beautiful to behold. All honor
to the forty thousand! What a host it was! If taken to the capital
of their native state and strung together, they would have made a
festoon stretching from the State house dome to the apex of Bunker
Hill monument! Many, many thanks to our generous friends.

                                                     ALL OF US.

       *       *       *       *       *


Twenty-eight New Disciples.

MISS JULIA GOODWIN, ATLANTA.

    “Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so clear!
    Bridal of earth and sky.”

These beautiful lines of the sainted Herbert well describe that
bright day in March, a day in which to breathe its delicious air
was a luxury; a day in which our hearts were lifted up in unison
with all things in Nature; a day long to be remembered as a golden
one in the history of this band of Christ’s followers.

As we entered the audience room, going from the clear sunshine
without into the subdued light of the sanctuary, we found it filled
to its utmost capacity, and over all seemed to reign a holy calm.
Before the altar sat thirty who waited to be made one with this
fold, (twenty-eight by profession, two by letter). Waiting to
welcome these and to assist in the sacred rites of the hour were
Rev. Messrs. Hawley, Francis, and Beaman, and Dr. Roy. After the
singing of hymns, reading of Scripture and prayer, and the pastor
had spoken fitting words of welcome, admonition and encouragement,
those who had not already received the rite, one after another,
kneeled before the altar for baptism. The hush of solemn stillness
added to the impressiveness of the simple ceremony. Then in the
freshness of their love the twenty-eight new disciples stood and
took the vows of God upon them, while Christian hearts rejoiced;
and may we not believe that angels bent to hear, and carry the
news to Heaven of young hearts renouncing the world and pledging
allegiance to the King of kings? God grant that each one may be
found “faithful unto death.”

The emblems were blessed, the bread was broken, the wine poured,
the invitation given, “eat ye all of it.” Interesting and touching
reminiscences were indulged in, often with much tenderness of
feeling. The heart-hymn, “My faith looks up to Thee,” every line of
which breathes a prayer, ascended in its wedded tune of Olivet. The
benediction was said; the service was over.

Thus we tell you of the first ingathering of sheaves from the
harvest not yet fully garnered. Silently, as God’s greatest
blessings always come, this favor has come to us. Seed scattered
through many years by loving hands has, all unnoticed, been
springing up. Sowing, pruning, digging about, preparing the ground
to receive the watering of Divine mercy, has not been in vain. In
answer to fervent, long-continued prayer, not with boisterous
storm or rush of wind, but gently, the rich showers of blessing
fell, “Not by might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the
Lord.”

The awakening began in our day-school. Much seriousness seemed
manifest during the week of prayer, when daily after-school
meetings were held, and in connection with the labors of Mr. and
Mrs. H. E. Brown, a few weeks later, in many hearts a settled
purpose to serve the Lord found expression. The church and school,
like twin-born sisters, go hand in hand. One can not be troubled
and the other be unaffected; one cannot be blessed and the other
remain unmoved. The work of grace went on, making the Sunday-school
and all church services solemn seasons. Each night the place of
prayer was crowded, many anxious to know the way of life or avowing
their purpose to live for Christ, sometimes struggling through days
of darkness to find the clear light from the sun of righteousness
just beyond. Sweet always will be the remembrance of a morning
greeting from a bright-faced girl of fourteen, as she waited at
the school-yard gate. Her beaming countenance told the story even
before the lips, which quickly uttered the glad words, “_I_ have
found Christ at last! He has forgiven my sins!”

Some among those who seemed the stoutest-hearted were the first to
submit to Christ, while sadly we look upon others, who remind us of
the young man whom Jesus loved, who seemed near the kingdom and yet
took no step nearer.

The joy it gives every new-born soul to welcome one after another
to their newly-formed ranks has been beautiful to behold. A hopeful
sign is that everyone seemed so ready, nay, so eager, to do some
service in showing to others the path in which their own feet had
just begun to tread. All love the place of prayer, and often spend
the half-hour recess at noon in a prayer-meeting by themselves in
the small library up-stairs. Some of tender years are as thoughtful
in face and manner as the oldest ones. One in telling of her
new-found love said, “I felt that I loved everybody, and if my arms
had been large enough I thought I would like to take in the whole
world;” and with eyes and voice full of tears, she begged prayers
for her father, who had said, when she urged him to come to Christ,
“I am too old.”

Just as in days gone by, many benighted ones outside of us believe
that “gettin’ religion” consists in the seeing of visions and the
dreaming of dreams, and those who have been taught the truth in our
Sunday-school are often interrogated; “How far did you go?” “What
did you see in your travels?” “How long did you stay in torment?”
and when they have no answer but the unvarying one, “We are
trying to do Christ’s commands,” they are taunted with “You’re no
Christian!” “Bible religion ain’t no religion.” Yet they show only
a feeling of pity for such ignorant ones.

There is still among us a spirit of inquiry. At our usual Monday
after-school prayer-meeting many said, “Pray for us!”

Through all there seems to underlie a current of earnestness and
desire for holier living in God’s children, and more, much more we
crave of willingness and strength, that so we may—

    “Joy to find in every station
      Something still to do or bear.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Temperance—First Impression—First Fruits.

REV. A. W CURTIS, MARION.

The temperance agitation here has not been without fruit. A monster
petition was sent to the Legislature, praying for prohibition, and
a law was passed prohibiting all traffic in intoxicating drinks
within five miles’ radius of the court house. The word _Bar_,
printed prominently over several places of common resort, has
found at last its legitimate meaning—to bar out all drinkers.
Everything is very quiet, and it seems probable that a great crowd
of loafers will have to go five miles for their liquor or reform.
One man died from over-drinking the last night of open traffic. Yet
another loud lecture on temperance was given us a few weeks ago. An
old colored man, going home late Saturday night, intoxicated, fell
about eight feet into a gully and broke his neck. The effect of the
new law upon the colored people has proved very salutary.

Knowing that this people have little opportunity for finding out
the news, I have adopted the plan of giving a brief resumé, such
as will afford them some idea of the world’s progress in all the
great reforms of the day, at the opening of our Sabbath evening
service. It works well, if intense eagerness in listening is a fair
indication.

My first impression of this people,—Sabbath, January 2d—was that a
very large infusion of white blood and brains was represented in
my audience, and it was very hard to think that most of them had
been slaves. The next was one of respect for my predecessors, as I
noted their readiness and precision in responsive reading; though
I afterwards saw that many of the older ones did not read—could
not, as it proved. You may imagine with what delight some of these
listened to President Garfield’s inaugural address as I read it,
when it came, to such as happened to be within easy reach. Our
work here has been full of encouragement. The attendance is never
large, as compared with the other churches, but good interest has
been manifest from the very first. We moved here January 17th, and
at once revived the meetings at “The Home” for the ladies, the
children and young people, Mrs. C. taking charge, with the one aim
from the first of winning their hearts to Christ. As many as forty
young people have been present at some of her Sunday evening and 3
P. M. meetings, and at the close frequently several of these would
ask leave to stay and talk personally about becoming Christians.
Of course, we were soon obliged to have special meetings, and have
just closed a session of 17 nights’ consecutive preaching. The Holy
Spirit has been working in many hearts. The church has been greatly
revived. _All_ the Sunday-school children—not already members—have
been forward for prayer, and many others in the community, quite
a number converted, and more awakened who will probably go to the
Baptists, who started a “revival” the second week of our meeting
and are still continuing with great excitement, and I hope real
good results. Not a small part of our work is to stir up the other
churches, for which let us thank God and take courage. Last Sabbath
we received ten of the first fruits on profession of their faith in
Jesus. Nearly every one of our Sabbath-school now think they are
Christians. Oh, for more to come into our Sabbath-school! Pray that
the good work may go on.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISIANA.

Examination of the Law Department at Straight University.

It was my pleasure to fall in upon the Straight University at the
time of the annual examination in its Law Department. The exercises
came off at the office of the Dean of the Law Faculty, Judge Alfred
Shaw. There were present, also, the three other Professors, J. C.
Walker, Esq., and Honorables M. M. Cohen and R. T. Posey, and Dr.
W. S. Alexander, President of the University. Eight young men were
examined for graduation, one of whom, J. B. Gaudet, was colored.
Pres. Alexander, leading off in general questions, each of the
Professors followed in the line of his department. The young men
had taken the two courses of lectures and had read law in private,
or under preceptors. All were approved. By the laws of Louisiana,
graduation from this Institution admits at the Bar for practice.
The State University’s Law Department has the same prerogative.
So fades out the color line. Our institutions are color-blind.
Brains and culture stand on their own merit. The accomplished white
law-lecturers and the bright white students receive the colored
aspirant lawyers on the basis of citizenship and scholarship.
Simon Cameron repeats at the North, after a tour of the South,
“the picked-up notion of ‘over-education’ among the blacks, the
same, of whom awhile ago it was said that they could not take on
the higher education. But how would the Pennsylvania statesman
have these sable attorneys prepared for their profession and for
the competition of life and business? Does it not come with an ill
grace that a man who has himself risen from humble position, should
rule down these Africo-Americans to an education that would simply
fit them for good servants?” Of the twenty-five graduates of this
Law Department, seven are colored, and they are making their way
successfully in the Courts. Of the nineteen students now in the
course, five are colored. One is the pastor of the English Lutheran
Church of the city, a former graduate of a Pennsylvania College,
and of Princeton Seminary.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


Off for Africa.

BY REV. HENRY M. LADD.

It does not seem possible that anyone could ever have crossed the
Atlantic, followed by more prayers and good wishes, than attended
and do, we believe, still attend us.

Our good steamer, the “City of Berlin,” though advertised to sail
from New York on the twelfth of February, did not leave till the
thirteenth. We met on board, quite unexpectedly, some old college
friends, who were bound for a trip in Europe, and we were therefore
soon at home, surrounded by the most congenial society.

On the twenty-first we sighted the bold headlands of Cape Clear,
and in the evening we were reading the latest news from London.
Having arrived safely in Liverpool, and Mr. and Mrs. Kemp, colored
missionaries for the Mendi Mission, reaching the same place a few
days later, we were obliged to wait there a week for an African
steamer; but the time was well employed in some preliminary
business in London and elsewhere, with reference to the proposed
new mission in the Nile basin. We had the pleasure of a short but
interesting visit with Rev. O. H. White, D.D., the earnest and
efficient secretary of the Freedman’s Missions Aid Society, who has
done so much to interest our English and Scotch friends in the work
of the American Missionary Association. We also called on Robert
Arthington, Esq., of Leeds, whose munificent generosity has made
possible the opening of the new mission near the head-waters of
the Nile, which is to be distinguished by his name. He received us
very kindly, and with outspread map before us, we spent a pleasant
afternoon together, discussing plans and hopes for the opening
of the work next fall, which now seems to promise so well. On
Saturday, March 5th, we embarked on board the steamship “Mayumba,”
for Africa, and our voyage has been a delightful one ever since.
The same steamer had on board two hundred tons of gunpowder for
the slaughter of the natives. Like the vessel that carried out rum
and missionaries to Turkey, this was carrying powder to kill the
Africans, while we were going for their peace and healing. Yet we
would rather a thousand times go with the powder than with the
rum; for the former, horrid as is the art of war, has in the hands
of the English made a way in the wilderness for the heralds of the
Cross, while the latter has been and always will be an unmitigated
curse.

But the cloud is beginning to lift. We believe that there is a
bright and cheering history of African missions yet to be written.
The five millions of reserve force, now drilling in America for the
final victory, are yet to be called out, and they will come to the
rescue. They are already on the move. These educated freemen have
developed already many of the proper qualifications for the work.
We must expect failures and disappointments at first from those so
recently in the degradation of slavery, but we believe theirs is
the work, and they will yet do it, and do it grandly, too. With a
holy enthusiasm they are coming by degrees more fully to appreciate
the fact that Africa is their true field of labor—even as this
excellent colored brother and his wife, who are going out with me,
say they would rather die for their degraded brethren in Africa,
than live in Christian America. As, therefore, we approach the
shores of Africa, to enlarge and carry forward this work, I feel
that we are now moving in the line of God’s appointment, and that
success must ultimately crown our efforts. In this very steamer are
those going out in Her Majesty’s service to conquer the rebellious
tribes along this same west coast. Shall we, who are the soldiers
of the Lord of Hosts, the King of kings, have less enthusiasm and
courage in conquering these same tribes with the sword of the
Spirit and in the bonds of peace?


                                           TENERIFFE, March 15th.

I am happy to report our safe arrival at this point on our
journey. We have had a very pleasant voyage thus far, and have
been remarkably well. Mr. and Mrs. Kemp are in excellent health
and spirits. I think we may hope much from them. I have learned to
esteem them very highly. Last Sabbath we touched at Madeira, and
were met on board by Mr. Smart, agent for the “Missions to Seamen
Society,” who very kindly invited us to his house to breakfast and
dinner. There we met Mrs. Godman, of the Wesleyan Mission at Sierra
Leone, who was much broken down in health. These kind friends
showed us every attention possible, and we came away feeling that
we had had a day of great spiritual as well as physical refreshing.
I was much pleased with what little I saw of the place. I have had
many pleasant talks with the Kemps regarding their work, and only
wish we had a dozen such men to send out to Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D.D., Thomas C. Wedderspoon, Esq., Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon.
F. F. Low, Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev S. H.
Wiley, D.D., Edward P. Flint, Esq., Rev. J. W. Hough, D.D., Jacob
S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GENTLE GROWL.

I love to look over the columns of religious intelligence in the
_Congregationalist_, the _Advance_, the _Pacific_. I say to myself:
“How well the churches are doing! How happy all these ministers
must be! How little they have to annoy, to worry, to depress! How
much to make them glad and even jubilant!” Yet, a few days pass, and
possibly one of these very ministers knocks at my study door, to
talk over, confidentially, the pains, the difficulties, the heavy
burdens of his work; a root of bitterness which he has tried in
vain to remove, now springing up to trouble him; finances going all
awry; sad cases calling for discipline,—the duty imperative, and
the church, though stung to the quick with a sense of its dishonor,
too timid to come up to its task. Of course, such things ought not
to go into the papers nor any other but the good and glad things.
We can make others sharers of our joys, but we shrink from asking
them to bear, with us, our pains.

“Well, that is all right,” I say to myself, and so it is. And yet
those who sustain a missionary work have a _right_ to see it on
_all_ sides. God be thanked that I have had so much to report that
was cheery, stimulating, hopeful; so little that was otherwise. I
wonder if our friends and helpers—readers of the _Missionary_—think
that, like the harvest fields of California, so our Gospel work
is bathed in perpetual sunshine? or do they know that here, too,
we have our darkened skies, our tempests untimely, our frosts
premature?

“Well, it won’t hurt them if they don’t see the shady side,” I say
to myself again.

“Yes, but am I _truthful_ in the matter?” I reply, and so even
conscience puts me up to make a gentle growl. There is nothing
very bad to growl about; no more probably than I need; far less
than I deserve; but there is something, almost always, on which if
one allowed himself to brood, he could soon get up steam to scold
hard. And I am not thinking just here of the greater trials of our
work, as when some riotous outburst of anti-Chinese prejudice sends
these people at sunset to their several retreats, and seems, for
the time, to knock our schools prostrate; nor of the sore trials
from false brethren among our Chinese Christians—starting discords
in the little flocks—or by their vile conduct bringing reproach on
the Gospel that they have proclaimed. Those things, I am grateful
to say, belong to years past; and, besides, we don’t growl at the
great trials—it is the comparatively little things that put us in a
scolding mood.

For instance: here is a teacher who has done well—been faithful,
skilful and successful; has won the intense affection—almost the
reverence of her pupils. But her heart is young, and somebody
else’s heart is young also, and these two have grown together,
till, in an hour of general congratulation, their hands are joined,
and they start off upon life’s journey no longer twain. Then the
same zeal, the same concentration of interest and effort which made
her so successful a teacher, is developed touching home cares and
a husband’s comfort; and weeks grow to months and months to years,
and her face is not seen, even for an hour, in the school-room
where she served so well. She did not mean it so to be; but so it
was, and the shrewd heathen Chinese, that was almost persuaded in
view of her zeal and self-denial to become a Christian, thinks now
that he sees through it all: “Good pay, good teach; no pay, no
teach.”

Here is another teacher who took up the work with zeal and loved
it—so she said and so she thought; better and better the longer she
wrought. But she is cumbered with much serving all day long, and
brings a weak flesh, and, consequently, a not very willing spirit
to her evening’s service at the mission. The pupils note it. It is
indeed unmistakable, for the head nods and the eyes close, time
and again, before the last school hour is half expired. They don’t
like to burden her, and one by one they drop out of the school. The
Superintendent intervenes as gently as he can; but he finds that it
is very difficult to dismiss a teacher and not lose a friend.

Here is a field where the opportunity is evidently large, and the
gate to it seems wide open. You enter it hopefully. Plans seem to
form themselves almost without your thinking. Arrangements are made
and the work begins. Then it appears the arrangements were _not_
made; that you “reckoned without your host;” his plans and yours
do not exactly dovetail, and in this case a miss is as good, and
as ill, as a mile. Delays ensue; disappointment and failure seem
inevitable. The very elements seem to have conspired against you.
And yet that opportunity must not be lost, for there are golden
harvests possible in that wide-open field, and, somehow, you must
reap them.

It is getting past the middle of your fiscal year. We have
tried hard to make one dollar do the work of two, and yet the
appropriation is well nigh exhausted. Contributions come in slowly.
The churches, you fancy, have forgotten this work; or, possibly
they dare not propose it among their charities. You sally forth,
subscription book in hand. You take the easy ones first, the men
that you “_know_” will give. But they respond to your “know”
with a different “No.” and you draw back to your retirement, you
enter into your closet, and learn to go forth the next time in
the use of a coinage and a wisdom not your own and prayer, or the
prayer-hearing Master, pulls you through, so that when the year
ends the year’s bills are all paid and you take a fresh start for
the next twelve-months’ campaign.

But a truce to all this. Who expects to make a voyage and encounter
no storms? Who can hope to win a battle without finding that there
are blows to take as well as blows to give? Our Master never
promised us that just now the currents should float in either to
the fulfilment of our task or the attainment of a full salvation;
but forewarning us that in the world we should have great trials
and tribulation, he adds, “Be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world.”

I conclude with this little extract from a letter just received
from a new helper, Jue Lee, whom we have sent to Oroville: “Now
the school is here first-rate getting on. We have almost thirty
scholars every night, but Mr. Ostrom, [Pastor of the church, W. C.
P.], read the Bible also. I explain China to them. Now I hope God
open their ears to hear; find out this true light soon, and come to
worship same God. But Christ is a faithful Saviour, and will not
forsake those who put their trust in Him. But I, at first, dislike
here; it seem everything so strange to me. Now that I remember what
the Bible says: ‘But the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head’
[I am content]. Now I hope God give me power to preach and soon
they will be all converted.”

       *       *       *       *       *




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_. MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONTHLY REPORT.

This Association has now become a corporate body. A meeting of the
Association to complete the business of incorporation by adopting
the Charter and By-Laws, was held in the chapel of Mt. Vernon
church, on March 30. In spite of the stormy weather the meeting was
a large one. Upon a motion to adopt the Charter, the opposition (to
the so-called “restriction” policy) at once offered an amendment,
to postpone the whole matter of incorporation for a few weeks. A
lively and somewhat lengthy discussion followed, which resulted
in the loss of the amendment and the adoption of the Charter by a
large majority. The debate was renewed over the obnoxious “9th
Article,” and an amendment to strike out the word “Home,” as
defining the work of auxiliaries, was proposed; but this was lost
by a vote of 87 to 30, and the original Article adopted by a vote
of 97 to 15.

The Association feel that they have reason to rejoice, not only in
the result, but in the whole course of the meeting. It was evident
that the opposition steadily lost ground, while the sentiment that
the policy of the Association thus far has been a wise and fitting
one, made a constant gain. We hope and believe that this is an omen
of the increasing good-will and confidence of Christian people
towards the Association. While we are thankful for the steady
growth of interest and the expressions of that interest in material
aid, we pray and long always for more; and we beg that none of
the friends of the work will remit, or intermit their interest,
but that they will rather redouble their efforts as they see how
the field opens before us, and how good a thing it is to help our
neighbors in this way, and to serve our country and God.

We give an extract or two from a letter lately received from
Miss Carter, at Nashville, telling us something of how she has
used the contents of her last barrel, and of the working of her
sewing-school.

“Wednesday evening,” she writes, “I had a reception in my room. The
guests were dirty, ragged, pitiful boys; some of them can read,
some cannot, but all of them are spell-bound by the wonderful
stories of _St. Nicholas_ and _The Youth’s Companion_. If the
children who sent these papers and magazines sacrificed anything
in so doing, may they be blessed for it; they would be could
they see the happy, wondering faces of the children, who almost
reverently turn the pages and spell out the stories.” * * * “I
wish it were possible for you to come into my sewing-school of a
Tuesday evening. At two o’clock the girls assemble—noisy, rough
girls,—racing and laughing they burst into the room where I wait
for them: a room where a family of father, mother and five children
live, one of many, in some old barracks that were used in the
war. We begin with reading of Scripture and a short prayer, and
sometimes the girls sing with their rich, full voices; then we
are all ready for the work, which is sometimes sewing, sometimes
cutting. There is a great deal of commendable rivalry among the
girls as to which shall sew best and fastest, so their tongues run
fast until I silence them with a proposal to read or tell a story.
They are deeply interested in ‘Pilgrim’s Progress,’ and beside we
are having ten minute talks on Physiology, and the care of the
body. The immorality among the women and young girls is something
to make one’s heart ache, and my daily prayer is that I may do
something to turn them to better, purer lives.

“When a garment is finished, the maker buys it for a trifling sum,
within the means of the poorest. My other school meets Thursdays,
in a school-house, and is conducted on nearly the same plan.

“Pure hearted Northern girls, with homes where every comfort and
luxury abound, you cannot picture to yourselves the poverty and
degradation of some of these homes where I go daily. Perhaps you
read Dickens and Thackeray with moist eyes, and then, laying
aside the book, comfort yourselves with the thought, ‘Well, after
all there is no Nancy or Bill Sykes. There was never any one so
miserable as ‘little Nell’ or ‘poor Jo;’ never any such frightful
creature as one of these great hearts has wept over and the other
has laughed over.’ But believe me, there _are_ just such; no
novelist’s pen has ever colored too highly possible poverty and
degradation. What would you say, or rather what would you _do_,
were you to enter a cabin where I have been many times? The
first time I ever saw —— she was standing in her door-way on a
snowy, cold day, _her only article of clothing a calico wrapper_.
Within, the one room was as cheerless as a place well could be. In
one corner stood a bedstead with only a dirty husk bed on it, in
another, a table; there were two chairs, neither boasting a seat;
on the table were a few broken dishes, and this list enumerates all
there was in the room, absolutely _all_. This woman lives with a
man many years older than she; he is a brute, and in his drunken
passions beats her; she with one paralyzed and utterly powerless
arm can do nothing to defend herself. Perhaps it is no wonder if
she too, drinks at times, to forget her misery, yet no amount of
persuasion or entreaty will induce her to separate from this man.

“How can other girls and women be saved? Certainly not by the
efforts of one woman working single-handed among them, not by the
efforts of many such, perhaps; yet possibly by the earnest prayers
of pure hearts, that send help while they still pray.”

Receipts of the Association from March 1 to March 28, 1881:

  From Auxiliaries                                        $377.63
  Donations                                                 90.95
  Life Members                                             245.00
  Annual Members                                            33.00
                                                          ———————
                                                          $746.58


DONATIONS.

Through Cong. Pub. Society, from Hoosac S. S., Hymn books, papers,
&c., for Miss Julia A. Wilson, Baxter Springs, Kansas, $15.88.

Bible Society, New York, 60 Bibles for Mrs. Amelia S. Steele,
Almeda, S.C., $24.

From Park St. S. S., Boston, for land for church, to Mrs. A. S.
Steele, Almeda, $30. From friends, for Mrs. Steele, new clothing,
etc., $25.

Barrel valued at $37, sent to Mrs. Steele, from Ladies’ Benevolent
Society, Piedmont Church, Worcester, Mass.

Two cases, valued at $100 each, to Western Missionaries, from
Shawmut Av. Church, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLAUDIE’S COLOR LINE.

MISS MARY L. SAWYER.

“I never, _never_ can bring myself to do it, Auntie; I know I never
can!” and Claudie’s blue eyes grew so very cloudy that Auntie
thought the rain drops would surely fall.

“Very well, my darling, you may do as you please,” she said,
cheerily; “but now run out into the sunshine, for I shall be very
busy this morning and you must amuse yourself.”

That did not seem a hard thing to the little girl, as she wanted to
explore the new home into which she had come for the first time the
night before. How strange everything looked; the blue mountains in
the distance, the cotton fields where women were picking the white
balls into baskets, the little log cabins with their queer mud
chimneys, and the mules shaking their long ears as they drew the
great wagons piled high with snowy cotton bales along the road to
town. From the open window of the great brick building opposite she
could hear the hum of voices, for this was a colored college, and
Claudie’s uncle was one of its Professors. Her mamma had gone to
Heaven a little time before, and this was why she was playing alone
in the Southern sunshine at Auntie Faith’s home.

But why was she alone? Out under the cedar trees were Pink and
Chloe and little Midge “playing supper” with persimmons and
chincapins, and breaking out now and then into song as naturally
as the mocking-birds themselves. They had viewed Claudie from
afar with round, admiring eyes, reserved the biggest chincapins
for her use, and Pink had even ventured to say “Howdy?” but the
little stranger stood aloof. Not a cross word or a naughty one had
any of the children spoken, and they looked as clean and neat as
Claudie herself would have looked had she been eating very ripe
persimmons as freely as they. Pink’s black eyes were as full of fun
and sparkle as Claudie’s blue ones, and her face as bright, and yet
playing with these children was the very thing Claudie had said she
could never, never do!

I really don’t like to tell you her reason, she would be so ashamed
of it now. It was just because their merry little faces were
colored _black_ instead of _white_!

Now Claudie would never have been so foolish if she had not heard
some grown-up people talking after this fashion just before she
left the North:

“I really don’t see how dear Mrs. Faith, with her refined tastes,
can _live_ among the blacks,” said one.

“Think of eating at the same table, and actually touching them!
It fairly makes me shiver,” echoed another, who sat with one arm
around a big Newfoundland dog while she fed him with candy.

And after Mrs. Faith, with tears in her eyes, had told the story
of her work and described her love and respect for her colored
friends, another lady smilingly said:

“I have enjoyed your talk _so_ much, Mrs. Faith; but I don’t envy
you in the least. I know I couldn’t _endure_ the negroes.”

Claudie was not old enough to understand that people who talk in
this way are not the best or the wisest or the most refined people,
and so their words influenced her. She was a very sociable little
body, however, and playing alone soon grew dull. It was hot on the
veranda, and, too, indeed, that shady nook under the cedars seemed
the only cool spot in the yard just then, and how cunning little
Midge did look!

    “No second-class on board the train,
      No difference in the fare,”

piped Pink, gleefully, as she set her table with gouber shells for
plates.

Claudie started. Why, Auntie sung that song once, and she said it
meant that Jesus and the angels loved black people just as well
as white ones, and thought them quite as beautiful. How funny to
forget that! If the little angels would be willing to play with
colored children of course she could, and then those persimmons
were vanishing _so_ fast!

The next minute a little white-robed maiden was flying through the
rose-garden toward the cedars.

“Oh, Pink!” she cried, breathlessly, “I never ate a persimmon in
all my life.”

“We is saving some for you,” answered Pink, as graciously as if her
polite advances had been received at first, “an’ Chloe got some
‘simmon bread an’ Midge brought some goubers.”

What these new delights were Claudie had no idea, and the
children’s tongues ran faster than ever as they explained. After
the feast came an exploring trip, and under Pink’s guidance the
yard and the adjoining field proved a perfect storehouse of
treasures.

“’Clare, I done forgot,” she cried, suddenly producing a long
necklace of chincapins, and presenting it shyly to Claudie; “I made
it on purpose for you.”

“Oh, you splendid Pink!” cried Claudie; “you are the very nicest
little girl I know!” and throwing her arms around her new friend’s
neck she kissed her rapturously.

Then of course they must play house, with Claudie as the
well-dressed mamma, and then came school and church and everything
else they could think of, till at last, tired out with play, they
threw themselves down in the shade to tell stories.

“I wonder if Heaven is over yonder by the mountains,” said Claudie,
dreamily; “my mamma is in Heaven, and she has a beautiful white
robe, and a golden crown and a harp!”

“An’ my mamma is in Hebben, too, an’ she wears a collarette,”
chimed in Chloe with much importance; “but Hebben isn’t on the
mountains; it’s in England!”

Claudie had just opened her mouth to dispute this remarkable
statement, when Pink took up the argument:

“Chloe doesn’t know nuffin ’bout it,” she laughed. “She just
thinks that ’cause cousin Emma went to England in a big ship with
a heap of colored people to sing, an’ she said ev’rybody was so
good it seemed just like Heaven, and nobody seemed to notice that
they weren’t as white as anybody, an’ she saw the queen, an’ she
went to dinner with white folks in splendid big houses, an’ a white
gen’leman took her out to dinner hisself, an’ treated her ’zactly
like a white lady; an’ she says, ‘’magine me in Washington an’
Gene’l Sherman taking me out to dinner!’”

Pink stopped breathless.

“But she did say it were sure ’nuff Hebben dere! You didn’t tell it
all, Pink Symond,” persisted Chloe, indignantly.

“Yes,” said Pink, more soberly, “she _did_ say that when they came
home an’ she had to ride in smoking cars, an’ couldn’t go to table
with white folks at hotels, an’ was treated just like we all are,
she thought England must be Heaven sure enough, ’cause everybody
says this is the freest country outside of Heaven!”

Just then this theological discussion was ended by the sound of the
dinner-bells, and Pink and Claudie, with arms lovingly around each
other, walked slowly toward the house.

“Of such is the kingdom of Heaven,” murmured Uncle Faith as he
watched them from his study window, and the tired look on his
face faded away and something came instead that made Claudie say
wonderingly—

“Oh, Uncle Faith, you look like—like the apostle John!”

“I think Pink is perfectly beautiful, Auntie,” whispered Claudie at
her bedtime talk that night, “and I do wish those ladies at home
could see her. You know, Auntie”—the fair face flushing—“I was so
ignorant ’bout the colored people this morning, and I didn’t know
any better, and I s’pose that’s just the way with those ladies.
Isn’t there some way we could tell them, Auntie, that the colored
people are just like us, and that they don’t seem so very colored
after all?”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR MARCH, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $131.43.

    Augusta. South Cong. Soc., ($30 of which from
      BARRETT E. POTTER, to const. DEA. GEO. F.
      HAWES, L. M.) $51; Mrs. A. M. C., 50c.; Mrs.
      D. A. F., 50c.                                         $52.00
    Farmington. H. P. K., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                      1.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.40
    Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Hermon. Mrs. M. A. Peabody                                 1.00
    Hiram. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Mrs. L. W.
      Hubbard, Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._,
      $2.50 _for freight_                                      2.50
    Kennebunk. Union Cong. Ch.                                15.53
    Machias. Centre St. Ch. and Soc.                          14.50
    Sweden. Members Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Windham Centre. J. T., 50c.; Mrs. B. F. D., 50c            1.00
    Woolwich. J. C. S.                                         0.50
                                                          —————————
                                                            $111.43
    LEGACY.

    Bethel. Estate of Sarah J. Chapman, by A. W.
      Valentine, Ex.                                          20.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $131.43


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $306.42.

    Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.86
    Colebrook. J. A. H.                                        0.50
    Dover. E. J. L.                                            1.00
    Exeter. Three Bbls. of C., _for Talladega,
      Ala._
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.98
    Fisherville. Rev. A. Wm. Fiske, $30, to const.
      MRS. A. W. FISKE, L. M.; MRS. MARY C.
      ATKINSON, $30, to const. herself L. M.                  60.00
    Fitzwilliam. Dea. R. B. Phillips, $5; H. H. W.
      60c.                                                     5.60
    Francestown. R. G. C.                                      0.50
    Great Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              26.23
    Haverhill. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.32
    Hillsborough Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $4.30; H. O. C., $1                                      5.30
    Hollis. Cong. Ch. (89c. of which _for Woman’s
      work for Women_)                                        26.78
    Laconia. “Friends,” Box of C., _for
      Washington, D.C._
    Lancaster. Mrs. A. M. Amsden                               5.00
    Littleton. Mrs. B. W. K.                                   1.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc., adl. to const. DEA.
      SAMUEL F. BALL, L. M.                                   10.80
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $57.33, to
      const. DEA. LEONARD FRENCH, L. M.;
      “Pillsbury,” $5                                         62.33
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           18.59
    Mason. E. B. Newell                                        2.00
    New Boston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            16.73
    Orford. David E. Willard                                   5.00
    Troy. M. W. W.                                             0.60
    Wolfborough. ——                                            5.00


  VERMONT, $289.61.

    Barre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 16.06
    Bethel. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.26
    Burlington. “A Friend”                                     1.00
    Castleton. Cong. Ch and Soc.                              32.00
    Clarendon. Mrs. A. Smith                                   5.00
    East Poultney. J. M.                                       0.50
    Essex Junction. Elizabeth T. Macomber                      2.00
    Greensborough. Mrs. L. S. Patton                           5.00
    Hubbardton. Mrs D. J. Flagg, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         2.00
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               40.14
    North Ferrisburgh. MRS. C. W. WICKER, to
      const. herself L. M.                                    30.00
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            15.75
    Norwich. Mrs. H. Burton                                    5.00
    Quechee. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. JOSEPH
      C. PARKER, L. M.                                        26.50
    Royalton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                21.75
    Saint Albans. Dea. H. M. Stevens, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           15.00
    Shelburne. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        15.00
    Strafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch., by Miss L. A. Kelley,
      Bbl. of C. and $1 _for freight, for
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         1.00
    West Charleston. Rev. W. T. Herrick, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             8.65
    —— “A Friend”                                             10.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             10.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,458.38.

    Abington. S. L.                                            0.50
    Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 21.15
    Amesbury. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C., _for
      Washington, D.C._
    Andover. C. E. Goodell, $25; A Friend, $5                 30.00
    Andover. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      15.00
    Andover. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    Arlington. Cong. Church and Soc.                          25.00
    Ashburnham. Fa r of Children’s Circle of Cong.
      Ch., _for Atlanta U._                                   45.70
    Ashfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    12.50
    Ashland. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            3.50
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   46.00
    Athol. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. ANDREW J.
      HAMILTON and ELBRIDGE E. SPAULDING, L. M.’s             75.00
    Barre. Sab. Sch. of Evan. Cong. Ch.                       14.03
    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Boston. Old South Cong. Church and Soc.,
      $672.24; “A Friend,” $1.50                             673.74
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      Abbie W. Pearson, Treas., $150.40, _for Lady
      Missionaries_; Individuals, _for Mag._, $2             152.40
    Boston. Mrs. M. E. Hayden, 2 Boxes of
      Articles, _for Fair at Emerson Inst._
    Boston Highlands. Miss E. Torrey’s Sab. Sch.
      Class, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                   2.00
    Boston Highlands. Eliot Dorcas Soc., Bbl.
      Bedding and C., _for Fisk U._
    Bradford. Elijah Bradstreet, _for Fisk U._                10.00
    Bridgewater. Sab. Sch. of Cent. Sq. Cong. Ch.             15.00
    Brockton. Mrs. B. Sanford, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    Brockton. Mrs. L. C. Sanford, Bbl. of C.
    Brookline. “A Friend”                                     50.00
    Buckland. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                           9.66
    Charlton. Bbl. of C. and $1 _for freight_, by
      Mrs. H. M. Fiske, _for Kansas Refugee M._                1.00
    Chelsea. “E. G.” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                5.00
    Dalton. First Cong. Ch.                                   33.98
    Danvers. Miss C. W. L.                                     0.50
    Dedham. Miss M. C. Burgess, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Dorchester. “A Friend of the Freedmen,” $5; C.
      E. B., $1; Mrs. E. T., 50c.; Mrs. M. J. B.,
      50c.                                                     7.00
    Dracut. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.00
    Easton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          13.75
    Fitchburg. H. M. F.                                        0.50
    Foxborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            31.56
    Franklin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           15.25
    Framingham. Mrs. J. W. C., 50c.; Mrs. F. B.
      H., 50c.                                                 1.00
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      28.82
    Greenfield. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           25.00
    Hampshire Co. “A Friend”                                 100.00
    Harwichport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                             6.00
    Hatchville. Mrs. V. N.H.                                  1.00
    Heath. Mrs. W. E. Hunt, _for Macon, Ga._                   2.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             105.00
    Hopkinton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.
      _for Mobile, Ala._
    Hubbardston. “A Friend,” _for Kansas Refugee
      M._                                                      2.00
    Linden. “A little boy,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            0.25
    Littleton. Mrs. Wm. Sewall, _for the poor,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            4.00
    Lowell. Edwin Lamson, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            32.25
    Marblehead. J. J. H. Gregory, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           65.00
    Marion. Ladies’ Missionary Soc.                            5.00
    Millbury. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _Bbl. of
      bedding, for Atlanta U._
    Monson. Mrs. C. O. Chapin and her S. S. Class,
      _for ed. of an Indian boy, Hampton N. and A.
      Inst._                                                  10.00
    Newbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         19.00
    Newburyport. Freedmen’s Aid Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Washington, D.C._
    Newton. First Cong. Ch.                                   25.00
    Northampton. “A Friend,” to const. MISS
      HARRIET S. BILLINGS and MRS. ELIZABETH MEAD,
      L. M.’s                                                100.00
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch., _for ed. of an
      Indian, Hampton N. & A. Inst._                          50.00
    Northampton. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         5.00
    North Brookfield. Union Cong. Ch.                         11.00
    North Somerville. “A Friend”                               1.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.00
    Oxford. Mrs. Edward Bardwell, $5; Mrs. D.
      Payne, $5; _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._                 10.00
    Peabody. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., by Mrs.
      Sperry, 2 Bbls. of Bedding, _for Atlanta U._
    Peru. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.00
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          27.00
    Roxbury. “A Friend,” _for the poor, Mobile,
      Ala._                                                   15.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              75.00
    Salem. Sab. Sch. of South Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      70.00
    Salisbury and Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    10.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Southborough. P. E. Ch. and Soc.                          23.16
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $25; Mrs.
      M. C. Tilton, $2                                        27.00
    South Framingham. G. M. Amsden                             5.00
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    24.00
    Springfield. “M.,” _for rebuilding, Tougaloo,
      Miss._                                                 100.00
    Springfield. Homer Merriam, to const. RUTH E.
      CLIZBIE, L. M.                                          30.00
    Springfield. T. S. S.                                      0.50
    South Royalston. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                20.00
    Stockbridge. Alice Byington, _for Ind. Sch.,
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           5.00
    Swampscott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.64
    Tewksbury. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C.
      and $3 _for freight, for Talladega C._                   3.00
    Upton. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Washington,
      D.C._
    Ware. East Cong. Ch. and Soc., $410.90; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $35.60                             446.50
    Warren. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. CHARLES F.
      PIERCE, L. M.                                           65.18
    Watertown. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Talladega,
      Ala._
    Westborough. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $95.03;
      Sab. Sch. of Evan. Cong. Ch., $50                      145.03
    Westhampton. Miss H. F. C.                                 1.00
    West Medway. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.00
    Westminster. Bbl. of C. val. $45, by Mrs. J.
      B. Wood; Mrs. H. G. Whitney, $2 _for freight_            2.00
    Westport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           3.54
    Weymouth and Braintree. Union Cong. Ch.                   23.79
    Wilmington. Mrs. Susan Bancroft                            6.00
    Winchester. “A Friend”                                     1.00
    Woburn. E. F. F.                                           1.00
    Worcester. Minnie A. Winter                                5.00
    Worcester. Washburn & Moen, 1142 lbs. of
      Galvanized Barb Fencing, _3 miles of fencing
      for Winsted Lawn, Talladega, Miss._
    —— “A Friend,” to const. MRS. SUSAN M. SPRAGUE
      and MRS. LYDIA S. SPRAGUE, L. M’s.                      60.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             10.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,308.38
    LEGACY.

    Northfield. Estate of Mrs. Amanda Field, by T.
      J. Field, Adm.                                         150.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,458.38


  RHODE ISLAND, $526.52.

    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch., $426.02;
      Rev. A. H. M., 50c.                                    426.52
    Providence. A. D. Lockwood, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Providence. Central Ch., one Bbl. and two
      Boxes of C. _for Washington, D.C._


  CONNECTICUT, $3,244.01.

    Ashford. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Bethlehem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             22.15
    Branford. H. G. H.                                         1.00
    Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                               93.81
    Collinsville. Mrs. Chidsey, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Derby. First Cong. Ch.                                    17.50
    East Hartford. First Cong. Ch. ($10 of which
      from Abraham Williams), _for Kansas Refugee
      M._                                                     20.00
    East Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         16.55
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                 100.00
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch., to const.
      CHARLES N. HUBBARD, L. M.                               37.10
    Goshen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                45.00
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                     6.00
    Hartford. Mrs. Polly Johnson, _for Mendi M._               1.50
    Hartford. Mrs. John Olmsted, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        15.00
    Harwinton. Cong. Ch.                                      44.80
    Hebron. L. W. R.                                           1.00
    Lebanon. Ladies’ Social Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of C.
    Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch., Box dried fruit,
      _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    Meriden. Edmund Tuttle, to const. MISS MARY A.
      RICE, L. M.                                             30.00
    Milldale. J. B. D.                                         0.50
    New Haven. Church of the Redeemer, $191.75,
      and books, val. $14, from Rev. S. W. Barnum            191.75
    New Haven. “A Friend,” _for Indian M._                    20.00
    New Haven. H. F. Hart, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    New Haven. E. P. Judd, books, val. $100, _for
      College Library, Talladega C._
    New Haven. “A Friend,” Box of books, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    New London. Mrs. Robert McEwen, _for Hampton
      N. & A. Inst., new building for Indian girls_          100.00
    New London. First Church                                  50.75
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch., $50; M. A. C., $1                     51.00
    North Greenwich. Mrs. A. D.                                0.50
    North Stamford. Cong. Ch.                                  3.00
    Norwich Town. _For Kansas Refugee M._                      5.00
    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         866.62
    Norwich. Miss Mary W. Rockwell, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Norwich. Home Miss. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      Box of bedding, _for Atlanta U._
    Norwich. Home Miss. Soc. of Park Ch., Bbl. of
      bedding and towels, _for Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._
    Orange. Rev. E. E. R., _for Macon, Ga._                    1.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Ch.                                   365.35
    Plantsville. “Friends,” $80; Mrs. E. P.
      Hotchkiss, $5, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._            85.00
    Prospect. R. R. Brown, $20; Cong. Ch., $17                37.00
    Somersville. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         1.00
    South Windsor. Cong. Ch., $32; C. W., 50c.                32.50
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      77.68
    Thompsonville. H. P. P.                                    1.00
    Tolland. Lucy L. Clough, ($50 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                            100.00
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.35
    Vernon Depot. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 9.00
    Warren. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          36.60
    Woodbury. “F. J.,” _for ed. of Indians,
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._                                   1.00
    Woodburn. Benjamin Fabrique                               20.00
    West Winsted. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    —— “A Friend,” _for rebuilding, Tougaloo,
      Miss._                                                  10.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,644.01
    LEGACIES.

    South Britain. Estate of Nancy P. Mitchell, by
      C. LeRoy Mitchell, Admr.                               500.00
    New London. “Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven”
      _for rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                      100.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,244.01


  NEW YORK, $796.01.

    Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
    Binghamton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Binghamton. Young People of Cong. Ch. through
      Miss S. Bean, Box of articles, _for fair,
      Mobile, Ala._
    Black Creek. Cong. Ch., $3.30; Miss M. T. $1               4.30
    Brooklyn. C. T. Christensen, $100; Park Cong.
      Ch., $10.63; Sab. Sch. of Ch. of the
      Covenant, $3                                           113.63
    Brooklyn. Mrs. B. W. Gleason, package of C.,
      _for Kansas Refugee M._
    Canajoharie. Mrs. D. H. P.                                 0.50
    Clifton Springs. Anna B. Miller, _for the
      poor, Mobile, Ala._                                      2.00
    Cutchogue. Mrs. L. D. Whaley, $9; Presb. Ch.,
      Box of C., _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._                  9.00
    East Aurora. Rev. R. M. Sandford                           4.00
    Ellington. Mrs. H. B. Rice, _for Woman’s Work
      for Women_                                              10.00
    Ellington. Cong. Ch.                                       2.50
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV. JOHN
      H. FRAZER, L. M.                                        51.20
    Flushing. First Cong. Soc.                                15.00
    Geneva. Mrs. C. H.                                         0.50
    Gloversville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Straight U._                                            40.00
    Griffins Mills. Abijah Paul                                2.00
    Hamilton. “A Friend”                                      15.00
    Hamilton. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 6.00
    Harlem. Cong. Ch., $45.53; Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., $30; to const. CHARLES P. PIERCE, L. M.            75.53
    Homer. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Talladega,
      Ala._
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch.                                        64.10
    McDonough. Miss Caroline Sawtelle                          2.00
    Millbrook. Mrs. J. W. C.                                   0.51
    New York. “Artist,” $25; A. N. Selter, $10; J.
      S. Holt, $10; Dr. A. S. Ball, $5                        50.00
    Oneida. S. H. Goodwin, $10; Edward Loomis, $2             12.00
    Oriskany. Albert Halsey, $5; Mrs. E. D. P., $1             6.00
    Oxford. Assoc. Presb. Ch.                                  8.69
    Palmyra. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for the poor,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            2.50
    Penn Yan. W. M. Taylor                                     2.50
    Perry Center. Mrs. E. A. S.                                1.00
    Portland. John S. Coon                                    15.00
    Prattsburgh. “A.”                                          5.00
    Rochester. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Plym. Cong.
      Ch., _for Straight U._                                  10.55
    Sackets Harbor. Mrs. Anar. H. Barnes, _for
      Indian M._                                              40.00
    Sherburne. Mrs. F. L. Rexford, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     12.00
    Silver Creek. Mrs. Eliza Lee, $100; W. Chapin,
      $5; C. H., $1; Others, $1                              107.00
    Syracuse. C. A. Hamlin                                    50.00
    Westmoreland. A. S. B.                                     0.50
    West Winfield. Miss A. K.                                  0.50


  NEW JERSEY, $240.00.

    Bergen Point. Reformed Church, by Rev. H. W.
      F. Jones                                                50.00
    Englewood. C. T.                                           1.00
    Montclair. Mrs. S. T. Pratt’s S. S. Class,
      $13; “A Lady Friend,” $1                                14.00
    Montclair. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._                                  40.00
    Morristown. Miss Ella M. Graves, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo U._                               100.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch., Package S. S.
      Papers; Mrs. H. M. A., 50c.                              0.50
    Newark. C. S. Haines                                      30.00
    Paterson. H. H.                                            0.50
    Raritan. Mrs. S. Provost, $4, and Box of papers            4.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $157.01.

    Coudersport. Mr. & Mrs. John S. Mann                       6.50
    Philadelphia. H. W. Pitkin, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Philadelphia. A. H. Wilstack, _for Tougaloo U._           50.00
    Pittsburgh. E. P.                                          0.51


  OHIO, $1,506.16.

    Alliance. Mrs. J. L. Thomas                                1.50
    Ashtabula. “A Friend,”                                   100.00
    Bowling Green. Mrs. P. Minton, $1.50; Rev. J.
      K. Deering, $1.50; Mrs. J. K. D., 50c.                   3.50
    Bissells. Mrs. S. H. E.                                    1.00
    Brookfield. By Evan T. Tomas, Sec.                        10.00
    Burton. Cong. Ch., (of which S. A. H., $10; L.
      R. B. $10, C. C. $10, to const. MRS. SARAH
      A. HOTCHKISS, L. M.)                                    40.26
    Cincinnati. Vine St. Cong. Ch. _for furnishing
      rooms, Tougaloo U._                                     37.00
    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., $18; “M. H. B.,” $1           19.00
    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of bedding
      and C., _for Fisk U._
    Columbus. Miss C. Herd, _for ed. of a colored
      man for the ministry_                                    5.00
    Fort Recovery. J. F. Collins                               5.00
    Four Corners. Cong. Ch.                                   11.75
    Gallion. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Pres. Ch., Box
      of C., _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._
    Geneva. Young People’s Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      the poor, Mobile, Ala._                                  5.00
    Gustavus. Ladies, 50c., _for Student Aid_,
      Bbl. of C., and $1.50 _for freight, for
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Hudson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            2.65
    Kingsville. Presb. Ch., $14; Rev. D. L.
      Hickok, $10; Mrs. A., $1; Ladies, 3 Bbls. of
      C., _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._                        25.00
    Lenox. Cong. Ch., $11.75; A. J. Holman, $10               21.75
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       80.48
    Mallet Creek. Dr. J. A. Bingham                            5.00
    Mechanicstown. S. M.                                       1.00
    Newark. Mrs. Lewis Jones                                   2.00
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., $90; Mrs. J. F. B.,
      60c.                                                    90.60
    Painesville. Reuben Hitchcock, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                           150.00
    Painesville. S. W. P.                                      1.00
    Pierpont. Mrs. S. W.                                       1.00
    Ravenna. S. H.                                             1.00
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.                                159.77
    Sandusky. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of bedding,
      _for Fisk U._
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Saybrook. Dist. No. 3, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._, $2.30, and _for freight_, $1.70            4.00
    Seville. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Tallmadge. Miss H. W. C.                                   0.50
    Toledo. First Cong. Ch., $24; Third Cong. Ch.,
      $10.70, _for furnishing rooms, Tougaloo U._             34.70
    Unionville. Mrs. J. M. Frazer, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Wakeman. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           31.70
    Wauseon. Cong. Ch., _for furnishing rooms,
      Tougaloo U._                                            12.00
    West Williamsfield. Cong. Ch.                             11.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $906.16
    LEGACY.

    Andover. Estate of Orrin B. Case, by Thomas
      Case                                                   600.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,506.16


  INDIANA, $5.50.

    Dublin. H. M.                                              1.00
    Economy. C. W. O., $1; Mrs. L. M., $1                      2.00
    Fort Wayne. Mrs. E. T. M.                                  0.50
    Sparta. John Hawkswell                                     2.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,098.90.

    Amboy. C. A. Church, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         5.00
    Avon. Mrs. Celinda Woods, $3.50; “A Friend,”
      $1.50                                                    5.00
    Belvidere. Miss Elizabeth Smith                            3.00
    Buda. J. B. Stewart, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Byron. A. A. Johnston                                      5.00
    Chicago. New England Ch. (ad’l), $118.61;
      Lincoln Park Cong. Ch., $10.89                         129.50
    Chicago. C. B. Bouton, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     50.00
    Chicago. Mrs. E. W. Blatchford, $10; Mrs. C.
      H. Case, $5; Ladies’ Aid. Soc. of Leavitt
      St. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.; Lincoln Park
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.; Ladies of New England
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for the poor,
      Mobile, Ala._                                           15.00
    Chicago. Lincoln Park Cong. Ch., Woman’s Miss.
      Soc., _for Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._               13.90
    Downers’ Grove. J. W. Bushnell, _for
      rebuilding Tougaloo U._                                  3.00
    Elgin. “Friends in Cong. Ch.”                             50.00
    Geneva. Cong. Ch., B. of C., _for the poor,
      Mobile, Ala._
    Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                    33.68
    Highland. Cong. Ch.                                       15.00
    Huntley. T. S. Huntley                                    10.00
    Hutsonville. C. V. N.                                      1.00
    Ivanhoe. Mrs. S. S.                                        1.00
    Jacksonville. T. W. Melendy, $10; H. L. and M.
      C. Melendy, $10                                         20.00
    Milburn. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
      of C., _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._
    Moline. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Moline. ——                                                10.00
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Ottawa. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Plymouth. N. F. Burton                                    10.00
    Quincy. Lorenzo Bull, _for rebuilding
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Quincy. Joshua Perry                                      10.00
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 8.32
    Streator. Mrs. M. L. W.                                    0.50
                                                            ———————
                                                            $673.90
    LEGACY.

    Chicago. Estate of Mrs. E. H. Craven, by E. N.
      Blatchford, Adm., $200, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._, and $225 _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                          425.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,098.90


  MICHIGAN, $540.68.

    Alpena. Mrs. S. Hitchcock, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        20.00
    Battle Creek. Presb. and Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               6.00
    Brighton. Mrs. M. A. Kellogg                               5.00
    Calumet. Cong. Ch.                                       242.44
    Calumet. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           28.68
    Church’s Corners. H. C.                                    1.00
    Covert. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   11.00
    Gaylord. A. Van Auken                                      3.00
    Grand Rapids. E. M. Ball                                  10.00
    Laingsburg. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                             2.11
    Lansing. Plymouth Ch.                                     33.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               19.75
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                          8.70
                                                          —————————
                                                            $390.68
    LEGACY.

    Union City. Bequest of Miss Sarah B. Clark,
      _for repairing roof of Swayne Hall,
      Talladega, Ala._, by I. W. Clark                       150.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $540.68


  WISCONSIN, $224.30.

    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             1.55
    Berlin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $10; Mrs. Geo.
      Waring, $5; W. F., $1; “A Friend,” $1;
      “Friends,” 1 Bbl. and 2 Boxes of C., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                               17.00
    Beloit. Ladies of First Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             3.00
    Beloit. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for freight_                 1.53
    Broadhead. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Bristol and Paris. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                        3.00
    Kaukauna. Cong. Ch.                                        2.50
    Kenosha. L. G. M.                                          1.00
    Lake Geneva. Mrs. H. A. Allan, _for Theo.
      Dept., Talladega C._                                    15.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., adl.                            50.00
    Mazo Manie. Mrs. R. Laughlin, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         2.00
    Milton. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.71
    Ripon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            15.00
    Sparta. First Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN L. WOY
      and WILLIAM LOHMILLER, L. M.’s                          60.01
    Sun Prairie. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               9.00
    White Water. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $20,
      Prof. Saulsbury, $5, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Woodworth. Ladies’ Soc., Bbl. of C. and $5
      _for Freight, for Macon, Ga._                            5.00


  IOWA, $438.97.

    Algona. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
    Anamosa. Woman’s Freedmen’s Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       19.00
    Big Rock. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           10.00
    Burlington. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    Cedar Rapids. T. M. Sinclair, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
    Cedar Rapids. Miss A. W. D.                                0.50
    Clay. Cong. Ch., _for Kansas Refugee M._                  17.00
    Chester Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 36.00
    Clinton. Dr. E. R. Mullet, $1.50; H. C. Y.,
      $1; H. R. W., 50c.; C. B., 50c.                          3.50
    Clinton. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            5.00
    Davenport. Geo. W. Ells                                   10.00
    Denmark. J. H.                                             0.51
    De Witt. Rev. J. F. T.                                     1.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. J. Merrit Rice, Box of C.; Cong.
      Ch. and Young People’s Benev. Soc., Bbl. of
      C., _for the poor, Mobile, Ala._
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                         15.73
    Grinnell. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $33.35; By
      Rev. J. S. F., $1                                       34.35
    Grinnell. “Eight Friends,” $20; Prof. F. P.
      Brewer, $2.21; _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     22.21
    Lyons. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           10.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” _for Straight U._              30.00
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch.                                      31.50
    Miles. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            1.75
    Montour. Cong. Ch.                                        14.70
    Montour. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Kansas
      Refugee M._                                              1.00
    Newton. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           11.22
    Oskaloosa. Rev. Asa Turner and wife, _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                               20.00
    Sabula. Ladies, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            5.00
    Tabor. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._                                                      5.00
    Wayne. Ladies, $2; D. C. S., $1; _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            3.00
    Wilton. Ladies’ Missionary Soc., $10; Ladies
      $5, _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._             15.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Council Bluffs. Ladies’ Home Miss. Soc., $15;
      Iowa Falls, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $15; Ames,
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $5; Bear Grove, Ladies
      of Cong. Ch., $5; Shelbyville, Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., $5, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           45.00


  MISSOURI, $132.35.

    Index. W. B. Wills, $10; P. M. Wills, $5; F.
      P., $1; Others, $1.50                                   17.50
    Meadville. Cong. Ch.                                       8.25
    New Cambria. Cong. Ch.                                     2.10
    Saint Louis. Mrs. R. Webb                                100.00
    St. Louis. Miss Mary E. Edgell, _for the Poor,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            5.00


  KANSAS, $14.67.

    Burlington. John Morris                                    2.00
    Lane. Mrs. N. D. Coleman                                   2.00
    Russell. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.67


  MINNESOTA, $114.64.

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 20.81
    Minneapolis. E. D. First Cong. Ch.                        12.63
    Northfield. A. N. N.                                       1.00
    Plainview. “Mission Helpers,” _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       7.00
    Saint Paul. Sab. Sch. of Plym. Cong. Ch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Tivoli. L. H.                                              1.00
    Waseca. Cong. Soc.                                        15.00
    Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. WILLIAM B. WARD, L. M.                             32.20


  NEBRASKA, $37.88.

    Red Willow. “A Friend”                                    37.88


  COLORADO, $10.50.

    Colorado Springs. Young Ladies’ Miss. Soc.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         10.00
    Loveland. C. E. F.                                         0.50


  CALIFORNIA, $300.00.

    San Diego. George W. Marston                             150.00
    Oakland. Mrs. E. A. Gray, _for School-house in
      Georgia_                                               150.00


  OREGON, $23.00.

    The Dalles. First Cong. Ch.                               13.00
    Oregon City. Rev. Amos W. Bower                           10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $4.06.

    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Cong. Ch.                     4.06


  MARYLAND, $100.00.

    Baltimore. “A Friend,”                                   100.00


  WEST VIRGINIA, $4.00.

    Elm Grove. Mrs. B. D. Atkinson                             4.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $151.75.

    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition                       106.75
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                     45.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $321.75.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         321.75


  TENNESSEE, $320.33.

    Memphis. Le Moyne School, Tuition                        207.50
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      112.40
    Nashville. “A Widow’s Mite,” _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 0.43


  GEORGIA, $827.72.

    Atlanta. Storrs School, Tuition, $324.35;
      Rent, $3                                               327.35
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition, $125.25; Rent,
      $7.80                                                  133.05
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                 125.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, $92.95; Rent,
      $5.50                                                   98.45
    McIntosh. Tuition                                          6.87
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $123; Rent, $10          133.00
    Spoonville. “Friends,” _for furnishing rooms,
      Tougaloo U._                                             2.00
    Woodville. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstack, _for Mendi
      M._                                                      2.00


  ALABAMA, $597.97.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          1.25
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           222.70
    Mobile. Emersonian Mission Band, $5; “A
      Friend,” $5; Miss R. A. Smith, $2.50, _for
      the poor, Mobile, Ala._                                 12.50
    Mobile. Ch. Offering, _for Mendi M._                       1.00
    Montgomery. Pub. Sch. Fund                               221.25
    Montgomery. Miss H. M. Scott, to const. LUCY
      C. SANFORD, L. M., _and for furnishing
      rooms, Tougaloo U._                                     50.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          12.75
    Shelby Iron Works. A. E. S. B.                             0.51
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition, $75.50;
      H. L. B., 51c.                                          76.01


  LOUISIANA, $251.00.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        150.50
    New Orleans. Central Cong. Ch.                           100.00
    New Iberia. B. K.                                          0.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $120.70.

    Tougaloo. Renters on McKee’s Plantation, _for
      fitting up Chapel_, $3.50; Tougaloo,
      “Friends,” $1.25; Canton, “Friends,” $2.10;
      Livingstone, $1.80; Sweet Canaan Ch., $2.50,
      _for furnishing rooms in Ladies’ Hall_                  11.15
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                           102.60
    Hinds Co. “Friends,” by A. Costello, $3.50; by
      Andrew Moman, $3.45, _for furnishing rooms,
      Tougaloo U._                                             6.95


  TEXAS, $45.75.

    Austin. Tillotson C. and N. Inst. Tuition                 44.50
    Corpus Christi. First. Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       1.25


  INCOME FUND, $455.00.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               355.00
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00
    C. F. Dike Fund                                           50.00


  SCOTLAND, $100.00.

    —— “A. P.”                                               100.00


  PERSIA, $50.00.

    Orsonnat. E. W. Labaree                                   50.00


  JAPAN, $40.00

    Kobe. REV. R. HENRY DAVIS ($10 of which _for
      Chinese M. in San Francisco_), $30, to
      const. himself L. M.; Miss Anna Y. Davis, $10           40.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total for March                                  $16,987.47
        Total from Oct. 1st to March 31st                104,509.93

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON C. & N. INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Norwich, Conn. Ladies of Park Ch., by Mrs. L.
      B. Young                                                27.00
    Buffalo, N.Y. W. G. Bancroft                              50.00
    Romeo, Mich. Miss T. S. Clark                             15.00
                                                          —————————
          Total                                              $92.00
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to Feb.
      28th                                                 4,110.71
                                                          —————————
          Total                                            4,202.71


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    From Oct. 1st. to March 31st                         $17,993.06
                                                         ==========

                                    H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R.I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D.D., R.I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., N.J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D.D., D.C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D.D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N.Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D.D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M.D., N.H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D.D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D.D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D., D.C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D.D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D.D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N.Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N.J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., N.Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N.Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    A. J. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N.C., 6; S.C., 2; Ga., 13;
Ky., 6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_,
2. _Among the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches as we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                             RIDLEYS’
                         FASHION MAGAZINE
                          _SPRING, 1881_,
                            NOW READY.
                             CONTAINS
                   Over 100 Large Quarto Pages,
                      _ENTERTAINING STORIES_,
                       _in Prose and Verse_,
                   _INTERESTING HOME ARTICLES_,
                      _ILLUSTRATED FASHIONS_,

     With valuable information for those living at a distance
         from New York on the many perplexing questions of

                         “_WHAT TO WEAR_.”


                         ISSUED QUARTERLY,

                50c per Annum; Single Copies, 15c.


     This publication should be found in every household. It
    contains the Lowest New York Prices, and is an invaluable
           guide to intelligent and economical shopping.


                   E. RIDLEY & SONS, Publishers,

                           GRAND AND ALLEN STS.,
                                         _New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      INVALID ROLLING CHAIR.

[Illustration]

(RECLINING.)

A PRICELESS BOON to those who are UNABLE TO WALK. LEONARD BACON, D.
D., HON. A. H. STEVENS, M. C., and OTHERS recommend them. SEND FOR
CIRCULAR.

[Illustration]

FOLDING CHAIR CO., New Haven Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

                               MASON
                                AND
                              HAMLIN
                              ORGANS


BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street,
Boston; 46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

              J. & R. LAMB, 59 Carmine St. NEW YORK.
                      ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS
                  MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                                 MEMORIAL TABLETS.

                Sterling Silver Communion Services.

                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     “IMPORTANT TO CLERGYMEN.”

                  PRINCE’S IMPROVED FOUNTAIN PEN

          [Illustration: CAP THE HANDLE CONTAINS THE INK]

            As now improved, saves one-third the time.

 “If I were bereft of it, I should feel myself bereft of my right
            hand.”—REV. LYMAN ABBOTT, _Ed. Ch. Union_.

  Can be sent by mail in a registered letter. Send for circulars.
                          Manufactured by

                          JOHN S. PURDY,
                        212 Broadway, Cor. Fulton St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        WHITE and DECORATED

         French China and English Porcelain at Low Prices.

  Fine White French China Dinner Sets, 149 pieces       $30.00
  Fine White French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces             7.00
  Fine Gold-band French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces         8.50
  Richly Decorated French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces      12.00
  Chamber Sets, 11 pieces, $4 00; white                   3.25
  White English Porcelain Dinner Sets, 100 pieces        14.00
  Silver plated Dinner Knives, per doz.                   3.00

                 ALSO ALL HOUSE-FURNISHING GOODS.

Illustrated Catalogue and Price-List mailed free on application.
Estimates furnished.

              C. L. Hadley, Cooper Inst., N.Y. City.

Orders boxed and placed on Car or Steamer, free of charge. Sent C.
O. D. or P. O. Money Order.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: GILLEN, Rng 36 Beekman St]

                         SECRETARY OF THE

                    Brooklyn Furniture Company,

               559 to 571 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N.Y.

Will send, free, to any address, our Illustrated Price-List of
Furniture. Intending purchasers of Furniture will do well to send
for it to compare prices with those of other houses. We manufacture
all our goods, and retail at lowest possible rates.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                         FUN FOR THE BOYS

Here you are boys! Just the thing for a little harmless
masquerading. The mustaches are made of genuine hair, can be
fastened to or removed from the face with ease, and when worn
cannot be told from the real production. Boys and young men can
have hosts of fun putting them on in a crowd of friends, who will
be greatly astonished at the sudden transformation. Three colors,
light, dark brown and black. Goatees to match. PRICE BY MAIL,
MUSTACHES 20 CTS. GOATEES 15 CENTS. Valuable Catalogue of Agents
goods free. =World Manuf’g Co. 122 Nassau St., New York.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


       “Indisputable culinary skill.”—_Philadelphia Times._

                    VALUABLE COOKING RECEIPTS.

By THOS. J. MURREY, late Caterer of Astor House and Rossmore
  Hotel, of New York, and Continental Hotel of Philadelphia.

Contains no theorizing, only practical, thoroughly tested formulas
for some of the most dainty, delicate dishes known among leading
caterers, simplified and adapted to the =WANTS OF FAMILIES OF
MODERATE MEANS=, without sacrificing the rare qualities that serve
to make the dishes at first-class hotels so appetizing.

Price, cloth, 75 Cents: paper, 35 Cents.

“It is especially rich in formulas for salads and sauces.”—_N.Y.
Evening Post._

Sent, post-paid, on receipt of price. GEO. W. HARLAN, Publisher, 19
Park Place, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            BISCOTINE,

                 _FOOD for CHILDREN and INVALIDS_.

                 Glycerine Sans Pareil Hair Tonic,

  Toilet
      Waters,

    Violet,

  New Mown
      Hay,

  Heliotrope,
      &c.

  Sachets
      D’Iris
    de Florence.

  Compound
      Orris
  Dentifrice

[Illustration: TRADE-MARK.
  Established 1770.]

                 DELLUC & CO., French Pharmacists,

  Send for Circular.                   _=635 Broadway, N.Y.=_


                 *       *       *       *       *


              The American Popular Dictionary, $1.00

[Illustration]

This useful and elegant volume is a Complete Library and
Encyclopaedia, as well as the best Dictionary in the world.
Superbly bound in cloth and gilt. IT CONTAINS EVERY WORD IN THE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE, with its true meaning, derivation, spelling
and pronounciation, and a vast amount of absolutely necessary
information upon Science, Mythology, Biography, American History,
Laws etc., being a perfect Library of Reference. Webster’s
Dictionary costs $9.00, and the =American Popular Dictionary= costs
only =$1=. “Worth ten times the money.”—Tribune and Farmer. “We
have never seen its equal either in price, finish or contents.”—The
Advocate. “A perfect Dictionary and library of reference”—Leslie’s
Illus. News, N.Y. One copy of the American Popular Dictionary
(illustrated), the greatest and best book ever published,
post-paid to any address on receipt of =$1=. ☞ Entire satisfaction
guaranteed. 2 copies post-paid =$1.75. Order at once. World
Manufacturing Co., 122 Nassau St., New York.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     THE WORLD MUSICAL ALBUM.

                47 PIECES OF POPULAR MUSIC FOR 50c.

We have secured an immense stock of Choice Music at an
extraordinary low price, and at our price it is the greatest
bargain ever offered. The Music, if bought separately in sheet form
at the Music Store, would cost over =Fourteen Dollars=. We have
the =Forty-Seven Pieces= nicely bound in book form and will send
the entire lot by mail for =Fifty Cents= or =Three Lots for One
Dollar=. Send your order at once. Postage Stamps taken. Valuable
catalogue of Agents’ goods free. =WORLD MANUFACTURING COMPANY, 122
Nassau Street, New York.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 A PRINTING OFFICE FOR ONE DOLLAR.

                             THE WORLD

                     SOLID RUBBER FAMILY FONT,

For marking Linen, Cards, Books, &c. Combines the convenience of
metal type, with the flexibility, durability and elegance of the
rubber stamp.

[Illustration: Children learn their letters, arrangement of letters
into words and words into sentences without a teacher

125 to 150 letters will set up any Name and can be Changed a
Thousand times.

Light, durable, cheap, the best thing for marking Linen ever
invented; ink is indelible.]


                          FOR ONE DOLLAR,

you get everything shown in the cut, with all the type shown below,
or your choice of several other styles of letters.


                             REMEMBER,

125 to 150 letters with Ink, Holder, Pads, Tweezers, &c., all in a
neat box with directions, only $1.00, the price you would pay for a
single name.


Styles of Type. Indicate by the number which style you wish in the
box.

[Illustration: Fac Similie of Font No. 1.

AABBCCDDEEFFGGHHIIJKKLLMMNN OOPPQRRSSTTUVWWXYYZ..,,,,";:!?aaabbcc
cddeeefffgghhiiijjklllmmnnooppqrrrssstttuuvwwxyyzz&]

[Illustration: Fac Similie of Font No. 2.

AABBCCDDEEFFGGHHIIJKKLLMMNNOOP PQRRSSTTUVWWXYYZ&....;::'!?123456789
0aaabbcccddeeeffgghhiiijjkklllmmnnnoooppqrrrssstt tuuvvwxyyz$]

[Illustration: Fac Similie of Font No. 3.

AABBCCDDEEFFGGHHIIJJKKLLMMNNOOPPQQR
RSSTTUUVVWWXXYYZZ$& ...,,,"::;;!?aaabbcccdd
eeeffgghhiiijjjklllmmnnnoooppqrrrssstttuuvwwxx
yyzz11223344556677889900]

[Illustration: Fac Similie of Font No. 4.

AABBCCDDEEFFGGHHIIJJKKLLMMNNOOPPQQR
RSSTTUUVVWWXXYYZZ&&....,,,,???!!!;:$12345678
90aaabbcccddeeeffgghhiiijjklllmmnnnoooppqrrrssstt tuuvvwwxyyz]

Sample Font by Mail, for =_One Dollar_=. We will send =_Two Fonts_=
for =_One Dollar and Seventy-Five Cents_=. We will send =_Four
Fonts_= for =_Three Dollars_=. Get three of your friends to send
with you, and you will have your own Font free.

  =CARDS.= We can furnish good Bristol Board Cards, suitable for
  the Fonts at 20 cents per 100, three hundred for 50 cents; $1.25
  per 1000.


        WORLD MANUFACTURING CO., 122 Nassau St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         MARCHAL & SMITH,
                           NEW IMPERIAL
                           GRAND ORGAN.

                           SENT ON TRIAL
                           SOLID WALNUT

                            Beautifully
                              Carved.

[Illustration]


=By Sending DIRECT from FACTORY to PURCHASER=, selling thousands,
and avoiding Agents’ commissions, Middlemen’s profits and all
expenses we can sell this Beautiful Organ.

=5 Octaves, 16 Stops, 4 Sets Reeds= with handsome Stool,
Instruction Book and Music, Making a Complete Musical Outfit for $75

A matchless combination of Power, Purity, Variety and Sweetness
of tone, combining =Sub-bass=, =Celeste=, =Coupler=, =Flute=,
=Diapason=, =Vox Humana=, =Grand Organ=.


                    AN ELEGANT PARLOR ORNAMENT

With Beautiful Carved Brackets, Polished Panels, Sliding Fall,
Turned Handles, Fancy Fret work, Carved Lampstands, Large
Ornamental Top with Pocket for Music. It is =70= in. high, =49= in.
long, =24= in. wide.


16 Beautiful Stops.

  (1) Diapason.
  (2) Dulcet.
  (3) Melodia.
  (4) Dulciana.
  (5) Echo.
  (6) Celeste.
  (7) Clarionet.
  (8) Sub-Bass.
  (9) Coupler.
  (10) Vox Humana.
  (11) Diapason Forte.
  (12) Aeoline.
  (13) Celestina.
  (14) Flute.
  (15) Flute Forte.
  (16) Grand Organ Knee Stop.

             A Finished Piece of Artistic Workmanship

We will box and deliver the Organ on board cars here, with handsome
Stool, Instruction Book and Music, for only $75

=In ordering=, send the certificate of your Bank, or some
responsible business man, that the organ will be promptly paid for
or returned to us. Freight will be paid by us both ways, if in any
way unsatisfactory. =You take no responsibility= till you receive
and approve the Organ after =15 days’ trial in your own home=.

_We guarantee every Organ for Six Years, and challenge the world to
equal them in quality and price._


                     THE ONLY HOUSE IN AMERICA

that gives so beautifully finished and complete a musical outfit
for =$75=.

=Our No. 375.= The most popular organ ever made, 15 stops, 4 sets
of reeds, 5 octaves, solid walnut. Thousands sold. A favorite with
all. =$60=

OTHER POPULAR STYLES in solid walnut cases, 5 octaves, =$45=,
=$50=, =$55=, =$60=, =$65=, =$70= and upwards. A splendid new
style, 5 octaves, with four full sets, is now ready at =$55=.


         TWENTY YEARS WITHOUT ONE DISSATISFIED PURCHASER.

=A Moment’s Consideration= will show the certainty of securing
a superior instrument from us. Dealers can trust to their own
shrewdness and the ignorance of purchasers to conceal defects in
Instruments they sell. We cannot know who will test ours, and
must send instruments of a quality so superior that their merits
cannot be hidden. Order direct from this advertisement. You take no
responsibility. Be sure to get our Illustrated Catalogue before you
buy. It gives information which protects the purchaser and makes
deceit impossible.

            MARCHAL & SMITH, No. 8 West 11th Street, New York, N.Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

OF THE

American Missionary.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress. Patriots and
Christians interested in the education and Christianizing of these
despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its circulation.
Begin with the January number and the new year. The price is only
Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 157. Donations and subscriptions should
be sent to

                             H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                       56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. It numbers among its regular readers very
many frugal, well-to-do people in nearly every city and village
throughout our Northern and Western States. It is therefore a
specially valuable medium for advertising all articles commonly
used in families of liberal, industrious and enterprising habits of
life.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

         THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                          56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, can aid us in this respect by mentioning, when
ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors have been corrected.

Word with missing letter on page 150 in the entry for Ashburnham
left as printed.

“Assotion” changed to “Association” on page 150 in the second entry
for Boston.

Missing “S” added to the beginning of Springfield in the first
Springfield entry on page 151.

“Toulagoo” changed to “Tougaloo” in the Hinds Co. entry on page 154.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 5, MAY, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.