VOL. XXXV.                                            NO. 6.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            JUNE, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    TILLOTSON NORMAL AND COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE                  161
    PARAGRAPHS                                                 162
    ARTHINGTON MISSION—TIMELY PROPOSAL                         163
    THE SECOND CALL: Rev. Jas. Powell                          164
    THE NEGRO FOR HIS PLACE: Prof. C. C. Painter               165
    ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS                                  167
    BENEFACTIONS—ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                          168
    GENERAL NOTES—Freedmen, Africa, Indians, Chinese           169


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ALABAMA, MOBILE—Conference—Woman’s Missionary Meeting      172
    LOUISIANA—South-Western Cong’l Assoc.                      174
    KANSAS—Condition of the Blacks Contrasted                  176


  THE INDIANS.

    LETTER FROM JAMES MURIE                                    177


  THE CHINESE.

    JEE GAM ON THE MISSION IN CHINA                            179


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N

    MONTHLY REPORT                                             181


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    FRANKIE’S CHAPEL                                           183


  RECEIPTS                                                     184

  LIST OF OFFICERS                                             189

  CONSTITUTION                                                 190

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                                 191

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK.

         Published by the American Missionary Association,

                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




[Illustration: TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE.]




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXV.      JUNE, 1881.      NO. 6.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


TILLOTSON NORMAL AND COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE.

PRES. WM. E. BROOKS.

Tillotson Normal and Collegiate Institute? (See opposite page.)
Where is it? What is it? When opened? How welcomed? What is its
present outlook, and what are its needs?

Tillotson Institute is situated just outside the limits of the
city of Austin, Texas, upon a fine elevation, commanding on the
east and south a beautiful and far-reaching view of the valley and
of the shimmering waters of the Colorado. On the west is the city
of Austin, with its spires and busy streets, and from the upper
part of the building, looking northward, appear the far-extending
prairies, so familiar in Texas, while, almost encircling the
whole, rise hills and mountains, making this a most beautiful and
picturesque spot, and of all others fitted for an institution of
learning, where the student, while treasuring up knowledge, may
have before him that which shall awaken a sense of the beautiful
and the grand, leading him from nature to nature’s God. In these
points Tillotson has few rivals.

As to its material, it is a large brick building with stone
trimmings, 104 feet in length, 42 feet in depth, and five stories
high. It has a dining hall, a beautiful and airy school-room about
37×48; three large recitation rooms, with other smaller ones, which
are probably the most complete in their appointment of blackboards,
maps and desks of any in the State. No one who has visited the
Institution has been heard to question this. It may be added, also,
that the building, as it now stands, is the gift of friends living
in the East and West for the education of the colored youth of
Texas.

Owing to delays in completing the building, the opening of the
school was deferred from October, 1880, till January 17th, 1881.

Our numbers at the beginning were small, but have been steadily
increasing, till now, in the Institute proper, we have over sixty
students, with a good prospect that this number will be increased
to at least a hundred before the close of the year. We have a large
class in algebra, a still larger class in complete arithmetic,
comprehensive geography and United States history, as also some
ten or twelve in Latin and an equally large number in English
composition. All of these are doing finely in everything but
Latin—only fair in this.

The question as to the spirit of the people will excite interest in
the minds of many. The “Fool’s Errand” and “Bricks Without Straw”
have prepared some for a doleful statement on this point. I am glad
to disappoint them, and in contrast to the above, I rejoice to bear
witness to the kindly and even cordial manner with which we have
been received. Thus far not one rebuff from the Governor down. The
people are not only kindly disposed, but are pleased with the work
carried on; they do not all have equal faith, but nearly or quite
all acknowledge that it is a work that should be done, that the
colored people must be educated. The State is doing something in
this line now—not for us, we have not asked for anything—and is
bound to do more. I venture the statement that _in ten years, no
other State in the Union will, in proportion to the number of her
people and area, do so much for the instruction of the young as
Texas_. Many are coming to see eye to eye and stand foot to foot on
this question of universal education.

The completion of the building and fencing the grounds, which is an
absolute necessity, with the cost of furnishing, call for at least
$2,000 more. This should be provided at once; then land is needed;
thousands of colored youth in Texas greatly desire an education;
they are worthy, but poor. Yet their highest good requires that
they pay for their education. And, since this is not possible in
many cases, some means should be provided by which they can. The
most practical way is to have land which they can work.

The result would be advantageous in two ways: First, it would
enable them to maintain their self-respect; they would feel that
they were not receiving bounty, but were paying their way; this
would make them more manly. Second, it would be a practical school
where they would be taught the best methods of agriculture; this
would be a priceless benefit to them.

But the Institution owns no land save the spot upon which the
building stands. There are, however, some 450 acres of the first
quality joining the Institution grounds for sale. True, since
close to the city it is dear; but when once bought and paid for,
these acres become a bank that will never fail, and always pay
good dividends. It would be a wise and noble act for some one
to buy this land and present it to the Institution; with it the
possibilities of Tillotson Institute would be greatly magnified.

Who will purchase the farm, and giving it his own name, present it
to the youngest child of the A. M. A.?

Finally, we are all more than pleased with the field and its work.
It exceeds even our expectations; the climate is delightful, the
location unsurpassed, the present inspiring, and the future radiant
with hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

It gives us pleasure to announce the safe arrival of Rev. Henry M.
Ladd and Rev. Kelly M. Kemp, with his wife, at Freetown, Sierra
Leone, March 23d, after a favorable and altogether agreeable
passage from Liverpool. They were cordially welcomed on their
arrival by the missionaries at that point on the coast.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Memphis _Appeal_ declares that there can be no excuse for
allowing the work for the colored people at the LeMoyne Institute
of that city to be sustained entirely by the friends of the A. M.
A. North. It suggests also that the citizens of Memphis provide the
improved facilities needful for the best development of the work of
this eminently worthy Institution.

       *       *       *       *       *

We heartily congratulate Berea College on its successful efforts
during the past winter in securing a partial endowment. A few
individuals in six different States recently joined in an effort to
secure for it a fund of $50,000.

The movement was started by a Western Massachusetts man who
subscribed $5,000, to which he afterwards added $1,666. Mrs.
Valeria G. Stone, of Malden, Mass., gave $10,000. One friend
in New York gave $7,500, and another $2,500. Three friends in
Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois, gave $5,000 each. The balance was
made up in smaller sums.

This college—the first founded by the A. M. A.—is doing a noble
work, educating about an equal number of blacks and whites. It
richly deserves all that has been done for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are thankful to our friends and patrons for their hearty support
of our work as shown in the increase of our current receipts by
$20,087 over those of the corresponding seven months of last year.
Encouraging as this is, the increase is not sufficient to enable us
to accomplish what we had planned to do, and close our year free
from debt, September 30th.

At the beginning of our fiscal year we called for an increase of
25 per cent. over the receipts of last year for current work. Our
receipts have increased 19 per cent. to April 30th. At this rate
we shall fall $10,700 short of the amount required to meet all
payments. We make an earnest appeal now, for we wish our friends to
know our situation, and to prevent a threatened debt. We already
feel the pressure, for our workers are calling for the salaries due
them, and they will need their money to bring them North for rest
and change after the severe labors of the year.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARTHINGTON MISSION—A TIMELY PROPOSAL.

In the spring of 1879 the Executive Committee of this Association,
after a careful consideration of Mr. Robert Arthington’s offer
of £3,000 for a new mission in the Upper Nile basin, voted to
undertake the establishment of the proposed mission on the receipt
of a fund of $50,000 for that purpose. During the autumn of the
same year the Committee pledged itself that on receipt of £3,000
from Mr. Arthington and a like amount from the British public, “to
devote thereto the sum of $20,000, and with the blessing of God
and the assistance of the friends of Africa in Great Britain and
America, to undertake permanently to sustain that mission.”

They felt free to make this pledge, as was stated in the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY at the time, “especially as final receipts from the
Avery estate have recently come to hand, which are devoted by the
donor to the evangelization of the African race in Africa.” The
receipts above mentioned amounted to $12,000. Mr. Arthington and
the friends in Great Britain have already paid over the £6,000, or
about $30,000, apportioned to them, and the Association has entered
upon preliminaries looking toward the early establishment of the
mission. We still lack about $8,000 for the completion of the
fund. In view of this deficiency we consider the unsolicited offer
from a distinguished anti-slavery man of $500 for this mission, on
condition that $500 more be given by another party for the same
object, as both opportune and providential, and we not only urge
that the above pledge be secured, but that the entire deficiency
be made up by the early autumn, as by that time our missionaries
purpose to be on their way to the Upper Nile in Central Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SECOND CALL.

REV. JAS. POWELL, CHICAGO.

When emancipation summoned the American slaves to freedom, nothing
appealed with stronger effect to the sympathies of their friends
than their wonderful eagerness for education. They thought that
if they only could obtain a knowledge of letters they would also
come into possession of the white man’s power and the white man’s
privileges. An illusion this, in so far as it held out promise of
speedy fulfilment, but a serious fact, nevertheless, in that it
points to the only open door through which the Freedmen or their
descendants must pass, if they ever do come into possession of that
power and those privileges.

But illusion as it was, it acted as an inspiration. Under its
power, old men and old women, young men and maidens, children
and youth, flocked into everything that was called a school for
Freedmen.

This unprecedented manifestation of a hunger and thirst for
education was promptly met by a large supply of missionary teachers
and educational facilities. The promise, however, was larger than
the fulfilment. Old people could not learn, and young people must
improve by the diligent application of persistent effort extending
through years. Such is the teaching of all history and experience.
This the negroes did not know, and many of their friends had
apparently forgotten it. Reaction came, and with it disappointment
and discouragement. “It’s no use, chile, I’se too old to learn,”
said the old negroes; and young Sambo, with a characteristic
genuinely human, began to develop a passion for sport rather than
study. The fact is, the wonderful passion for study exhibited by
the Freedmen was abnormal. It is not natural for scholars to be
running ahead of their teachers and enthusiastically shouting back
for them to come on. As a rule, the teacher must lead. Ability to
inspire pupils with a love for study is one of the essentials for
success in teaching. The work of education, like everything else
good in this world, must be pushed.

A full recognition of these facts dictated the original policy
of the A. M. A. in its educational work among the Freedmen, and
has shaped its policy ever since. Institutions were planted and
fostered with a view to permanency. Interest in sustaining them
might rise or fall, but the work, in order to succeed, must be
patiently carried forward.

The flood-tide of enthusiasm on the part of the Freedmen, as a
matter of course, began to ebb when the difficulties of obtaining
an education fairly dawned upon them. Some of their friends at
the North, seeing this, began to lose faith in their educability,
and as a consequence began also to withhold their support from
the work. But the American Missionary Association said, “This is
just as we expected,” and instead of yielding, buckled down to
its work all the more earnestly, and argued for its continuance
all the more forcefully. The reaction would again react. The tide
of interest would return with healthier beat, and the second call
would be more effective than the first. It was a firm faith in such
an outcome that prompted the annual reports which, for several
years, held out this bow of promise, while that ugly debt was
hanging like a threatening cloud over all the work; and the faith
has been justified by the results. The reaction of the reaction
has come. The tide is setting back again with normal flow. The
cause is advocated from the leading pulpits; our foremost statesmen
endorse it; the most influential newspapers editorially commend
it; the debt has been wiped out; our schools are crowded to their
utmost capacity, and there is to-day sounding in the ears of the
public a louder call for the immediate enlargement of work for the
education of the Freedmen than has ever yet been heard. It is not
the old, with heads filled with all sorts of fantastic notions, who
now clamor for what they never can acquire. The young and ambitious
are pressing forward, and they are doing it with eyes wide open
to the difficulties that must be encountered, while at the same
time, to give them confidence and hope, they have before them the
living examples of scholarly achievement on the part of some of
the youth of their race. These young men and young women, who are
now turned away from the doors of our schools because “there is
no room,” appeal to us not merely because they want to obtain an
education for themselves, but because they represent the neglected
condition of a race. It is a remarkable fact, and most pathetic in
its meaning, that they plead in many instances to be taken into
school in order that they may qualify themselves to be the means of
the elevation of their people.

A critical time is this. These millions cannot be left much longer
in their ignorance without danger to the public peace. Vice does
not tend to produce virtue. Ignorance does not tend to produce
knowledge. Let the feeling settle down on the colored youth that
all avenues for intellectual culture are closed against them, and
ambition for improvement will soon disappear, and when the brood
of evils to which ignorance is the prolific parent has been once
fairly let loose upon the land, it may be too late to remedy the
mischief. “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,” says
the wisdom of the ages. The demand of the hour is, “Let the wisdom
of the ages be put to practical use.” Recorded in books, tossed
from lip to lip, it profits little; it must be put into action.
No question presses upon the Christian and patriotic thought of
our land with greater urgency, or bears within it farther reaching
consequences, than this same question of the education of our negro
population. The hour of opportunity is now. We ask the friends
of the Freedmen to heed this second call that comes to them, to
prosecute the work of Christian education among the negroes, with
a greater zeal and greater enthusiasm than ever before. If we are
faithful, a rich harvest will be ours to reap.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO FOR HIS PLACE.

PROF. C. C. PAINTER.

An intelligent Christian woman, fairly representative, we believe,
of the best friends of the negro, herself engaged in the work of
negro education as an amateur, in the literal meaning of the word,
during her annual sojourn in the South, said to us recently that
she did not believe in the attempt of Fisk, Howard, Atlanta and
like schools to give this people a higher education. They should
be taught the three R’s, and how to work, and so fitted for their
place in life. She esteemed it an unfortunate mistake and blunder
that they should be disqualified for it by a classical education.

An associate editor of one of our largest dailies, a widely
influential man, commended, not simply by its excellence, but by
way of contrast, the work done at Hampton, not because in the
pursuit of its own aims it left the work of higher education to
other schools, but because it taught its negro pupils to work, and
did not make fools of them by teaching them Latin and Greek, and
this, not because he is opposed to higher education for any one,
but because such an education unfitted the negro for his place.
These friends are not alone in the opinion that the place of the
negro is definitely known, and that is one which demands and allows
a very limited range of intellectual power, and requires the
exercise of his muscles chiefly.

We respectfully submit that the only possible apology for slavery
as it existed in this country was based upon the assumption that
the white man had the right to determine just the place in the
scale of being that the black man should occupy. He stood forth
as the authorized interpreter of nature, and maintained that both
nature and Noah had settled it that the sons of Ham were fitted
alone to be the servants of their brethren.

When we have assented to the proposition that nature has allotted
to a race a certain position, we have assented, logically, to the
further and co-ordinate proposition that it should be fitted for
the place and kept in it; thus the whole code of slave laws stands
approved and justified.

There has been much discussion, and there will probably be a great
deal more, as to the proper place and exact sphere of woman; and
with more show of reason, for she constitutes not a race, but a
class; and nature has indicated in the fact of sex some of the
possibilities of her nature and duties of her sphere; has decided
some things as possible, and some as impossible to her. She cannot
be the father of a family; but what she may be intellectually,
morally, spiritually, as a mother, as a woman, can be known only
when she has opened before her unlimited opportunity for her
untrammeled powers. She may not transcend nature’s limitations, but
she ought to insist that man’s ignorance and prejudice shall not
prove a more insuperable bar to what she may do.

That nature has placed any disqualifications upon the negro, and
has thus indicated or determined what is or what is not possible
for him to accomplish, we cannot know until we have so far removed
the obstacles we have put in his way, and stricken off the chains
with which we have bound him, and thrown open an opportunity which
we have barred against him, that he shall have a chance to show
what the purpose was with reference to him; and we may thus learn,
also, as we are beginning to do, what our injustice and wrong has
been.

Our treatment of the negro, whether as slave or Freedman, has
been and will be shaped by our theories in regard to him, but it
is time we honestly sought to know what the facts are, and draw
our theories from them rather than attempt to limit him by our
prejudices, as if they were indisputable facts of nature.

The master said the negro’s place is that of a chattel slave, and
he wisely enacted that he should neither be educated out of it,
nor be allowed to escape from it. The fortunes of war (should we
not say the misfortunes, if the theory were correct?) broke the
chain and palsied the whip-arm of the master, and now his friends,
many of them, who rejoice that he has escaped from his old place,
would attempt to fit him for a new one, but determine for him what
it shall be, and express grave apprehensions of evil if we say he
should have the best possible opportunity to find for himself what
it is. The war destroyed the old chain by which he was held in his
appointed place, but has not eradicated the disposition of the
Anglo-Saxon to decide for him what his new one must be, and in the
minds of many it is that of a laborer of the lowest grade; and lest
he might escape from it by rising above it, they would see to it
that his education shall be of such character as to fit him for it
alone.

While the wise teacher sees to it that he shall not neglect
thorough training in the most elementary branches in order to
become a smatterer in Greek and Latin, it should be done on the
general principle applicable to all races and every individual,
that any other course would be consummate folly. The theory to
which our practice should conform is this: Give to every child of
God the best opportunity possible for him as such, and let him in
the untrammeled exercise of his powers find out what his Creator
designed him to be and assigned him to do.

The time is coming when it will appear incredible that a man’s
place in the intellectual and social world shall be assigned to
him because of the color of his skin, any more than because of the
color of his eyes, or of his clothes. Educate not the negro, but
the child, not for his place, but that he may find his place, and
do his work among his fellows.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS.

FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.—Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday
A.M., May 22d. Anniversary of Missionary Society, Sunday evening.
Examinations, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. Commencement
Exercises, and the ceremony of laying the corner-stone of
Livingstone Missionary Hall, Thursday.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE, TALLADEGA, ALA.—Baccalaureate Sermon, by the
President, Sunday, June 12th. Examinations, Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday. Commencement Exercises, Thursday.

ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ATLANTA, GA.—Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday,
June 12th, Examinations, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, to be
attended by the Examining Committee appointed by the Governor of
Georgia. Commencement Exercises Thursday. Address by Rev. Atticus
G. Haygood, D.D., President of Emory College.

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, TOUGALOO, MISS.—Baccalaureate Sermon by Rev.
M. E. Strieby, D.D., Sunday, May 29th. Examinations and closing
exercises Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS, LA.—Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday,
May 29th. Examinations and closing exercises, May 30th and 31st and
June 1st.

TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN,
TEXAS.—Examinations and closing exercises, June 8th, 9th and 10th.

BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.—Examinations and closing exercises,
May 26th and 27th.

SWAYNE SCHOOL, MONTGOMERY, ALA.—Examinations and closing exercises,
May 30th and 31st.

EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA.—Examinations and closing exercises,
May 25th, 26th and 27th.

LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN.—Annual Sermon, Sunday evening,
May 29th. Junior Exhibition, Monday, 30th. Graduating exercises,
Wednesday, June 1st.

LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL, MACON, GA.—Examinations and closing exercises,
May 31st and June 1st.

AVERY INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.—Examinations and closing
exercises, June 29th and 30th.

The next meeting of the National Teachers’ Association will be
held in Atlanta, Ga., July 19th. This opportunity for interchange
of views between Northern and Southern teachers ought to result in
great good. Northern teachers need not fear to visit Atlanta at
that season of the year, as its altitude, about eleven hundred feet
above the sea, gives it a mild and healthful climate. Our teachers
often spend their summer there.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Cyrus McCormick, of Chicago, has added $75,000 to his former gifts
to the Presbyterian Theological Seminary of that place.

Robert L. Stewart has enlarged his gift to the San Francisco
Presbyterian Theological Seminary from $20,000 to $50,000.

Mr. Moses Hopkins, brother of the late Mark Hopkins, has just given
to a California academy an endowment of $50,000, the largest sum
yet bestowed in this way by any one person in that State.

Harvard College has received a gift of $115,000 for the erection
of a physical laboratory, provided a fund of $75,000 be raised to
defray the running expenses. As in the case of the Law School, the
name of the benefactor is not to be made public.

Mr. Thomas A. Scott has endowed the chair of Mathematics in the
University of Pennsylvania, now occupied by Prof. Kendall, with
$50,000. He has also given $50,000 to Jefferson College, $30,000 to
the Orthopedic Hospital, and $20,000 to the children’s department
of the Episcopal Hospital.

The list of Mr. Geo. I. Seney’s gifts in the past two years,
including his latest donations to Southern Methodist institutions,
is as follows: Wesleyan University, $260,000; Long Island
Historical Society, $62,000; Brooklyn Industrial Home, $20,000;
for Hospital, $270,000; Church at Bernardsville, $15,000; Emory
College, Oxford, Ga., $50,000; Wesleyan Female College, Macon, Ga.,
$50,000; total, $727,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

MCINTOSH, GA.—Miss Parmelee, from Memphis, after visiting some of
her old pupils at Andersonville, writes: “It is easy to forget
any hardship connected with those pioneer days in visiting these
Christian homes of former pupils, and the homes that have been
blessed through them. One woman was telling me of this and that
neighborhood where schools and church meetings had been held,
and, with a gratitude that was genuine, exclaimed: ‘There’s many
a light been started in this dark place, and it all dates back to
Andersonville.’ I could but feel, and afterwards say: ‘No, it all
dates back through John Wycliffe to Calvary.’ I have been deeply
impressed during these past few days with a sense of the power of
grace. I never had great expectations of any of these friends.
Their honest, kindly, God-fearing lives are all that I expected,
and more than I feared. Remembering their former low estate, I am
filled with a sense of relief and gratitude at finding them so
trusty and good. Friday morn: just there came a call to go and see
a sick woman; returning from the two-mile ride, I found forty women
waiting for me. I talked to them for half an hour and then answered
questions for nearly an hour. Several come in every day to listen
to the school talks.”

CHILDERSBURG, ALA.—“We are going on in the work of the Lord. We
have a good lively Sabbath-school every Sabbath, and all seem to
enjoy the lesson. All are Christians but six, and I hope to gain
those for the Lord. We are going on in peace as pastor and people.
We did not pay all we owed on our church farm last year, but we
will pay all of it this year, and then we will give $25 or $30 every
year to carry other work on. My members want to give as much as
any one else to the work. I hope they will. I have put my horse on
the church farm to work. Bro. Y. gives his entire attention to the
farm, and he rents more land to make out a full two-horse crop. He
has planted all his corn, and the most of his cotton land is bedded
up, and I think he is doing well. One of my best members last year
went to Long View, Ala., and since he has been there he has got up
a meeting-house and wants me to come and preach once a month.”

CYPRESS SLASH, LIBERTY CO., GA.—The Cypress Slash church was
dedicated the 10th of April. An audience of 150 was comfortably
seated in the new church. A brief sketch of the history and
formation of the church was given, going back to the time when the
first public meeting was held in the public road. The church is now
in a growing condition, and the church building is completed except
the ceiling.

LITTLE ROCK, ARK.—On the Sabbath, April 24th, by a Council, Rev.
B. F. Foster was ordained as pastor of the new church of this
city, which has now come on to a membership of 69, and which has
purchased a lot for $400, one half of which has already been paid.
Supt. Roy, Rev. J. W. Roberts, of Paris, Texas, and Rev. L. A.
Roberts, of Memphis, led in the services of the sermon, charge,
right hand, and address. It was a great day for the new enterprise.
Two other sermons were preached by the young men. On the evening of
the 25th, Mr. Foster was married by his two young brethren to Miss
Helena Duff, a graduate of Talladega College.

At the annual meeting of the New Orleans Sunday-school Association,
held April 4th in the Y. M. C. A. Hall, the lesson of the next
Sunday, upon the good Samaritan, was the subject of the three
addresses made. George W. Cable, the author, a member of Dr.
Palmer’s church, spoke from manuscript upon the point: “Who is
my neighbor?” After giving the question the old antislavery
interpretation he found the wounded man as an amalgam of Chinese,
Indian and Negro, and a Roman Catholic; and his suggestion was that
we should not put that man up in the gallery of the church, nor
make him wait for the communion till after we had been served. The
hits made a few persons wince, as was apparent in the assembly; but
they were honestly delivered and will do good. They are a finger
indication of the working of the Southern Christian mind. I noticed
that Prof. McPherron, of the Straight University, had been selected
to act as precentor to lead the singing of the occasion, being a
prominent and greatly respected member of the Philharmonic Society
of the city. Dr. Alexander, who is an officer of the city S. S.
Association, was called upon to offer prayer. Nor is it an evidence
that these men have fallen from grace that by their patient waiting
they are thus winning honorable recognition among the best people
of the city.

                                                       L. E. R.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


The Freedmen.

—The census reports show that in three States, South Carolina,
Mississippi and Louisiana, the colored people exceed the whites
in number. In the first named there are 154,458 blacks to every
100,000 whites; in Mississippi 135,664 blacks to 100,000 whites;
and in Louisiana the proportion is 106,372 to 100,000. In Alabama
the blacks are 91 per cent. of the whites; in Georgia 89 per
cent.; in Florida, 88 per cent.; in Virginia, 72 per cent.; in
North Carolina, 61 per cent.; in the District of Columbia, 50 per
cent. The colored element in the Northern States is the largest
in Kansas, where it is 4½ per cent. The colored population has
increased in twenty-seven States and Territories in the last
decade. In the United States as a whole there has been an increase
of 625 to the 100,000. This state of things means work for all
who have the interest of the country at heart, that the increased
suffrage shall be intelligent and the new lives a help rather than
a burden to the land.—_Congregationalist._

       *       *       *       *       *


Africa.

—The French Government is placing a second telegraphic line between
Algeria and Tunis. It was to have been finished by the last of
March.

—Work on the railroad from Sétif to Algeria has been commenced. The
greatest activity prevails, and the whole line may be finished in
14 months.

—The Belgian Society has charged Mr. Stanley with engaging anew at
Zanzibar, for several years, native workmen, who will be employed
upon the Congo.

—The sultan of Zanzibar has offered to the celebrated traveler
Thomson the mission of exploring the basin of the Rovuma from a
geological point of view.

—Mgr. Taurin Cahagua, apostolic vicar of the Gallas, has gone to
Berber to install there three missionaries. From thence he will go
with the others to Havar.

—M. Irgens Bergh, a Danish archæologist, has arrived at Cairo to
devote himself to his favorite studies. M. Insenger, a Hollander,
also an archæologist, accompanies him. The field of his scientific
exploration will be essentially Nubia and Upper Egypt.

—After a journey in Europe M. de Hesse Wartegg, who has already
turned his studies in Fayoum and in Nubia to the Coptic race, has
returned to Alexandria to continue them. He is accompanied by Dr.
Hociner, a noted botanist. These gentlemen are awaiting the arrival
of two other students attached to the expedition, after which they
will set out in a caravan for Upper Egypt.

—A French expedition composed of mining engineers and chemists, has
started from Marseilles, on the side of the Oxus, to explore the
region north of the Zambeze.

—The missionary Hore, of Ujiji, traveled in 62 days the distance
from Tanganyika to Zanzibar. He is reported to have observed
earthquakes in the months of September and October, 1879 and 1880.
The last made various crevasses a metre long.

—A new military and maritime expedition is preparing, with a view
to the occupation of the Upper Niger. It will probably set out
towards the month of October.

—A new company, the Akankoo Gold Coast Company, Limited, has been
added to the preceding societies for the exploration of the mines
of the Gold Coast. The mine which they have acquired is situated
upon the borders of the River Ancobra.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Indians.

—Fifteen Indian youth from Capt. Pratt’s school, Carlisle, Pa.,
were recently received into the Second Presbyterian church at that
place.

—Rev. Mr. Hayworth being detained by swollen streams while
journeying in the Indian Territory among the Kaws, interpreted the
circumstance as a providential indication that he should labor
for the conversion of the tribe. He at once instituted religious
services. A revival followed, which resulted in the organization of
a Presbyterian church of 15 members.

—At the McAllister Mines (Indian Territory), a house for church
and school purposes is being fitted up for the use of the Indians.
A Sunday-school of 40 scholars will be organized at once. The
American Home Missionary Society are about to build a church
edifice in the immediate vicinity, the money being nearly all
secured.

—Revs. Geo. W. Wood and A. L. Riggs, missionaries among the
Dakotas, have, during the past year, put through the press a
new edition of Dakota hymns. Mrs. Wood has also prepared a new
Dakota dictionary, which is soon to be published. There are now
190 communicants in three churches, under the supervision of the
Presbyterians among these Indians, seven new members being admitted
the past year.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Chinese.

—The Chinese University at Pekin, under the presidency of Dr. W. A.
P. Martin, numbers 100 students.

—A Chinese mandarin, on reading a translation of Matthew’s
Gospel, says: “Its style is perfect. It is quite as good as that
of Confucius himself. And as to these New Testament ideas, there
is nothing so beautiful in all Chinese literature. The humanity
of the Sermon on the Mount I am perfectly fascinated with. Our
sages became gods after they had written our reverend classics;
but divinity must have come before the writing of these matchless
thoughts, these exquisite sentiments!”

—During 1879 there were imported into China from India, under
monopoly of the British Government, 11,073,333 pounds of opium, of
the market value of $50,700,000. Allowing for the amount consumed
in Hong Kong, or re-exported thence to the Chinese in California,
Australia and elsewhere, the total importation was not less than
13,995,000 pounds. No other article of importation or exportation
equaled this in magnitude or value. The value of imported cotton
goods was only $31,400,000; of woolen goods, $7,000,000; metals,
$5,700,000; and all other articles together less than $20,000,000.
Even the tea exports amounted to less, not exceeding $46,000,000.
Silk exports were valued at $40,000,000, and all other articles
combined at $11,200,000.—_Foreign Missionary._

—The following words from Kobe and Okayama, Japan, are very
cheering. They have all the added force that always accompanies
letters bearing liberal gifts:

  "May God abundantly bless your work, whether among the Freedmen
  or among their kin in their native Africa, as well as among the
  Indians and the Chinese. Your Society has a grand field before
  it, and I hope it will be able ere long to lay a mighty hand for
  healing upon Africa and another upon China.

      "Ever truly in fellowship,
                                             R. HENRY DAVIS,
                                             “Miss. Am. Board.”

  "I want to give the grand work of your Society a little push
  this year, so send you a draft. May your work be prospered in
  increasing fold as the years go by. The work is one the world
  over, and the same God is in it all.

                        “Yours heartily,
                                            JAMES N. PETTEE.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D.,

FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

Conference at Mobile.

We received too late for publication in our May issue, a full and
well written report of the Sunday-school Convention and Conference
of Congregational Churches held at Mobile, Ala., the last of March.

The opening sermon was preached by Rev. A. W. Curtis, of Marion,
Friday evening, March 25th. Saturday was devoted mainly to reports
from the Sabbath-schools, which brought out a valuable discussion
on the question of the establishment of mission schools and the
benefits of the visitations necessitated thereby. An address on
“The teachers’ meeting” by Rev. O. W. Fay, was mentioned as a paper
of choice thought. A general discussion followed the reading of the
paper.

The sessions of the conference were opened Saturday evening by a
sermon from Prof. G. W. Andrews, of Talladega, who chose for his
theme, “The Harmony between the Divinity and Humanity of Christ.”

On Sunday, ministerial fellowship and courtesy were shown by
a number of the pastors of the city, both white and colored,
by sending in requests that their pulpits might be supplied by
representatives from the Conference. Monday was occupied chiefly
by papers and discussions, which appear to have been of unusual
interest. Monday evening Dr. Roy gave a full and most instructive
account of the origin and progress of the A. M. A., and was
followed by Pres. DeForest, of Talladega, and several others, who
urged the need of education for the 600,000 who, in Alabama, are
sitting well nigh in midnight darkness. The Conference is reported
to have given great satisfaction to those in attendance, and to
have elicited much sympathy among the white pastors and several of
their families, who opened their doors for the entertainment of
some of the delegates.—ED.

       *       *       *       *       *


Woman’s Missionary Meeting at Mobile.

MISS EMMA E. CAUGHEY.

Mrs. O. D. Crawford, as acting President, opened the meeting,
and in a very happy manner addressed a few words of welcome to
representatives of sister societies with us and also to the ladies
of the city, who by their presence showed their sympathy with
our work; and expressed the hope that the meeting would inspire
all with new zeal, and refresh us with a new baptism of the Holy
Spirit. Mrs. Cheeny then sang a solo, “What shall the harvest be?”
which very appropriately appealed to the gleaners in the field and
opened the way for bringing in the sheaves of the year’s work.

Reports from local societies at Selma, Montgomery, Talladega and
Mobile were given. Selma sent in a very interesting report. Many
good results seem to be growing out of their missionary meetings.
In the woman’s meeting $80.45 has been raised during the past year,
and among the “Mission Workers,” who are under the care of Miss
Lunt, $27.85. The Montgomery society reported a discouraging state
of affairs at the beginning of the last, its third year, having but
twenty-five names on the roll, some of these permanently out of the
city, more who did not again connect themselves with the society,
and of the small remnant left death had claimed four; while the
resignation of both President and Secretary took off two wheels of
the chariot at once; but the “royal remnant” rallied to the front
and succeeded in creating a good degree of interest, by various
ingenious plans, until now the roll of membership numbers forty,
and the outlook for the coming year is hopeful. The expressed aim
of the societies is to promote intelligence, industry and piety
among the women and girls, believing that the missionary spirit
will as naturally follow as that flowers in good soil will bloom in
the warm sunlight and soft showers.

The report from Talladega was encouraging. In connection with this
society are three committees, one for visiting the sick, one on
visiting in general, and the third, called the “Highway and Hedge
Committee,” consisting of young men, who report any destitution
which they may find. The society acts upon these reports and grants
any aid which is within its power. A mothers’ meeting is held,
and also a girls’ mission band, before whom mission work is held
up in such a way that the hope is expressed that some may be led
to consecrate themselves to the work of carrying the Gospel to
Africa. From Mobile the report from the mothers’ meeting showed an
enrolment of thirty-two, nine of whom have been added this year,
while the average attendance has been eight; the great disparity
between the enrolment and the average attendance being mainly
due to the great disadvantages under which the mothers labor,
many of them widows obliged to toil hard for the support of their
families. It is only owing to a faithful and earnest desire that
some are enabled to gather at the weekly meeting for prayer. By
much self-denial this year the mothers have contributed $3.50 for
the Mendi Mission. The Emersonian Mission Band, formed from the
girls of Emerson Institute, was reported in a state of progress;
thirty-nine members enrolled. The girls have been working every
Saturday afternoon since November 13, preparing salable articles
for a fair, the proceeds to be devoted to mission work, both at
home and in foreign fields. The character of the meetings is
social, industrial and religious combined, hoping to elevate the
standard of virtue and piety among our girls and give them correct
ideas of pure womanhood. Rev. Dr. Roy addressed the association,
expressing in very hearty and encouraging words his views of
woman’s position and importance in the world at large, but more
especially in this particular branch of God’s work, “Woman’s Work
for Woman,” in the missionary field. We were next favored by a solo
from Mrs. DeForest, of Talladega, “Not a sparrow falleth,” which
was very beautifully rendered. Miss Strode, a former student from
Emerson Institute, being called upon, arose and gave some of her
personal experiences. Miss Stevenson, the visiting missionary at
Mobile, in a few words, gave expression to the gratitude she felt
toward the kind people of the North, who, during the past winter,
had sent her fifteen barrels of clothing and over $100 in money to
assist, in relieving destitution and want among the people for whom
she is laboring, thus making her the dispenser of their generosity.
Miss Lunt, visiting missionary at Selma, read a paper on “The True
Success of Missionary Work—What is it?” in which she compared the
condition of heathen nations in past ages with their condition
since the missionaries had planted the banner of the cross on
their coast; how woman had been elevated from her menial life of
servitude and oppression to be a help-meet capable of the highest
mental improvement, fitting her for the noblest enjoyments of
life, spiritually, mentally and socially. Mrs. Cheeny read a paper
prepared by Mrs. A. W. Curtis, of Marion, on “How to Reach Mothers
in their Homes.” Since Mrs. Curtis is an invalid and a great
sufferer, being unable to visit among the homes, it seemed at first
an unfortunate topic for her consideration; but when we listened
to her paper and saw how she had been directed of the Lord to reach
the mothers and help them by bringing them to her own home, and
there giving them the perfect illustration of what a true Christian
home may be, and of counseling and instructing them, we were led to
say, “Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity. Man deviseth his ways,
but God directeth his steps.” This paper was an inspiration, must
have been, to every mother present. To this contact with the mother
at her own home, Mrs. Curtis points as the first seed dropped which
led to the revival at Marion, where such a harvest was reaped for
the Lord. Mrs. Deforest, of Talladega, read a paper on “How shall
we Increase the Interest in our Work?”

These brief mentions are only crumbs which fell from our
bountifully loaded table, the fragments, hastily and poorly
gathered together, but we hope that you may gain some faint idea
of the good which came to us by our mutual exchange of thought and
sympathy, and the encouragement we received to persevere in our
good work.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SOUTH-WESTERN CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION.

Annual Meeting at Terrebonne, April 6–8.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D., NEW ORLEANS.

The Association met with a most cordial welcome by Brother Clay and
his church at Terrebonne, the place of our last annual meeting. The
good pastor has been sadly afflicted during the year by the loss
of his devoted wife and daughter, but he has met his troubles with
the faith and fortitude of a true Christian. Terrebonne—worthy of
its name, “good-land”—is situated in one of the most beautiful and
productive sections of Louisiana. The chief staple is sugar, and it
requires only capital and enterprise to cause the entire country to
bloom like a garden of roses.

To those who believe that it is a prime necessity to the Freedman
to own his homestead and to become a part of the “_realty_” of this
Southern country, it is especially gratifying to see the modest
homes and fruitful gardens and cultivated acres of our newly made
citizens, and to hear them say: “This is mine; no man holds a
mortgage on my home.”

Our annual meeting was regarded as in some respects the best we
have ever held. The brethren feel that they are climbing a little
higher each year. Every church but the smallest mission church was
represented, and several delegates came 100 miles to the meeting.

The reports from the churches were hopeful. There have been seasons
of refreshing and ingathering, as at New Orleans and New Iberia. In
all I think there was a desire and purpose manifest to bring the
churches to a higher standing of intelligence and holy living.

There is something of the old conference element in our meetings
which is healthful; to examine critically the ministers and their
churches, and to have their “_characters passed_.” So men are here
judged by actual results, and vital defects in administration are
criticised with kindly severity, and impartially condemned.

The annual sermon was preached by Rev. Charles E. Smith, of
Abberville. It was earnest, evangelical, and marked by a good deal
of ability. Dr. Roy, who is always heartily welcomed, addressed the
association with great acceptance. The “amen corner” made itself
heard while he spoke. One good brother would occasionally break the
silence by saying, “Look at him. He has a good hold now, sure.”

The session of Thursday morning was devoted to the subject of
employing missionaries at large. A decision was reached at a
subsequent session that a missionary committee be appointed,
representing the northern, central, and southern portion of the
association limits—New Orleans, Terrebonne and New Iberia—to
exercise wise missionary over-sight over the parishes adjoining
their own, to report opportunities of planting new churches,
and to make temporary provision for them. Two new churches were
received—St. Rock, in the town of Howma, and Little Zion, near
Thibodauxville. These churches were regularly organized, with the
assistance of Congregational councils.

To meet the growing demands of the field, and in answer to the
urgent request of the churches, it was decided, after faithful
examination regarding the character, doctrinal views and
qualifications of the candidates, to license for the term of one
year Mr. Squire Williams, of Thibodauxville, and Paul Martin, of
New Iberia. In the case of Father Benjamin Fields, of Terrebonne,
who has suffered for his faith in Christ and his fidelity to
His service in the darkest days of bondage, the association,
by a unanimous and cordial vote, granted him a license without
limitation of time. The relation of his personal experience was
very affecting. When he had spoken of the torture inflicted
upon him by the lash, the paddle and the stocks, the Moderator
asked him if while he suffered for his faith he prayed for his
persecutors. He said: “I should not have been a Christian if I had
not prayed for them.” One of the new churches received, the St.
Rock Congregational church, earnestly requested that Mr. Humphrey
Williams, one of their number, be set apart to the work of the
ministry by the solemn rite of ordination, that he might serve them
as pastor, and administer to them the sacraments of the church.
The examination of Mr. Williams was approved, and his ordination
secured in the evening. The Moderator preached the sermon and Dr.
Roy gave a most excellent charge to the candidate. The ordaining
prayer was offered by Rev. J. K. Jones, of Napoleonville, and the
right hand of fellowship given by Rev. W. R. Polk, of New Iberia.

After the ordination service, Rev. Isaac H. Hall, of New Orleans,
the delegate of the association to the National Council at St.
Louis, made his report. His address was grand. As he described his
visit to the Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association
at Norwich and to the National Council, giving the salient features
of each as they impressed his own mind, the audience were aroused
to a high state of enthusiasm; smiles and tears were commingled;
and one loud “Glory to God!” broke forth from hundreds of lips.

I must relate one incident in Mr. Hall’s address. Speaking of
the election of a colored man as one of the vice-presidents of
the National Council, he said: “Just think of it, dear brethren!
There was Dr. Dexter on one side, and Dr. Sturtevant on the other,
and a colored man in the middle, saying, ‘Are you ready for the
question?’” You should have heard the hallelujah which greeted this
announcement. There was a colored Baptist minister in the audience,
with more enthusiasm than learning, who said: “Do you hear that? A
white man on one side, and a white man on the other, and a nigger
in the middle, saying, ‘Is you ready for de question?’ O Lord! is
we riz so high?”

The association adjourned on Friday morning to meet in New Orleans,
with Central Church, the first Wednesday in April, 1882. Dr.
Alexander was appointed to represent the association at the autumn
meeting of the Congregational Church in England. The religious
interest awakened by our annual meeting deepened to the last, and
at the urgent request of Brother Clay, several of the ministers
remained after the adjournment. At the meeting on Saturday night,
35 were brought under conviction of sin, and asked for the prayers
of the church. The good work still goes on.

The churches of the association need to be encouraged, instructed
and helped. I see to-day, as I have seen every year that I have
been in the State, opportunities of investing one hundred dollars
in a piece of ground for a church site, or to make the last payment
upon a chapel, or to save a discouraged frontier preacher, which
would pay a fabulous revenue.

While our bankers and statesmen are devising means for funding the
national debt, who in all this broad land, so rich in resources,
will decide to fund something of his surplus revenue in the way I
have indicated?

       *       *       *       *       *


KANSAS.

The Condition of the Blacks at Topeka, Kan., and Savannah, Ga.,
Contrasted.

REV. R. F. MARKHAM.

I spent five years in Savannah, devoting my whole time to the
colored people. Savannah claims 30,000 inhabitants, of whom about
15,000 are colored. Topeka has 16,000 inhabitants, 5,000 of whom
are colored. Physical wants can be more easily supplied in Savannah
than in Topeka. In nearly all of the South the bare necessities of
life are more easily secured than at the North. The colored people
of Topeka have equally good schools with the whites, where separate
schools for them are established. The State Superintendent has
ruled that any district which does not supply equal advantages for
both white and colored can have no State appropriation. Savannah
has tolerably good public schools for a little over one half of the
colored children, but the poorest teachers are employed especially
outside of the city. Everywhere through Kansas the blacks are as
well supplied as the whites.

In Topeka a colored man can take jobs and superintend business when
he is competent, and all are willing he should, but in Savannah I
employed a very competent negro to superintend a job of mason work.
I asked a white mason a few days afterward if it would do to put
mortar on green lath. He replied, “I will not answer you. You have
got a nigger to do your work.”

It is all right for colored men to do the work South, but they must
have a white overseer. At the barber shops in Topeka they shave
both white and colored, but let a colored man shave a black man in
Savannah, and he will have no white customers. If a white man and a
colored man walk the streets of Savannah together, the colored man
must go behind, like a dog, not walk by the white man’s side. It
was a long time before I learned why even my deacons would always
walk behind me. That was their training. I said: “Walk by my side,
you are my brother.” My daughter walked the streets of Savannah
with a colored lady by her side. A white lady said to her, “You
cannot be respected; you should have the colored girl walk behind
you.”

In Topeka colored men and white walk side by side. Even the
Governor of the State does not hesitate to walk this way with
a colored man. I attended an election yesterday in Topeka.
Politicians were anxious for colored votes. So they are in the
South sometimes, but I observed the different way they have of
treating a colored man in Topeka from the one they practice in
Savannah. The politician says: “Mr. So-and-So,” but in Savannah
it is, “Jim, Jack, boy, come, give me a vote.” I never heard a
Southern white man “Mr.” a colored man. I wrote several articles
for the _Savannah News_ and called the colored girls Misses, and
applied Mr. to colored men. In every case they struck out Miss or
Mr., as applied to colored persons. I was told by a prominent man
in Savannah that any man who would sit at the table with a colored
man ought to be driven out of the city. A colored man cannot sue a
white man in Savannah and collect a debt; but in Kansas he is equal
before the law. A negro entered the Presbyterian church in Savannah
when Ralph Wells, of New York, was lecturing on Sabbath-schools,
and was called upon to pray, at which the black sexton said to
me, “The millennium must be here, a colored man prayed in the
Presbyterian church! I never heard of such a thing before in my
life.”

The Topeka Ministerial Association invites negro ministers to come
in and join indiscriminately in its deliberations. In Topeka every
white man encourages the colored man to save his money and get a
home; in Savannah it is right the reverse. In Topeka a majority
get homes; in Savannah but very few. In Topeka a majority of the
whites encourage temperance, and, as the result, the colored vote
goes nearly solid for temperance. In Savannah it is the reverse;
nearly all drink. The moral instruction in Topeka is deficient, as
the instruction is largely given by ignorant colored people, except
the Sabbath-school sustained by the A. M. A. I believe it a great
mistake of the A. M. A. not to put more laborers into the field in
Kansas, where there are nearly 60,000 freed people. By no means
neglect the South; all the work now being done is needed and twice
as much more, but do not neglect this important field in Kansas,
where all that pertains to true manhood can be far more rapidly
developed than at the South.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM JAMES MURIE.

Dear Friend:—A year ago, when I was at home, I stayed at the
Agent’s office. I used to stay there and board at the school. I
had a room and had nice things in there. One day a white man came
to the office, wanted some children to go to Carlisle and Hampton
schools. He said he wanted to take the Chief’s sons. In the evening
I went to the school-house. A lady called me; she told me if I
wanted to go to school. “Why, yes,” I said. The next morning I
got two boys, and the Agent got two girls and a boy. We went to
the commersary and got some clothes, and got ready for the next
morning. We went to our homes the same day to see our friends. My
father talked to me, but my mother and sisters cried. The next
morning the wagon came up to the school. All the school-children
came out, and the teachers; we bade them good-by. We start off for
Arkansas city, which is about sixty-five miles from here. We had
a box of grub to eat on the way. We went on; we stopped at place
called “Poor Pawnee;” we had dinner there; the girls stopped crying
then. Dinner was over, we watered the mules, hitched them up and
went on. About five o’clock we got to Ponca Agency; we camped on
a small creek; all the grub was gone; we had to buy some more.
The man went to the Agent’s house to get some boys. They had a
council with him; they let him take some boys. We stayed in the
post-office all night; the next morning the boys were ready; there
were five boys, two Nez Perces and three Poncas. They had to get
another wagon for them. We went on. We got to Arkansas city about
six o’clock. We camped on the western side of the city. We went to
the town to buy some things which we had to eat that night. One
white man came to the camp and told us that Capt. Pratt telegraphed
to Winfield that we were to get to Wichita City before morning.
We started off for Winfield. I had to drive, for the man had to
walk to know which way we went. We got there in the night, and got
to the depot house. We laid down for a little while, and the man
told us that the train was ready. Before we got in the cars the
Indian man who brought us talked to us. He wanted us to be good,
and told us to remember what we were going away for. We got in the
train, and got to Wichita before morning. We went to the hotel and
found some other Indians there; we stayed there one day to rest.
The next morning we took another train; we did not stop at any
place till we got to St. Louis. I saw many white people there. We
had supper there. I do not know what other places we stopped till
to Harrisburg, Penn., and then went to Carlisle. I stayed there
little while, and then I went to Hampton. I got here last October,
which I entered in the lowest class. I think I improved my studies,
and am now in another class. I will now try and tell you about my
vacation this summer. School closed in June, Mr. J. C. Robinson,
who had charge of us Indians, divided us into groups, some to go
to Massachusetts, and some to change around. I mean there were
three crowds; each crowd had to go to a farm called Shellbanks,
to work out there a month. My crowd were the first to go out. We
used to work on the farm, hoe corn, beets and cabbages, etc. I like
to work on farm, though it was hot. Every evening we used to have
prayer-meeting with Mr. Davis, who had charge of us out there. We
had two Indian boys to cook for us. Every Sunday we used to go to
the church, though it is about four miles where we stayed, and went
to Sunday-school, too, and went back as soon as possible, so as to
rest. Month was out, we went back to the school. On the way we met
the other party of boys, to stay there a month like we did. When we
got to the school they sent us right in the orchard, to help the
men in gathering fruits. We got through, then Mr. Cocks took us on
the farm to plant some potatoes. Then I went in one of the training
shops to work. I worked in there till my time came on again. I went
out there again, this time we worked on a bridge which the colored
students were building to shorten the Normal School road. Some boys
help load the carts, but I haul dirt with a wheelbarrow.

When I went back to the school I went in the same trade or shop. I
went to learn the trade of printer that I might be able to start
a trade out there. But, friend, don’t think that I did not do
anything in the evenings of my vacation. Every Tuesdays and Fridays
Rev. J. J. Gravatt and Rev. Mayor use to come over to the Indian
Cottage, and there we would meet with them, read the bible and
prayed with them, taught us about God, I learned many things from
them. They are good friends toward the red men, for they want them
to know something about God and have faith in him. They are doing
this yet. I was glad when I saw some teachers here for I was ready
to study. I know it is my duty to study and I always try and have
good lessons. I work two days every week. There are more students
in school this term than there were when I first come here. I hope
I will learn all I can while here that I might be able to teach
my own people. I am getting along well in this school, I like the
colored students for they help us how to talk English. I am very
glad that some white people thinks that Indians can learn, I know
some thinks they can not learn, and thinks that it is no use for
them to come to a good school like this; if the old Indians had
been educated like the old white people, we would have been even in
schools. The Government have just started schools for Indians. When
these Indians at Hampton first came here, they did not know a word
of English, they were dressed in Indians’ cloths; but now they have
cloths like white people and they can read, cipher, and spell, and
we are learning how to work just as well as studying books; we are
getting along very nicely in our studys. Dear friends, I am glad
that you are helping me in school though I am an Indian, which some
people say that they can not learn anything. I have learned here
that we can learn though we were not raised in talking the English
language. I will now close, thanking you for what you have done for
me.

                             Yours respectfully,
                          JAS. R. MURIE, Young Eagle,
                                       Pawnee Indian.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association.

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D.D., Robert B. Forman, Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low,
Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey,
D.D., Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E.
P. Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Howell, Rev. John
Kimball, A. L. Van Blarcon, Esq., George Harris, Esq., and the
Secretary ex officio.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


JEE GAM ON THE MISSION IN CHINA.

  [The sixth anniversary (eighth year) of our Chinese Schools
  takes place next Sabbath, April 24th. The following address has
  been prepared by Jee Gam to be delivered on that occasion. I
  forward it as a sort of first instalment in our plea for the
  commencement of a work greatly needed, and capable, if rightly
  carried on, of yielding most blessed results.—W. C. P.]

In China proper, exclusive of Chinese Tartary, Thibet, etc., there
are eighteen provinces, among them Kwong Dioung, of which the
well-known city of Canton is the capital. This province embraces
77 districts, and almost all of our Christian Chinese come from
four of these districts, which lie in a cluster about eighty miles
south-west of Canton, and 100 miles west of Hong Kong. To these
districts our young men expect to return, and many of them already
have returned. Their faith has often been tried, but they have
stood firm, and have often come forth victorious, because the Lord
Jehovah has been with them.

I wish I could tell you all about the trials and persecutions of
these converts; but time will not permit, so I will briefly relate
the story of the marriage ceremonies of Lee Fon and Quong Jo. These
two brethren went home some three years ago. Not long after they
had arrived the time for their marriages was undesignedly appointed
on the same day. When they learned of this, and found that the
day for their marriages could not be changed, they were very much
grieved, for they did not wish the ceremony to be performed in a
heathen manner. The principal rites of a Chinese wedding are the
worshiping of ancestors, and of the household gods. The bride and
bridegroom are married separately at their own homes. After the
marriage of the bride, she is taken to the home of the bridegroom.
Then both worship the ancestors together.

Within a distance of eighteen miles there were only two
Christians—one of them a native preacher. The help of these men was
very much needed. There being such a long distance between them,
it would have been impossible for the native missionary and the
convert to attend both ceremonies. So Quong Jo decided to stand
alone, and oppose his brothers and relatives, who were urging him
to worship the ancestors. He would not do this. They reviled him,
and threatened to compel him. He still stood firm, for the Lord
was with him even there, alone in that heathen village. Finally
they left him to himself to worship whatever God he pleased. When
the time came to place the offerings before the ancestral tablets,
Quong Jo turned the opposite way, and prayed aloud to the true God
whom he had learned to worship in America. He was closely watched
by a crowd.

At the same time the marriage of Lee Fon was taking place in his
own village, about ten miles from Quong Jo’s home. The native
preacher and his convert were invited a few days previous, and
arrived early in the morning of the day of the marriage. As soon
as they entered the reception hall of the village, the cry on the
streets was: “Two barbarians have come to the wedding.” Fifteen
minutes afterwards the hall was filled. Among those present were
teachers and professors who had come to argue with the so-called
“barbarians.” For several hours the argument was kept up, but
each of these followers of Confucius was, in turn, silenced. His
brothers and relatives, who had been the chief persecutors, now
said, “We will let you worship the foreign Jesus.” After this
contest the missionary and the native convert returned with the
bridegroom and his friends to his home, where the marriage ceremony
was concluded by prayer and praises to God, instead of the worship
of ancestors. Thus these two battles for the right were gained by
four Christians.

From this, dear friends, you can see that a _native_ missionary
who understands the customs and manners of the people, and is
thoroughly acquainted with their language, is a very great help in
two respects: 1st, in preaching the Gospel to the people; and, 2d,
in helping and advising those who are already converted. We want
more of such missionaries; and we want more missionary stations in
these districts. Neither can be had, until we first establish a
General Mission or Seminary in that country.

Hong Kong would be the most suitable and convenient city for the
seat of such a mission. I will tell you why.

1st. The English language is used more in Hong Kong than in any
other port in China, and the Chinese living there, or those
visiting that place, could not be reached in a more efficient
manner than by opening the same kind of free schools for them
as you have opened for us here. They feel that they need to
know the English language. Of course, there are public schools
where both the English and Chinese languages are taught by the
British government, but all have their sessions in the day-time;
consequently, the children are the only ones benefited by these
schools. There remains the laboring class unreached. If a free
evening school is opened, I have no doubt that much good could be
done among them.

2d. Hong Kong is a great highway to all foreign ports, especially
San Francisco. Through Hong Kong nearly all the Chinese in the
United States have come and will return. If a General Mission
could be established at this port much co-operating work could
be accomplished between our mission here and that at Hong Kong.
Christian Chinese, returning home, would receive letters of
introduction to the superintendent of the Hong Kong mission. This
superintendent would have pastoral care over them, and be a very
great help in time of persecution. Converts would be made firmer
in faith, and more earnest in leading others to Christ. If this
mission prosper, as we have not the least doubt it would, these
converts could have preaching stations in these districts, and from
these stations reach every village; but the work would be carried
to a much wider extent by the aid of lady missionaries, who alone
could reach the women.

Many of our number will go back there to study; for if they return
they must be well versed in the Chinese Bible and in the classics
of Confucius. They will meet much opposition from educated men.
These will come and discuss with our brethren, and they should be
able to give a reason for the hope that is in them.

In regard to the cost of this mission, what we propose would not be
very expensive. There should be one missionary, a wise and earnest
Christian, with good business capacity, and one _well-educated_
Chinese helper; and as the school grew and scholars were prepared
to preach, the range of studies and the number of teachers could be
increased.

All our Chinese Christian brethren expect to do all they can
towards the establishment of such a mission, but we must have help
from our American friends, especially the friends of the American
Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

  MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_.
  MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

One of the difficulties the W. H. M. A. meets with is to find
definite work for its auxiliaries. Although in general they have
fields of labor chosen by themselves, it often happens that they
look to the parent society to furnish them; and indeed one of the
chief offices of the Association is to bring together the need
and the supply, those who want help and those who have the heart
and the hands ready to help. So we are fortunate this month in
having something to offer to the party requiring work, and first
we present a call which may well enlist sympathy and effort. Miss
Carter, writing from Nashville, Tenn., asks in behalf of the
President of Fisk University, whether our Association, in any of
its auxiliaries, would be willing to assume the education of a
pupil there. She says:

"Let me tell you of an especially sad case. ———— is a little girl
about thirteen, her fair hair, blue eyes and white skin prove her
parentage. Her mother is a colored woman of the lowest class,
living and delighting in licentiousness. There are numberless such,
but this woman differs from the majority in this respect, it is
perfectly immaterial to her what becomes of this daughter. Usually,
if the mother seems hopelessly bad she will yet try to shield her
child from the same sin which has been her own ruin. * * * ————’s
mother is different. Her grandmother has seen the danger to the
girl of allowing her to remain with her mother, so has sent her
here. But the grandmother can pay only five or six dollars a month
towards her expenses. The tuition and board are twelve dollars, and
beside this is the expense of clothing her. If the girl can remain
here four or five years, such habits and good principles will be
formed in her that at the end of that time she will be morally
saved, perhaps. If during that time she could receive help she
could then begin to teach and so help herself. There is more than
usual religious interest in Fisk at present, and little ———— has
surprised all by showing deep interest.

“Will you not present her case to whomsoever will help her?”

This opportunity offered suggests also that there are many such.
We do not know of any better or more satisfactory work for an
auxiliary than to assume the support of a student at Hampton,
Carlisle, Fisk, or some other kindred institution. There is
certainly no surer way to have a hand in the strengthening and
purifying of our country as well as in saving individuals, for the
large majority of those so helped go directly into the work of
helping up their own race as teachers, and all so brought under
the power of a Christian education must be centres of good in the
nation.

Then here is one more opportunity, and this is for the children.
The greatest, perhaps, or at least one of the greatest disadvantages
under which these brave and earnest young teachers labor who go out
from Hampton, Fisk, and other schools to teach their people, is the
almost total lack of good reading matter. Sunday-school papers are
of really inestimable value to them in their Sunday-schools; but
they can only get them occasionally and very sparingly. Now we know
there are Sunday-schools on Sunday-schools of our Congregational
churches where the children would be glad to save their papers and
send them regularly to such destitute schools, where we can promise
the children they will give double the pleasure they have ever
given before—in fact will double the pleasure to each party, to the
givers and to the receivers. Now, how to do it; for, in order to
be a success, the thing must be done systematically. Well, then,
first, if any Sunday-school wishes to adopt the plan, let them send
to us and we will furnish them the name of a neighbor Sunday-school
in the West or South too poor to have any papers of its own. Then
let them appoint some one to take charge of sending the papers, and
let each scholar be sure and remember to save his paper and give
it to the one who has the business in charge. The only expense,
in money, will be the postage. This often seems a good deal, when
large numbers of papers are mailed each week, and some one may even
be disposed to question whether it is worth the money; but our Home
Secretary, who has taught some years at Hampton, and is in constant
communication with teachers who have gone from there, and is often
sending papers and books in this way, and receiving letters in
return which show how they are appreciated, thinks the good they
do far outweighs the expense; for, she says, in many cases, the
children would have absolutely no reading were it not for them.

So then, third, some one or ones, will be found to pay the postage,
and the thing will be done. The children will have the pleasure
of reading the papers themselves, the pleasure of sending them
regularly to some one else who will appreciate and enjoy them even
more than they; the pleasure of hearing from these friends at a
distance, for the teachers will write them, that is a part of the
plan; and the pleasure of doing something for Jesus and helping His
cause.

Now, who wants to take up with this plan and begin at once?
Let them write to the Secretary of the Woman’s Home Missionary
Association, 20 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., and the
address will be sent them forthwith. Where Sunday-schools are
not ready, individuals can take up the work. A little girl in
Philadelphia is sending two hundred a week, her mother paying the
postage.

Since writing the above we have received an account of the Annual
Meeting of our Alabama State Auxiliary, held in Mobile March 28th.
This must have been a meeting full of interest to all who were
present, and as the reports were brought in from different parts of
the State, the Secretary writes, “We found that the field had many
a Ruth, who had toiled from morning even until even, and brought in
her gleanings.”

Receipts of the Association from March 21 to April 25, 1881:

  From Auxiliaries     $163.85
   ”   Donations         74.60
   ”   Life Members      40.00
   ”   Annual Members    59.00
                        ——————
                       $337.45

Donations through Cong. Pub. Soc., Boston, to colored schools, S.
S. papers, $5.20. From the Williston Young Ladies’ Aux., Portland,
Me., one box of new clothing and sewing material valued at $30.00.
From Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc., of Eliot Ch., Newton, second hand
clothing, $55. From Ladies’ Aux., Franklin St. Ch., E. Somerville,
barrel clothing, $94.50.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRANKIE’S CHAPEL.

PREPARED FROM “THE VINTONS AND THE KARENS,” BY THE EDITOR.

Some years ago there lived in Suffield, Ct., an elderly woman by
the name of Mary Ann Bestor. She was so poor that charitable people
frequently assisted her. On one occasion she received a five franc
piece, with which to purchase a warm dress for winter, but desiring
to give something for missions, she argued that the money was hers,
and that if she chose she could give it to the Lord. She was not
ignorant, however, that some might blame her for giving from her
deep poverty. So she hid the money in the toe of a stocking and
sent it to Mrs. Vinton, who was on a visit to this country from her
mission work among the Karens in India.

When Mrs. Vinton learned of the poverty of the donor, her heart was
touched, and she said: “This is holy money and must not go into
the general fund.” So she laid it aside by itself. Soon afterward,
while narrating the circumstance to a Hartford gentleman, he said
to her: “It is cold weather; ‘Frankie’ should have a wrapper,” and
he handed her a ten dollar bill, which she wrapped around the five
franc piece, “to keep him warm.” The next day another ten dollar
bill was given by Deacon Day, of Hartford, “To buy ‘Frankie’ an
over-coat, as the weather had grown colder,” while Mrs. Kent, of
Suffield, happened to remember: “These are stinging nights to sleep
alone; ‘Frankie’ must have a bed-fellow,” and a five dollar gold
piece was laid by his side. Mrs. Vinton then said: “If ‘Frankie’
had a few more wrappers I would send him to Boston.” So she
wrote out “Frankie’s” history and forwarded it to Dr. Ives, with
an appeal for other articles of clothing. The good doctor read
the letter from his pulpit, and thirty dollars were secured and
forwarded to Mrs. Vinton. She now felt that she could furnish a
suitable outfit to enable “Frankie” to appear among city people,
so she sent him first to Boston for the purchase of Bibles for the
Karens, and next to Philadelphia for a box of medicine, also for
the Karens, and afterward to a Mrs. Thompson to buy some eye-water
for the poor heathen, who suffer so much from the glare of the
sun. All the good people where he visited were glad enough to see
him, but none of them seemed to care to keep him long, so he was
sent back every time with the supplies he wanted, to Mrs. Vinton.
Just on the occasion of his last return, Rev. Mr. Vinton came back
from a tour among the churches where he had been pleading for his
mission in India, and his wife told him “Frankie’s” story. After
hearing it, he said: “I, too, have had a donation which has touched
my heart. At Norwich, a Mrs. Chapell came to me and tearfully said,
handing me a little roll of money: ‘This belonged to my poor boy. I
cannot put it into the general fund, but will you, Mr. Vinton, take
it and apply it to some special purpose?’”

Mrs. Vinton at once said: “That, too, is holy money, it will do to
go with my ‘Frankie.’ This money shall build a house for the Lord
in Burmah, and it shall be called ‘Frankie’s Chapel.’”

The story, with its singular incidents, was repeated by one and
another, and money began to flow in from many sources, some
ingenious play of imagination serving constantly to keep up the
interest. Friends in Philadelphia said: “We often visit Burmah in
imagination, and when we reach there we are tired enough to sit
down; may we not rent pews in ‘Frankie’s Chapel’?” The suggestion
was so reasonable, that a plan of a church was drawn, and sittings
were rented rapidly. Clergymen who contributed had their names
written on the platform. From Philadelphia Mrs. Vinton went to
Cincinnati, where the people said to her: “Why, you have rented
all your pews, and we Western people are crowded out.” So they
drew a larger plan and began renting more pews. Meanwhile, a
communion service, a beautifully bound pulpit Bible, a fine-toned
bell, pulpit lamps and a communion table were presented by one and
another in the different localities visited.

In 1850 the Vintons sailed for Calcutta, with the purpose to build
the chapel in Maulmain. On their arrival they found that their
English friends and the Karens were as deeply interested in the
welfare of “Frankie’s Chapel” as their American friends had been.
An English officer sent 200 rupees, with the message, “In America
they gave money to keep ‘Frankie’ warm. In view of the high state
of the thermometer I send this to keep him cool.”

Another sends 100 rupees “for legs for ‘Frankie’ to stand on,”
alluding to the custom of building houses on posts in Burmah. Still
another officer sent 1,000 rupees.

It transpired, however, that an overruling Providence had greater
plans for “Frankie’s Chapel” than those which had yet been
conceived of by the Vintons. During the four or five years after
they left America with “Frankie” there were serious troubles in
Burmah, and the affairs of the country were such that they were
unable to settle down permanently until 1855. At that time plans
were furnished for a building much more elaborate and substantial
than had been contemplated at first. A beautiful location had been
selected at Kemmendine, and the land necessary made a free gift by
the Governor-General of India.

On the 20th of May, 1855, the corner-stone was laid by Mr. Vinton,
in the presence of a large assembly. The building was to be 60
by 70 feet—two stories high; the lower part being designed for a
school-room and the upper part for church services. It was built of
brick, and admirably adapted for the use for which it was designed.
It serves the purposes not only of the mission, but also as an
assembling place for special meetings and general conventions. The
Rangoon Karen Mission was at that time the largest in Burmah, and
the building was precisely what was needed to meet the various
wants of the many interests which centred at that point. Now, after
more than twenty-five years, “Frankie’s Chapel” still stands as a
monument to the consecration and faith of the poor old Suffield
woman, who chose rather to provide for the cause of her Master than
to enjoy the comfort and warmth that had been intended for herself.
But it happened to her as everyone might have supposed it would
have happened; she did not have to go unclad, either, for good
people, learning of her charity and self-denial, provided her with
the “warm dress” and such other consolations as she richly merited.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS

FOR APRIL, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $221.81.

    Augusta. John Dorr                                       $15.00
    Bath. Central Ch. and Soc.                                25.00
    Bethel. Mrs. R. A. Chapman                                10.00
    Blanchard. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Brewer. First Ch.                                          9.37
    Castine. Mrs. Lucy S. Adams, to const. L. G.
      PHILBROOK, L. M.                                        30.00
    Cumberland. S. M. R.                                       1.00
    Gardiner. A. D.                                            0.50
    Gorham. Cong Ch. and Soc.                                 29.09
    Gorham. Miss E. B. Emery, Bbl. of C., _for
      Talladega C._
    Gray. S. S. Class, _for Selma, Ala._                       0.66
    Hallowell. S. L. Smith, Bbl. of C., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._
    Lewiston. Pine St. Cong. Ch.                              27.44
    Lyman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  7.50
    Machias. “Machias”                                        10.00
    New Gloucester. “Ladies,” Bbl. of C. and $7
      _for freight_, Miss S. S., $1, _for Selma,
      Ala._                                                    8.00
    Portland. J. M. G., $1, _for freight_; D. P.,
      50c                                                      1.50
    Skowhegan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.25
    Skowhegan. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Chapel, Tougaloo, Miss._                                 5.00
    South Berwick. Mrs. Kate B. Lewis, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Union. Box of C., Mrs. A. J., 50c., _for
      freight, for Selma, Ala._                                0.50
    Waldoborough. Geo. Allen                                   2.00
    Warren. “Ladies,” Bbl. of C., Rev. J. E. Pond,
      $5, _for freight, for Selma, Ala._                       5.00
    Wells. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          12.00
    Wiscasset. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    ———— Mrs. S. D. L.                                         1.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $496.33.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        20.20
    Antrim. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), to const.
      JOHN ALFRED MCNEIL, L. M.                               24.00
    Bristol. H. T. A.                                          0.63
    Chichester. Jacob S. Sanborn, $2; E. R. S. S., $1          3.00
    Concord. W. H. Pitman, $5; Miss F. A. G., 50c.             5.50
    East Concord. Miss C. D.                                   0.50
    East Derry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      38.03
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.                                 112.96
    Exeter. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                      2.00
    Great Falls. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Keene. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                       29.74
    Litchfield. Presb. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             11.00
    Littleton. Mrs. B. W. Kilborn, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             5.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   1.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                        24.30
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.64
    New Boston. Presb. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                     1.50
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch., $4; Mrs. A. C., 50c.               4.50
    Peterborough. Union Evan. Ch.                             30.00
    Plaistow and North Haverhill, Mass. Cong. Ch.
      and Soc., $76; Mrs. E. W. Merrill, $25                 101.00
    Rindge. Mrs. R. K., $1; Mrs. E. H., $1; Mrs.
      M. W., $1; Mrs. Roxy K., $1                              4.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             23.63
    Rye. Cong. Ch.                                             4.20
    Shelburne. Mrs. Mary C. Ingalls                            3.00


  VERMONT, $386.06.

    Bennington. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     15.00
    Benson. ————                                               3.00
    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.25
    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               26.45
    Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $7.30;
      “A Friend,” $1.50                                        8.80
    Cambridge. Madison Safford                                43.52
    Cambridge. Widow Nancy Howe, bal., to const.
      MISS M. HATTIE PUTNAM, L. M.                            10.00
    Charlotte. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                                9.00
    Clarendon. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Danville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.00
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox                                5.00
    Fair Haven. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              30.00
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      21.00
    Fairlee. “A Friend”                                        1.00
    Fayetteville. Mrs. A. E. K. H.                             1.00
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.00
    Lyndon. First Cong. Ch. to const. DEA. JONAS
      N. BARTLETT, L. M.                                      31.60
    Manchester. Bbl. of C., by Mrs. A. C. Reed,
      _for Mobile, Ala._
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.60
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       9.56
    North Craftsbury. Mrs. C. C. D.                            0.51
    Pittsford. Mrs. E. H. Denison                              5.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.00
    Sheldon. D. D. W.                                          1.00
    Thetford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           65.25
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   12.01
    Westminster West. Mrs. Z. D.                               0.51
    West Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          24.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,792.20.

    Amherst. First Ch., $50; “A Friend,” $30, to
      const. Mrs. ELIZA M. THAYER, L. M.                      80.00
    Andover. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $74.64; H.
      C., $1                                                  75.64
    Andover. Sab. Sch. of Chapel Cong. Ch., by
      Agnes Park, _for Student Aid, Straight U._              30.00
    Andover. Young Gleaners’ Soc. of Old So. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           27.00
    Andover. “A Friend,” _for Chinese M._                     10.00
    Boston. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $859.39;
      Shawmut Cong. Ch. and Soc., $248.57; Mrs. B.
      F. Dewing, $5; Mrs. G. R. C., 50c.                   1,113.46
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Ass’n, by Miss
      Abby W. Pearson, Treas., _for Lady
      Missionaries_                                          162.41
    Boston Highlands. Eliot Cong. Ch.                         14.46
    Bradford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian M._                37.08
    Brimfield. Mrs. P. C. Browning, $10; Mrs. J.
      S. Upham, $3                                            13.00
    Brockton. Mrs. Lucy C. Sanford, _for freight_              2.00
    Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     99.10
    Cambridge. First Cong. Ch. and Shepherd Soc.             180.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.             15.59
    Charlestown. Winthrop Cong. Ch.                           63.23
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         33.38
    Chester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         4.00
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.57
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   2.00
    Easthampton. Miss E. A. Clark                              1.50
    East Taunton. Mrs. B. L. S.                                0.50
    Feeding Hills. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                   123.00
    Florence. A. L. Williston, $500, _for
      rebuilding_, and $50 _for furnishing room,
      Tougaloo U._                                           550.00
    Foxborough. Mrs. Lemuel Dickerman, _for
      freight_                                                 3.00
    Framingham. Young Ladies’ Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
    Framingham. “A Friend”                                     2.00
    Franklin. Bbl. of C., _for Marion, Ala._
    Globe Village. “B. U. B.,” _for Student Aid,
      McLeansville, N.C._                                     10.00
    Granby. Cong. Ch.                                         15.54
    Hadley. E. Porter                                         10.00
    Hanover. Second. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.00
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of District No.
      4,” $25; H. C. K., 50c.                                 25.50
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        25.18
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Mobile,
      Ala._
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Leicester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       62.41
    Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     23.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. of C., _for
      Mobile, Ala._
    Long Meadow. Dea. N. B.                                    0.50
    Lowell. High St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       90.00
    Lynn. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.00
    Malden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                43.93
    Newburyport. Miss S. E. Teel                               5.00
    Newton. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc., $190; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $50.79                             240.79
    Newton Centre. “Friends,” by Mrs. M. B.
      Furber, _for furnishing a room, Atlanta U._             25.00
    Newton Centre. Mrs. M. B. Furber, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Newtonville. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           25.00
    Newtonville. Mrs. J. W. Hayes                             25.00
    Northampton. Edwards Ch. ($5 of which _for
      Cal. Chinese M._), $52.97; First Ch., $88.23           141.20
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               100.00
    North Somerville. “A Friend”                               1.00
    Norton. Mrs. E. B. Wheaton, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                24.00
    Oxford. Ellen A. Paine, Bbl. of C., _for
      Mobile, Ala._, and $4 _for freight_                      4.00
    Peabody. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        120.33
    Peabody. ANN S. OSBORN, to const. herself L. M.           30.00
    Pepperell. D. B. Sibley                                    5.00
    Petersham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              2.35
    Pittsfield. James H. Dunham, $25; First Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $15.05                                    40.05
    Royalston. M. J. Estabrook, _for Charleston,
      S.C._                                                   10.00
    Salem. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.25
    Shelburne Falls. E. Maynard                                5.00
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                    133.80
    Somerville. Broadway Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   14.50
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                 0.65
    South Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.00
    South Royalston. S. M. N.                                  0.60
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $45.44;
      South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $35.04                        80.48
    Sudbury. U. E. Soc.                                       23.50
    Upton. Mrs. M. F. C.                                       1.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             47.51
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               24.32
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Westborough. “Ladies,” _for Talladega C._                  2.00
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           9.55
    Westhampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.50
    Westfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., $41.59;
      First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $29.51                        71.10
    West Stockbridge. Village Ch. and Soc.                    31.98
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             37.00
    Winchendon. “F. T. J.”                                     5.00
    Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     152.61
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $153.28; Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., $139.65;
      Salem St. Cong. Ch., $5                                297.93
    Worcester. Old S. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              27.22
    Worcester. Miss Mary F. Wheeler and Sister,
      _for rebuilding Tougaloo, Miss._                         5.00
    ———— “A Friend”                                          100.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,192.20
    LEGACIES.

    Abington. Estate of Samuel Reed                          100.00
    Reading. Estate of Amos Temple, by Martha R.
      Temple, Ex.                                            500.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,792.20


  RHODE ISLAND, $100.00.

    Providence. W. J. King, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       100.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,297.20.

    Bethel. Cong. Ch., $30, to const. SILAS H.
      HICKOK, L. M.; Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., $6.12               36.12
    Bozrah. Miss Hannah Maples                                 5.00
    Birmingham. Stephen Morse, Box of Books
    Bridgeport. V. C.                                          0.50
    Colchester. Mrs. C. B. McCall, _for Tougaloo
      U._                                                     10.00
    Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                    16.27
    Danielsonville. Class in Westfield Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $6.50; Mrs. J. D. Bigelow, $3.50, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                            10.00
    Darien. Cong. Ch.                                         22.75
    Durham. Rev. A. S. Chesebrough, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             5.00
    East Hartford. Abraham Williams, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                           100.00
    Enfield. Daniel H. Abbe                                    5.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     42.27
    Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                56.51
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch., $54.03; “A.,” $20            74.03
    Greenwich. I. P.                                           0.50
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 22.00
    Hartford. South Cong. Ch.                                200.00
    Hartford. Benev. Soc. of Asylum Hill Cong.
      Ch., Box and 2 Bbls. of Bedding and C., _for
      Atlanta, Ga._
    Higganum. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. DWIGHT M.
      PRATT, L. M.                                            30.00
    Higganum. Mrs. Susan Gladwin, $2; Mrs. G. S.
      G., $1                                                   3.00
    Lyme. E. M. P.                                             1.00
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       6.16
    Meriden. Centre Cong. Ch.                                 35.00
    Middle Haddam. Second Cong. Ch.                           15.36
    Moose Meadow. Francis Wilson                               5.00
    New Hartford. Bbl. of Papers and Books, by
      Rev. F. H. Adams, _for Macon, Ga._
    New Haven. First Cong. Ch., $158.02; College
      St. Cong. Ch., $19.43; Howard Av. Cong. Ch.,
      11.09; “A Friend,” $5                                  193.54
    New Haven. “A Friend,” _for Temperance Tracts_             5.00
    New Haven. B. F. Koons, _for furnishing room,
      Tougaloo U._                                             4.00
    New Preston. “S. J. A.,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    North Coventry. Cong. Ch.                                 34.50
    Norwich. Home Miss. Soc. of Broadway Ch., _for
      New Orleans, La._                                        5.00
    Norwich. Home Miss. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for freight, for Atlanta, Ga._                          5.00
    Old Lyme. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Orange. Bbl. of C., by Rev. E. E. Rogers, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Prospect. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Box S. S.
      Books.
    Putnam. H. A. F.                                           0.50
    Rockville. Daniel Martin                                   2.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                        8.25
    Seymour. Cong. Ch.                                        36.00
    Sherman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               19.44
    South Coventry. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           12.00
    Southington. Mrs. James P. Dickerman                     200.00
    South Norwalk. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            62.00
    Stamford. First Cong. Ch., $82.58; “A Friend,”
      $2                                                      84.58
    Stanwich. William Brush                                  100.00
    Thomaston. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   45.25
    Torrington. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const.
      LEVI HODGES, L. M.                                      15.00
    Vernon Depot. Sab. Sch., by C. D. Tucker, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 9.00
    Wallingford. “Mite Gatherers,” Miss Lizzie
      Elton, Treas., _for ed. of an Indian boy,
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._                                20.00
    Watertown. Benj. De Forest, _for Talladega C._           500.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         80.25
    West Suffield. Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
    Whitneyville. Cong. Ch.                                   25.00
    Willington. Mrs. H. C. Harbison, $5; Mon. Con.
      Coll. Cong. Ch., $1.42                                   6.42
    Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                                  83.00
    ———— “A Friend”                                           10.00


  NEW YORK, $5,627.96.

    Albany. Freeman Snowden, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        25.00
    Binghamton. First Cong. Ch., (of which $2 _for
      Chinese M._ and $1 _for Fisk U._) $187.53;
      Sheldon Warner, $50                                    237.53
    Brooklyn. Church of the Pilgrims (of which
      $3,000 _for rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._,
      and $60 to const. C. A. HULL and S. F.
      PHELPS, L. M.’s)                                     3,191.37
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., Geo. A.
      Bell, Supt., _for Missionaries at Ladies’
      Island, S.C., and Fernandina, Fla._                    150.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                    17.25
    Bristol Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         8.00
    Camden. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                     28.52
    Cheektawaga. E. Sterling Ely, _for Kansas
      Refugees_                                               50.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch.                              42.01
    Crown Point. Second Cong. Ch.                              2.00
    Darrowville. Coll., by Rev. S. H. Foster                   3.33
    East Bloomfield. Russel B. Goodwin, (“Easter
      Card”)                                                  10.00
    East Palmyra. Miss Laura E. Dada, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             5.00
    Eden. M. W. C.                                             1.00
    Gilbertsville. Rev. A. Wood                               10.00
    Harford. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Harpersfield. Cong. Ch.                                   12.63
    Havana. J. F. P.                                           1.00
    Kiantone. Cong. Ch.                                        9.04
    Middletown. Dea. G. L. Parsons, $2; Selah R.
      Corwin, $2; J. B. S., 50c.; Rev. F. R. M.,
      50c.                                                     5.00
    Mill Brook. Coll., by Rev. S. H. Foster                    3.67
    Millville. ————                                            4.50
    Morristown. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle Ch.                      1,514.24
    New York. “A Friend,” _for Tougaloo U._                    5.00
    Orange. “A Friend of Abraham Lincoln”                      2.00
    Oswego. Sab. Sch., by F. A. Stevens, _for
      Straight U._                                            12.05
    Randolph. First Cong. Ch.                                  9.00
    Richford. Cong. Ch.                                        9.95
    Rodman. Miss Eliza Gates                                  25.00
    Sherburne. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                         38.67
    Spencerport. Sarah Vannest, $10; Mary E. Dyer,
      $5, _for Student Aid, Straight U._                      15.00
    Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke, (of which
      $7.10 _for Tougaloo U._) $14.20; Miss F. A.
      C., $1, _for Tougaloo U._                               15.20
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. S.                                        1.00
    Utica. Miss Cornelia Hurlburt                             10.00
    Westfield. Mrs. A. B. R.                                   1.00
    Yaphank. “A Friend,”                                      10.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,497.96
    LEGACY.

    Bergen. Estate of I. M. Hitchcock, by A. E.
      Hitchcock, Ex.                                         130.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,627.96


  NEW JERSEY, $482.22.

    Camden. J. E. S.                                           1.00
    Chester. “A Friend”                                       20.00
    Englewood. “A Friend”                                      3.00
    Montclair. First Cong. Ch. (of which $50 from
      Ladies’ Aid Soc., _for furnishing two rooms,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._)                            262.05
    Orange Valley. First Cong. Ch.                           176.17
    Paterson. Benj. Crane                                     20.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $173.51.

    Jeansville. Welsh Cong. Ch.                               10.00
    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch. (of which Sab.
      Sch. Coll., $25; Mon. Con. Coll., $5.83.)
      $145.51, to const. THOMAS F. HAMMOND,
      WILLIAM H. LAMBERT, WILLIAM H. WANAMAKER and
      DANIEL A. WATERS, L. M’s; Mrs. Sarah P.
      Fairbanks, $2; W. P. F., $1                            148.51
    Scranton. F. E. Nettleton _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         5.00
    West Alexander. ————                                      10.00


  OHIO, $567.13.

    Ashtabula. C. H. N.                                        0.50
    Austinburgh. L. M. Austin                                 10.00
    Burton. Cong. Ch. Mrs. H. H. Ford, (ad’l)                  5.00
    Chagrin Falls. “Earnest Workers” _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        5.00
    Chatham Center. Cong. Ch.                                 24.45
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch.                                242.38
    Cuyahoga Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
      $11.82; C. H., $1                                       11.82
    Delaware. Wm. Bevan                                        5.00
    Geneva. “An Individual”                                    5.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                       16.00
    Lindenville. John Thompson, $10; Mrs. Lydia C.
      Bearss, $2                                              12.00
    Madison. Mrs. M. P. St. John, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        5.00
    Madison. Mrs. J. Dayton, _for Selma, Ala._                 4.00
    Marysville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              10.00
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                     75.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 16.55
    Oberlin. Mrs. J. Williams, _for Selma, Ala._               3.50
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch., _for freight_                        3.75
    Ruggles. Cong. Ch.                                        20.15
    Seville. L. W. Strong, _for addition to
      Ladies’ Hall, Tougaloo U._                              25.00
    South Newbury. Missionary Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.03
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch.                               6.17
    Springfield. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.03
    Steubenville. First Cong. Ch.                             11.00
    Strongsville. Cong. Ch., _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        15.00
    Toledo. Mrs. Parmelee and Mrs. William Smith,
      _for Ind. Dept., Le Moyne Sch._                          8.00
    Unionville. Mrs. Elvira Stratton, $5;————
      50c., by Rev. J. M. Fraser                               5.50
    Weymouth. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             1.33
    Willoughby. Miss Mary P. Hastings                         10.00


  INDIANA, $61.00.

    Evansville. Samuel Orr, _for furnishing a
      room, Straight U._                                      50.00
    New Corydon. Geo. Stolz, ($5 _of which for
      Tougaloo U._)                                           10.00
    Sparta. Mrs. L. R.                                         1.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,168.52.

    Alton. Church of the Redeemer                             54.45
    Altona. Cong. Ch.                                          2.25
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., (Quar. Coll.)
      $214.82; Plymouth Cong. Ch., $132.45;
      Leavitt St. Cong. Ch., $21.20                          368.47
    Chicago. Ladies of New England Cong. Ch.,
      $28.11; Ladies of Lincoln Park Cong. Ch.,
      $25, _for Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                53.11
    Dover. Ladies Miss. Soc.                                   5.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch. (in part)                                11.49
    Elmwood. Mrs. R. H. Reed                                  20.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
      ALEXANDER PICKENS and SAMUEL NEWELL, L. M’s             72.47
    Galesburg. Mrs. Julia T. Wells                            25.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        60.00
    Kewanee. Mrs. R. J. Shaw                                  10.00
    Mendon. Mrs. J. Fowler, _for parsonage,
      Florence, Ala._                                         20.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. A. Aldrich                             5.00
    Moline. Thomas Jewett, _for Tougaloo U._                  50.00
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Morrison. Miss E. S. B.                                    1.00
    Oak Park. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           58.54
    Oak Park. “A Friend,”                                      5.00
    Olney. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._              5.00
    Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                        23.00
    Ottawa. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            19.86
    Pecatonica. Cong. Ch., $22, and Sab Sch., $8              30.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch.                               19.50
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               12.00
    Quincy. C. H. Bull, _for rebuilding, Tougaloo,
      Miss._                                                  25.00
    Ravenswood. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               10.00
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Rockford. Ladies’ Sew. Circle, 3 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Mobile, Ala._
    Shabbona. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._, and to const. FRANK W.
      GILBERT, L. M.                                          30.00
    Sycamore. J. H. Rogers, $100; Cong. Ch.
      $26.28, _for Tougaloo U._                              126.28
    Tonica. F. A. Wood                                        10.00
    Union. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  3.00
    Victoria. Capt. G. W. Reynolds                             1.50
    Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                        9.60


  MICHIGAN, $769.31.

    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Battle Creek. Cong, and Presb. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               5.00
    Big Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                      2.13
    Bliss. Mrs. A. A. C.                                       0.60
    Bridgman. Cong. Ch.                                        2.84
    Calumet. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           66.25
    Charlotte. First Cong. Ch.                                27.53
    Church’s Corners. Cong. Ch., $49.12, and Sab.
      Sch., $10.08; Cornelius Clement, $2.50                  61.70
    Church’s Corners. A. W. Douglass, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             5.00
    Coloma. Cong. Ch.                                          2.16
    Detroit. W. C. S.                                          0.50
    Frankfort. First Cong. Ch.                                 4.44
    Galesburgh. Mrs. Sarah M. Sleeper                          5.00
    Grand Rapids. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke_                               30.00
    Greenville. Mrs. E. P. C.                                  0.54
    Laingsburgh. Cong. Ch.                                     8.12
    Laingsburgh. Rev. F. Hurd, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         2.00
    Le Roy. Rev. A. G. Hibbard, $2; Mrs. E. L.
      Hibbard, $2; Master M. H., $1                            5.00
    Union City. “A Friend,” _for rebuilding
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                       500.00
    Vermontville. First Cong. Ch., $25; Philetus
      Sprague and Wife, $5                                    30.00
    Victor. Dea. H. P.                                         0.50


  WISCONSIN, $165.55.

    Appleton. Ladies’ Soc., 2 Bbls. C. and $4.55
      _for freight, for Macon, Ga._                            4.55
    Appleton. “Lena,” $2, _for Mendi M. and_ $2
      _for Cal. Chinese M._                                    4.00
    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.50
    Beloit. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            11.00
    Beloit. Prof. Hendrickson and others, Box of
      C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Brandon. Rev. H. W. C., _for furnishing Room,
      Tougaloo U._                                             1.00
    Evansville. Mrs. M. V. P.                                  1.00
    Genoa Junction. Cong. Ch.                                  2.67
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., to const. S. L.
      SHELDON and O. M. CONOVER, L. M’s                       60.00
    Madison. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            10.00
    Oshkosh. L. L. Osborne. $7.20; Sab. Sch. of
      Cong. Ch., Box papers and books, _for
      Mobile, Ala._                                            7.26
    Platteville. Cong. Ch.                                    17.00
    Racine. Cong. Ch.                                         22.00
    Ripon. Prof. C. T. Tracey, $5; Sab. Sch.
      class, Cong. Ch., $5                                    10.00
    Watertown Cong. Ch.                                        7.57
    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                                  5.00


  IOWA, $273.75.

    Atlantic. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           6.31
    Burlington. M. L.                                          1.00
    Cherokee. Young People’s Missionary Board _for
      Lady Missionary, New Orleans, La._                      25.00
    Cincinnati. J. G. McD., _for rebuilding
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                         1.00
    Cromwell. Mrs. E. B.                                       1.00
    Danville. Mrs. Harriet Huntington, _for Kansas
      Refugee, Miss._                                         10.00
    Davenport. George W. Ells, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    Denmark. Oliver Brooks                                    10.00
    Dewitt. “A Friend,” $8; Sab. Sch. Coll., $7,
      _for rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                       15.00
    Dubuque. Two Bbls. C. _for New Orleans, La._
    Fayette. Children in Cong. Sab. Sch., $1.76.
      W. W. Waterbury, $1.24                                   3.00
    Garwin. Talman Dewey                                       2.50
    Genoa Bluffs. HENRY A. MORSE _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss., and to const. himself_ L. M.           50.00
    Grinnell. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $44; Cedar
      Falls, Ladies of Cong. Ch., $20; Muscatine,
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $15; Waverly, Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., $6.50, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           85.50
    Magnolia. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.00
    Muscatine. W. F. J.                                        1.00
    McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                       24.44
    Osage. “W. M. S.”                                          3.00
    Tabor. James L. Smith, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        10.00
    Winterset. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore, _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             5.00


  MISSOURI, $127.86.

    Brookville. Cong. Ch.                                     26.00
    Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                              91.86
    Meadville. Edward D. Weage                                 5.00
    Saint Louis. Mrs. L. C. Edgell, _for the poor,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            5.00


  KANSAS, $6.12.

    Waubaunsee. First Ch. of Christ                            6.12


  MINNESOTA, $79.36.

    Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                                        2.59
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 24.77
    Northfield. Rev. A. Willey, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Winona. Cong. Ch., to const. J. B. CUMMINGS,
      L. M.                                                   45.00


  NEBRASKA, $2.00.

    Steele City. Cong. Ch., M. C. Coll.                        2.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $3.15.

    New Dungeness. J. W. Blakeslee                             3.15


  OREGON, $10.00.

    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $100.00.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                              100.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $104.75.

    Charlotte. Miss Rosa Morehead, _for Atlanta U._            2.00
    Raleigh. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            1.50
    Wilmington. Williston Normal Sch., Tuition                96.25
    Wilmington. First Cong. Ch.                                5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $328.00.

    Almeda. “Friends,” by R. G. Holmes                        30.00
    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         298.00


  TENNESSEE, $330.44.

    Chattanooga. Cong. Ch.                                    18.00
    Chattanooga. Sab. Sch. Con. Coll.                          5.64
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          210.75
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                               93.70
    Whiteside. Friends, by G. W. Jackson, _for
      furnishing room, Tougaloo U._                            2.35


  GEORGIA, $798.85.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $253.35; Rent,
      $3                                                     256.35
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition, $121.25; Rent, $6          127.25
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Atlanta. Col. A. E. Buck, _for Atlanta U._               150.00
    Cuthbert. F. H. Henderson, _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    Macon. Lewis High School, Tuition, $86.60;
      Rent, $12                                               98.60
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $94.75; Rent,
      $10                                                    104.75
    Stone Mountain. E. M. M.                                   0.51
    Woodville. Pilgrim Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Mendi M._                                                1.39


  ALABAMA, $578.95.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             35.05
    Marion. Cong. Ch., $4.80; A. W. C., 50c.                   5.30
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           234.20
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                          1.55
    Montgomery. City Fund                                    210.00
    Selma. “Mission Helpers,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            9.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          83.85


  MISSISSIPPI, $104.40.

    Hermanville. “Friends,” by R. T. Sims, _for
      furnishing room, Tougaloo U._                            1.90
    Selma. “Mission Workers,” $6.10; “Cheerful
      Workers,” $2.15, _for furnishing room,
      Tougaloo U._                                             8.25
    Sollis. “Friends,” by Ella Wigley, _for
      furnishing room, Tougaloo U._                            2.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                            87.25
    Tougaloo. G. W. McKee & Co., _for furnishing
      room, Tougaloo U._                                       5.00


  LOUISIANA, $219.25.

    New Orleans. Rev. Issac Hall                              50.00
    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        169.25


  TEXAS, $4.30.

    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch., $2.20; Dea. G. G.,
      50c.                                                     2.70
    Helena. Busy Bee Mission Circle                            1.60


  JAPAN, $20.00.

    Okayama. Rev. James H. Pettee                             20.00
                                                           ————————
        Total for April                                  $21,399.98
    Total from Oct. 1st to April 30th                    125,959.91

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Windsor Locks, Conn. Young Ladies’ Soc., by
      Miss Frances Newport                                    25.00
    West Farms, N.Y. Ladies, by Mrs. Alphonso
      Wood, $12, _for furnishing room_; Mrs. A.
      Wood, Pkg. of C.                                        12.00
    Willoughby, Ohio. “Friends,” _for furnishing
      room_                                                   25.00
                                                            ———————
          Total                                              $62.00
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to March
      31st                                                 4,202.71
                                                          —————————
          Total                                           $4,264.71


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    London, England. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc.,
      by Rev. O. H. White, D.D., £415 18s.                 2,008.80
    London, England. Rev. O. H. White, £20                    96.90
                                                           ————————
          Total                                           $2,105.70
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to March
      31st                                                17,993.06
                                                         ——————————
          Total                                          $20,098.76
                                                         ==========

                                        H. W. Hubbard, _Treas._,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R.I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D.D., R.I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., N.J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D.D., D.C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D.D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N.Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D.D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M.D., N.H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D.D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D.D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D., D.C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D.D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D.D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N.Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N.J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., N.Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N.Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    J. A. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    CHAS L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of Thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Va., 1; N.C., 6; S.C., 2; Ga., 13; Ky.,
6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 2.
_Among the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK       H. W. Hubbard, Esq., 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON         Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Room 21 Congregational House.
  CHICAGO        Rev. Jas. Powell, 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ———— dollars
in trust, to pay the same in ———— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          MANHATTAN LIFE
                    INSURANCE CO. of NEW YORK.

                        ORGANIZED IN 1850.

             _Over Thirty Years’ Business Experience._

            =AGENTS WANTED.= Apply at the Home Office.

                               HENRY STOKES, President.
            J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        WHITE and DECORATED

         French China and English Porcelain at Low Prices.

  Fine White French China Dinner Sets, 149 pieces      $30.00
  Fine White French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces            7.00
  Fine Gold-band French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces        8.50
  Richly Decorated French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces     12.00
  Chamber Sets, 11 pieces, $4.00; white                  3.25
  White English Porcelain Dinner Sets, 100 pieces       14.00
  Silver plated Dinner Knives, per doz.                  3.00

                 ALSO ALL HOUSE-FURNISHING GOODS.

Illustrated Catalogue and Price-List mailed free on application.
Estimates furnished.

              C. L. Hadley, Cooper Inst., N.Y. City.

Orders boxed and placed on Car or Steamer, free of charge. Sent
C.O.D. or P.O. Money Order.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

             =J. & R. LAMB=, 59 Carmine St., NEW YORK.
                      ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS

                MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                                  MEMORIAL TABLETS.

                Sterling Silver Communion Services.
                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       J. B. WILLIAMS & CO.,

                        GLASTONBURY, CONN.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                     Shaving and Toilet Soaps.

For over 30 years this firm has made the manufacture of =Shaving
Soaps= a specialty, and their Yankee Barber’s Bar, and other Soaps,
enjoy a reputation among Barbers, as well as those who shave
themselves, unequaled by any other.

To all of our readers who are seeking for the =very best Shaving
Soap=, we would say, be sure and get some of the following
(_carefully avoiding counterfeits_):

  GENUINE YANKEE SOAP,
  BARBER’S FAVORITE SOAP,
  CLIPPER SHAVING SOAP,
  VERBENA CREAM TABLET,
  POCKET SHAVING SOAP,
  TONSORIAL SOAP,
  BARBER’S BAR SOAP,
  MUG SHAVING SOAP.

These Soaps can be found in every State, and nearly every town in
the United States.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             GREGORY’S

                          SEED CATALOGUE.


         My Annual Catalogue of Vegetable and Flower Seed

                             FOR 1881,

              Rich in engravings from photographs of
                    the originals, will be sent

                      FREE TO ALL WHO APPLY.

My old customers need not write for it. I offer one of the largest
collections of Vegetable seed ever sent out by any Seed House in
America, a large portion of which were grown on my five seed farms.
_Full directions for cultivation on each package._ All seed

           Warranted to be both Fresh and True to Name:

              so far, that should it prove otherwise,

                  I will refill the order gratis.

The original introducer of the Hubbard Squash, Phinney’s Melon,
Marblehead Cabbages, Mexican Corn, and scores of other vegetables,
I invite the patronage of _all who are anxious to have their
seed directly from the grower, fresh, true, and of the very best
strains_.

                    NEW VEGETABLES A SPECIALTY.

                               JAMES J. H. GREGORY,
                                           Marblehead, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             RIDLEYS’

                         FASHION MAGAZINE

                           SUMMER, 1881,

                            NOW READY.

                             CONTAINS

                   Over 100 Large Quarto Pages,

                   _ENTERTAINING STORIES_,
                           _in Prose and Verse_,

                   _INTERESTING HOME ARTICLES_,

                   _ILLUSTRATED FASHIONS_,

     With valuable information for those living at a distance
         from New York on the many perplexing questions of

                         “_WHAT TO WEAR_.”

                         ISSUED QUARTERLY,

                50c per Annum; Single Copies, 15c.

     This publication should be found in every household. It
    contains the Lowest New York Prices, and is an invaluable
           guide to intelligent and economical shopping.

                   E. RIDLEY & SONS, Publishers,
                                  GRAND AND ALLEN STS.,
                                                _New York_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

  MASON
  AND
  HAMLIN
  ORGANS

BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street,
Boston; 46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: FUN FOR THE BOYS]

Here you are boys! Just the thing for a little harmless
masquerading. The mustaches are made of genuine hair, can be
fastened to or removed from the face with ease, and when worn
cannot be told from the real production. Boys and young men can
have hosts of fun putting them on in a crowd of friends, who will
be greatly astonished at the sudden transformation. Three colors,
light, dark brown, and black. Goatees to match. PRICE BY MAIL,
MUSTACHES 20 CTS. GOATEES 15 CENTS. Valuable Catalogue of Agents
goods free, =World Manuf’g Co. 122 Nassau St, New York.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


           =$2= FOR THIS STYLE OF FOLDING STEAMER CHAIR.

[Illustration]

Solid Black Walnut. Length, 5 ft. 6 in.; width, 1 ft. 9 in. Packed
in Burlaps and delivered to any R. R. depot or Steamboat landing
for 25 cents extra.

                      Brooklyn Furniture Co.,
                      559 to 571 FULTON ST.,
                          Brooklyn, N.Y.

         Illustrated price list of Furniture mailed free.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      INVALID ROLLING-CHAIR.

                           (RECLINING.)

[Illustration]

A PRICELESS BOON to those who are UNABLE TO WALK. LEONARD BACON,
D.D., HON. A. H. STEVENS, M.C., and OTHERS recommend them. SEND FOR
CIRCULAR.

[Illustration]

FOLDING CHAIR CO., New Haven Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            BISCOTINE,

                 _FOOD for CHILDREN and INVALIDS_.

                 Glycerine Sans Pareil Hair Tonic,

  Toilet
      Waters,

  Violet,

  New Mown
      Hay,

  Heliotrope,
      &c.

[Illustration: TRADE-MARK. Established 1770.]

  Sachets
        D’Iris
  de Florence.

  Compound
      Orris

  Dentifrice

                =DELLUC & CO.=, French Pharmacists,
          Send for Circular.        _635 Broadway, N.Y._


       *       *       *       *       *


                          T. H. JOHNSON’S
                             “=FRUIT=
                                OF
                                THE
                             =VINE=.”

Pure juice of Grapes for communion, received Centennial =MEDAL=.
Circulars free. Ask for =T. H. JOHNSON’S, New Brunswick, N.J.=
Nat’l Temperance Society, 58 Reade St., N.Y., Cong’l and Bapt.
Publication Societies, Boston.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                      THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

                              OF THE

                       American Missionary.

                               1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress. Patriots and
Christians interested in the education and Christianizing of these
despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its circulation.
Begin with the January number and the new year. The price is only
Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 191. Donations and subscriptions should
be sent to

                       H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                       56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. It numbers among its regular readers very
many frugal, well-to-do people in nearly every city and village
throughout our Northern and Western States. It is therefore a
specially valuable medium for advertising all articles commonly
used in families of liberal, industrious and enterprising habits of
life.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

        THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                         56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, can aid us in this respect by mentioning, when
ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors corrected.

Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to contributions by various
authors.

“Millyille” changed to “Millville” on page 186.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 6, JUNE, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.