VOL. XXXV.                                            NO. 7.

                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            JULY, 1881.




                            _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    OUR ANNIVERSARY REPORTS                                  193
    A BRIEF VIEW OF THE SITUATION—INTEMPERANCE IN THE
      SOUTH                                                  194
    THE LAST MAN: Rev. C. P. Osborne                         195
    OUR BOSTON ANNIVERSARY                                   196
    BENEFACTIONS                                             197
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese                   198
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                     201


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ANNIVERSARY REPORTS—D.C., Howard University              201
        Va., Hampton Institute, Hampton                      202
        Tenn., Fisk University, Nashville                    203
        Miss., Tougaloo University, Tougaloo                 205
        La., Straight University, New Orleans                207
        Tenn., Le Moyne Normal School, Memphis               208
        Ala., Emerson Institute, Swayne School               209
        Ga., Beach Institute, Byron                          210
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE—LAYING OF CORNER-STONE                 210
    NORTH CAROLINA CONFERENCE                                211


  AFRICA.

    ORDINATION AT GOOD HOPE                                  212


  THE CHINESE.

    ANNIVERSARIES: Rev. W. C. Pond                           214


  WOMAN’S HOME MISS. ASSOC’N.

    MONTHLY REPORT                                           216


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    STORY OF REBECCA                                        217


  RECEIPTS                                                  218

  LIST OF OFFICERS                                          222

  CONSTITUTION                                              223

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                              224

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:
         Published by the American Missionary Association,
                      ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.




[Illustration: STONE HALL, STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.—See Page 208]




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXV.      JULY, 1881.      NO. 7.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.

We devote an unusual amount of space in this number to reports
of the closing exercises of ten of our educational institutions
at the South. Next month we purpose to add reports of others
whose anniversaries occur too late for mention at this writing.
It will be seen that the year has been an unusually prosperous
one. The number of students, either of advanced grade or seeking
for a higher education, has been larger, perhaps, than during any
previous year. We note especially the large number of boarding
students, and also the fact that the accommodations for them are
by far too limited in many of our schools. The growing disposition
of our students to continue their studies through as many months
of the year as possible is a fact of much significance. It will
be remembered that our missions have been richly blessed by
outpourings of the Holy Spirit, and that a goodly number—sometimes
whole classes—have indulged the hopes of a new life. Most of these
will go forth to teach during the summer, and the rich experiences
through which they have passed will prove of great value to them
in their work. We know of no class of people needing the prayers
of our patrons more than these. Perhaps the influence of our
institutions upon the leading minds of the South, and especially
upon those interested in popular education, was never so great.
Governors of Southern States, mayors of cities, presidents of
colleges, representatives of the pulpit, the bar and the press,
attend our anniversary exercises, and enter heartily and with
appreciation into the spirit of the work. We believe any one who
will read the reports referred to will find much occasion for
thanking God and taking courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reports of the exercises at Hampton, Va., and Fisk University,
Nashville, Tenn., were written by Virginians, and give a good idea
of the drift of thought concerning our institutions among the
better class of Southern people.

       *       *       *       *       *


A BRIEF VIEW OF THE SITUATION.

The gift of Mrs. Stone of $150,000 for new buildings at Fisk,
Atlanta, Talladega, and New Orleans; the new educational
institution at Austin, Texas, and our new churches organized the
past year at the South, make additional demands upon our treasury.
The churches should not be left to a feeble struggle for life,
but be aided to a vigorous growth. The additional facilities at
the schools mentioned, and the new institution in Texas, mean an
increased number of students to be aided, and increased expense for
teachers, for insurance, repairs and other incidentals. Our work
among the Chinese in California calls urgently for enlargement; in
fact, the continued existence of such a work means continued growth
with increased expenditures.

A great pressure has been brought to bear upon us to do more for
the education of Indian youth; but the work cannot be done without
money. The success, however, at Carlisle and Hampton indicates
clearly the hopefulness of doing much more. Mr. Arthington, of
Leeds, England, has paid over £3,000, and British Christians have
given a like amount, for a new mission on the Upper Nile, in East
Central Africa; but the opening of the Arthington Mission will
require $10,000 annually for its support.

It will be seen by these statements that the entrance to our
different fields of labor has been thrown open more widely. We must
settle the question as to whether we shall enter; but to enter
means continued and efficient occupancy. “Occupy till I come” is
the command of the Great Teacher. The gate is not open to a haven
of rest, but to a field of labor, and additional labor calls for
additional expense. Nothing short of an increase of 25 per cent.
of the income of the Association will be adequate to meet the
increased demands. The pastors and officers of the churches are our
most effectual helpers in raising the amount required. Will they
not come to our relief right early? The people will give of their
means if the work and its wants are properly presented to them; and
if God has set before us these open doors, surely He will add His
blessing as we enter.

       *       *       *       *       *


INTEMPERANCE IN THE SOUTH.

One of the “decisive battles” to be fought by and in behalf of
the colored people of the South is on the field of intemperance.
Slavery made this vice impossible. Emancipation, with all its
manifold blessings, opened the gates to its entrance, and these
once opened, it now pours in like a flood.

The cannonading has already begun in some of the Southern States in
regard to prohibition, local option and other legal safeguards; but
in this, as in other battles, small arms and the hand-to-hand fight
must win the victory. Man by man, must the victims of this vice be
warned and rescued, and especially must the young, individual by
individual, be instructed, warned, pledged to personal abstinence,
and enlisted in the work of saving others. The schools of the
American Missionary Association are the very citadels of drill and
equipment in this warfare. Their students must be the vanguard
in the onset, and the “old guard” that “never surrenders” in the
hottest fight.

We rejoice to know that our schools and their students are alert
and active in their duties in this respect. Temperance literature
and the prayers of God’s people are invoked in their behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LAST MAN.

REV. C. P. OSBORNE.

The first man is named by sacred history. Scientific prophecy
ventures to tell us who the last man is to be.

Prof. Alphonse de Candolle, son and successor of the great
naturalist, wrote, a few years since, some interesting speculations
on the probable future of the human race. This paper was deemed
of sufficient value to be republished in the Annual Report of
the Smithsonian Institution at Washington, for the year 1875. In
the course of his discussion the eminent writer shows reason for
believing that the last man is to be, not one man, but three. The
future history of mankind, leaving out of the account any possible
catastrophe that might suddenly extinguish the race, will be, in
his view, somewhat as follows.

For an extended period the population of the globe, favored by
improved methods of agriculture, by migration to unoccupied lands,
by general prevalence of peace consequent upon higher morality,
will increase until the world is stocked with inhabitants to its
fullest capacity. Then, after a period, will begin a process of
depopulation. The conditions of life in the colder regions will be
greatly changed by growing scarcity of the fuel supply; the world’s
stock of minerals will be gradually exhausted by rust and wear,
which will bring an end of ships, railroads and commerce, and thus
increase the difficulty of maintaining life; and the incessant
action of water, ice and air will constantly diminish the land area
of the globe, until only mountains will remain as islands above the
surface of the sea. Under the combined action of these agencies,
the principles of natural selection and survival of the fittest
will come into play with decisive effect, and in the struggle for
life the weaker races will one by one succumb and disappear. Three
races, however, exhibit qualities which fit them to survive beyond
all others.

1. The white race, as represented by Europeans and their American
descendants, thanks to their intelligence and habitual bravery,
skill, and the confidence they can place in each other, will
sustain the struggle. 2. The negroes also will prevail, on account
of their physical vigor, power to resist malaria and to flourish in
tropical regions, where the white race rapidly deteriorates. 3. The
yellow race, represented principally by the Chinese, will maintain
their place, since they have great vigor of stock, a capacity to
exist on small resources, and alone seem sufficiently intelligent
and robust to struggle in all latitudes with both the other races.

The last man, then, is to be a white man, a negro and a Chinaman.
But de Candolle seems to think that the negro may, after all, be
the last man of this triumvirate. For the white man, occupying
scattered islands in the colder regions, and deprived of fuel,
might be exterminated by the more or less periodical invasions
of ice from polar regions, while the black man could continue to
subsist with little effort on the pulp of tropical melons.

Such is a brief outline of the curious speculations of this
eminent savant. Of their value as science or prophecy, of their
correspondence with Biblical views of the future of human history,
let the reader make his own judgment. The writer simply asks
attention to a few obvious suggestions.

1. It is a very significant fact that a man of recognized eminence
as a scientist should, in a glance at the probable future of
mankind, give so important a place to the despised African. It
is a fact that more than justifies all the deep interest of
the Christian and the philanthropist in that unfortunate race.
Christians are not in any danger of giving undue attention to the
claims of the negro upon their prayers and benefactions.

2. The conclusions of science, that the African race is fitted to
persist among the latest inhabitants of the earth, are confirmed
by the evidence of facts. The census of 1880 produced two genuine
surprises. First, the fact that the largest relative increase of
population in the United States during the last decade was in the
former slave States. Second, that this result was due to the fact
that while the increase of the whites of those States was some two
per cent. below the average for the whole country, the increase of
the blacks was more than three per cent. above that average.

It is thus demonstrated that negroes are not to be numbered with
those races which, like Australians, Hawaiians and American
Indians, fade away and disappear in the presence of more civilized
races. The negro in warm latitudes has shown his ability, with less
than a fair chance, to hold more than his own with the white man.
We may no longer hope that the grave problems, social, political
and religious, connected with his residence in our land, are to be
solved by the gradual extinction of the race. The black man will
not die; he must be instructed and evangelized.

3. If we are to have black men and yellow men for our neighbors to
the end of time, it is for our interest to be on good terms with
them. As a matter of policy it will be best for us to do all we can
to make them comfortable—I may even say, companionable neighbors.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR BOSTON ANNIVERSARY.

It will be remembered by our readers that during the last week
in May the six co-operative Societies sustained largely by the
Congregationalists, hold anniversary meetings in Boston. This year
the meetings were held on Wednesday, the 25th. The day was bright
and breezy, and the congregations throughout were larger than
usual. The meeting of the American Missionary Association closed
the morning session.

A report was made by Secretary Woodworth, reviewing, in brief,
the several branches of the work carried on by the Association
during the past nineteen years. Mr. Woodworth’s address was replete
with facts and statistics, giving a comprehensive view of the
importance, success and necessities of the Association.

Rev. J. F. Lovering, of Worcester, was the first speaker. During
his address he mentioned the fact that a negro family of his
acquaintance, in Massachusetts, found it difficult to rent a
house on account of their color, and argued that if there be such
prejudices still at the North, we ought not to be surprised if
they yet exist at the South. He related several instances coming
under his observation during the war, showing the religious nature
of the colored people and their love for knowledge, closing his
address with a graphic description of a company of colored women
and children singing songs of thanksgiving to troops returning from
the war.

Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, was the next speaker. He
urged the work of saving the Freedmen as a duty upon us from a
common-sense and statesmanlike view, as well as from a religious
consideration. He said: “They will never vote safely until they
vote intelligently. They will always be at the mercy of others
until they can think for themselves. They are not like the
Mexicans, who have not changed for a century, but they are eager
for knowledge, plastic, and have already made astonishing advances.
They spend their money freely, and if educated will like their
homes tasteful and attractive. In so low a view as the commercial
one, we should be deeply interested for these people. There are
only about twenty-five colored lawyers and a hundred doctors among
them. In the time of the yellow fever, one of the latter remained
through it all and cared for the people. When his work was over,
a large company of white citizens gratefully followed him to the
depot with a band of music, showing that color is forgotten when
there is ability and power.”

Mr. Gregory is now building a mission home and remodeling the
school-house at Wilmington, N.C., at an expense of about $8,000.
These buildings are in close proximity to the new church edifice
also built by him, an account of which was given in the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY for May.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

—Yale and Hamilton Colleges are to receive $40,000 each from the
estate of James Knox, of Knoxville, Ill.

—Dartmouth College receives a bequest of $5,000 from the late Hon.
H. C. Burleigh, of Great Falls, N.H.

—Hon. E. B. Morgan, of Auburn, N.Y., has given Wells College,
Aurora, $10,000, making his gifts to it upwards of $160,000.

—Col. Gardner A. Sage, of New York, has given $90,000 to the
Theological Seminary of the Reformed Church in America, situated at
New Brunswick, N.J.

—Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, Mass., has recently added
to his gift to the A. M. A. of $3,600 for a church at Wilmington,
N.C., $3,500 as the first installment for a school building to be
erected in close proximity to the new church.

—A banker of Altenburg recently bequeathed $187,000 for endowments
in the University of Jena. The government of Saxe-Altenburg,
however, retained $54,000 of the amount as legal duty, thereby
reducing the endowment to $133,000.

—Col. C. G. Hammond, of Chicago, has offered $20,000 towards
establishing an endowment fund of $80,000 for the Congregational
Theological Seminary of that city. Not long since Mr. Hammond
contributed $25,000 for a library building to the same institution.

_The endowment of the young institutions for the education of
colored people South, presents a fine field for the exercise of
such wise charity as is shown in some of the liberal donations
above._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—Dr. Laws, of the Scotch Mission on Lake Nyassa, discovered two
coal seams on the north-eastern end of the lake.

—The Akankoo Gold Mining Company has ordered the explorer Cameron
to go to the Gold Coast to study the mineral ores of the grant
which it holds.

—Dr. Lanz has exploded the theory of converting the Sahara into an
ocean. He reports that the most depressed portion of El Juf, the
body of the desert, is nearly five hundred feet above the level of
the sea.

—M. Harold Tarry, a member of the French Sahara commission, has
discovered, south of Wargla, the ruins of the large city of
Cedradra buried under the shifting sands. A mosque and nine houses
have been excavated containing columns, statuary and charred
manuscripts.

—The village of Roumbeck contains a hundred _toukouls_ (cabins
built upon piles to preserve them from the ravages of the white
ants). This is the chief place of the province of Rohl. Here are
collected ostrich plumes, caoutchouc, tamarinds and cotton, which
are sent to Khartoum.

—The efforts of the French to find tracing for a railroad across
the Great Desert to Timbuctoo have met with disaster. The great
expedition under Col. Flanders, when nearly across the desert, was,
according to most reliable reports, attacked by the hostile natives
and destroyed.

—Dr. Oscar Lanz, the leader of the German expedition to Timbuctoo,
has accomplished the object of his mission. He started from
Morocco, taking a south-easterly course across the Great Desert.
In returning he followed the route to the westward toward the
Senegal river, arriving safely at St. Louis on the coast, after
experiencing many delays and hardships. He went in the disguise
of a Turkish physician, taking with him one Italian and five Arab
servants.

—Timbuctoo is described as lying on the southern edge of the
Sahara near the Niger, is five miles in circumference, and
surrounded on all sides by plains of white sand. Its population has
decreased, many of the houses are in ruins, but it is still the
most important city in Central Africa and the great emporium for
the slave trade of those regions.

—Dr. Holub is preparing to start for the Cape of Good Hope, from
whence he will travel towards the interior of the continent, with
the expectation of coming out at some point on the Mediterranean.
Although his trip is essentially a scientific one, he will not
neglect the commercial question. He is connected with important
houses of Vienna, with which he will attempt to establish relations
with the tribes of the interior of Africa.

—On his return from Bahr-el-Ghazal, Gessi found Khartoum very
different from what he had seen it three years before. The European
colony had transformed it. The Catholic mission had become the
instructor of the population. The traders had imported all the
products of European industry. Houses with magnificent stores had
been erected, and one could obtain there all that was required for
modern civilization. It had become a centre of exportation for
the products of Soudan. To remedy the inconvenience of expensive
voyages, they already thought of establishing in the neighborhood a
permanent place for receiving the wax, rubber and ivory which they
brought from the more central countries.

—The French missionaries who are in the Egyptian Soudan complain
that the slave trade is more active than ever, and that far from
taking measures to prevent it, the regular troops take part in
the plunder in the neighborhood of the White Nile, where they
capture thousands of slaves of both sexes and all ages. One of the
missionaries saw at Fachoda a number of children taken to the slave
market. Another reports that the mountains south of Kordufan are
inhabited by a very beautiful race of negroes, who have resisted
all efforts of the proselytizing Mussulman. These are sold at high
prices, and the slave-hunters regard them as a favorite prey. This
missionary also relates that a dozen valleys were recently ravaged
by the Bagarahs.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

—In British America, during the past 20 years, more than 13,000
Indians have been received into the Church of England.

—There is a church organization at Fort Wrangel, Alaska Territory,
among the Stickenn tribe of Indians, with a membership of about
forty. In connection with this, an industrial school and home for
girls has been established.

—The Indians at present in close relations with the Presbyterian
church number about 16,000, and may be divided as follows: Mohave,
838; Chimehneva, 200; Coahuila, 150; Cocopah, 180; Pima, 4,500;
Maricopa, 500; Papago, 6,000; the San Carlos, White Mountain,
Coyotero, Tonto, Chiricahua, Cochise, Ojo Caliente, Yuma and
Mohave Apaches, 4,878; Hualapai, 620; Yuma, 930; Suppai, 75; and
Quacharty’s, 400.

These are grouped into the three agencies of Colorado River, Pima
and San Carlos. They number 2,218 children of school age. They had
7,700 acres of land under cultivation, and raised 43,333 bushels of
wheat, 2,493 of corn, and 10,833 of barley and oats.

—Some poet at Carlisle Barracks, Pa., has set forth the merits of
the Indian training-school at that point as follows:

    “The Garrison, where tap of drum was rule,
    Is now the famous Indian Training School.
    In days of yore, the Soldiers there were taught
    That RED MEN’S USE WAS ONLY TO BE FOUGHT.
    But note the change! The reign of Peace is near,
    The ploughshare conquers deadly sword and spear.
    The cunning pen shall in their swarthy hand
    A swifter missile be than burning brand.
    Their only WATCH-FIRE shall be REASON’S LIGHT—
    Their only WARFARE, BATTLING FOR THE RIGHT.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

—It is a significant fact that nearly all of the thirty men-of-war
composing the fleet of the Chinese navy are commanded by European
officers.

—The Young Men’s Christian Association at Tokio, Japan, consisting
wholly of natives, has concluded to start a religious magazine.

—During the past eight years, which will measure the time of actual
service of the Protestant missions in Japan, the work has been
so far advanced that at present there are 160 missionaries, with
50 churches organized and a total membership of 8,000. There are
also schools, dispensaries, colleges and publishing houses, which
circulate the Scriptures and religious reading in all parts of the
empire.

—It is reported, concerning the Chinese boarding-school for boys at
Ningpo, that nothing has appeared for years that seems to so fully
enlist the interest and co-operation of all the natives. Although
the school is under native management, the foreign members of the
Presbytery with which it is connected have a voice in its affairs.
Contributions for its support have been given freely both by the
converts and heathen people. It seems that the method pursued is
similar to that carried on so generally in the A. M. A. schools
South.

—Lai Tip, a Chinese laundryman, was recently murdered on Spring
Street, New York, while returning from the Sunday-school of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church. It appears he was set upon by two or
three roughs, and while stooping to recover his hat, which had been
knocked off, received from a knife fatal wounds from which he died
on the third day. His funeral was attended by Rev. Drs. Hall and
Crosby, and he was buried amid a large attendance of Chinamen at
Machpelah Cemetery, Hoboken, N.J. The murder was most shameful and
unprovoked.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

FLATONIA, TEX.—“The box you spoke of in your letter was received
last week. Maps are just what we need and will be a great help.
Almost everything was of use, and I consider it a very valuable
box, unusually so. I would like to give my heartfelt thanks to the
donors if I knew them. Please do so for me. I know that those who
keep up the supplies at home like to be assured that their gifts
are appreciated.”

COLORED SUNDAY-SCHOOLS, N.C.—“Happy Greeting” Union Sunday-school
is the name of one of eight schools organized during the last two
months by a missionary of the American Sunday-school Union in North
Carolina. “This name,” he writes, “was adopted by a cheerful crowd
of colored people.” Another of these schools is called “Valley
Home.” Very few among those people were able to read the Bible.
In a class of twenty-five, only one could tell the name of the
first book in it. Some said that Jacob built the ark. When asked
how the Israelites expressed their joy after crossing the Red Sea
in safety, one said: “I s’pose, sir, dey shot off big guns and
holler’d!” and all present nodded their assent.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.


HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

Commencement Exercises of the Theological Department of Howard
University were held in the Memorial Lutheran Church, Fourteenth
Street and Vermont Avenue, Washington, D.C., Friday evening, May
6th, 1881, at 7.45 o’clock. A large audience of white and colored
friends was present, including various U.S. Senators and other
persons of influence.


ORDER OF EXERCISES.

Music; Prayer by Rev. W. W. Patton, D.D., Pres. Howard University;
reading of the Scriptures by Rev. J. G. Butler, D.D.; Music;
Addresses by Graduates; The Perpetuity of the Church, by Emory
W. Williams, Prince George’s Co., Md.; Man, a Religious Being,
by William A. Shannon, Washington, D.C.; Music; The Christian
Minister, by George V. Clark, Atlanta, Ga.; Our Duty to Africa, by
Jarrett E. Edwards, Columbia, S.C.; Music; Address to Graduates, by
Rev. Charles A. Stark, D.D., Lutheran, Baltimore, Md.; Presentation
of Bibles to the Graduates, in behalf of the Washington Bible
Society, by Rev. A. W. Pitzer, D.D.; Conferring Certificates, by
Rev. J. G. Craighead, D.D., Dean Theo. Dept. The addresses were of
a creditable character and gave promise of future usefulness.

The following persons connected with the Congregational, Baptist,
Methodist and Presbyterian denominations, having pursued studies in
the Theological Department, now leave the University to engage in
the work of the Ministry in their respective churches: George V.
Clark, Atlanta, Ga.; Thomas H. Datcher, Washington, D.C.; Jarrett
E. Edwards, Columbia, S.C.; John H. T. Gray, Prince George’s
County, Md.; Thomas H. Jones, Baltimore, Md.; William A. Shannon.
Washington, D.C.; Emory W. Williams, Prince George’s County, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *


HAMPTON INSTITUTE.

REPORTED BY JUDGE WATKINS, A VIRGINIAN.

Those whose good fortune it was to be present will “not willingly
let die” the pleasant memories of the Commencement day at Hampton,
Va., on the 19th May, 1881. Representatives of widely circulated
journals have made public record of many good things said and done
on this occasion. Some of the incidents will interest readers of
the MISSIONARY.

The illness of Mrs. Garfield, regretted by all, prevented the
President’s attendance. General Howard, Governor Holliday of
Virginia, Rev. Dr. Potter, and other representative men and women,
contributed largely to the pleasures of the day. The full and most
interesting report to the corporation of Principal Armstrong gave
satisfactory evidence of the God-blest success and continuing
usefulness of this noble enterprise. A large edition of this
valuable paper will be issued, and will, it is hoped, be widely
circulated. No report of any year in Hampton’s history has been
more satisfactory.

An account of the public exercises of the day for the MISSIONARY
must necessarily be brief. At 8.30 a. m. the new Academic Hall
was dedicated. Bishop Payne, of the Colored Methodist Episcopal
Church, in most appropriate words and manner, offered the
dedicatory prayer. General Howard followed in an address of
marked ability, and of broad and liberal and most approved views,
admirably presented, basing his brief and pertinent remarks upon
the duties of the hour in reference to the negro on the editorial
in the Memphis _Appeal_ reproduced in the May MISSIONARY. Governor
Holliday, of Virginia, was introduced to General Howard. Both had
lost an arm in battle. With their left hands in cordial grasp,
they exchanged fraternal salutations. The incident gave unaffected
pleasure to all who witnessed it.

The corner-stone of the Stone Memorial building, for colored girls’
industries (the generous donation of Mrs. Stone of Massachusetts),
and the corner-stone of the Indian Girls’ building, were laid.
The Rev. Dr. Strieby, president of the corporation, delivered
the address in the first, and Rev. Dr. Potter, of New York, in
the latter of the ceremonies. Both gentlemen performed the duty
assigned them most acceptably to the friends of the institution.

The large and interested audience filled the chapel of Virginia
Hall to its utmost capacity to hear the public addresses of six of
the alumni. These performances were made in excellent taste, the
elocution being exceptionally good, and the views were expressed in
a style and range of thought above the average Commencement orator,
and reflected honor on the _Alma Mater_ and her sons and daughters.

In appropriate terms General Armstrong introduced General Howard,
Dr. Potter and Governor Holliday, of Virginia, whose words of wit
and wisdom were enthusiastically received. His Excellency, who is a
Christian gentleman of enlarged views and a broad-gauge statesman,
gave cordial welcome to the strangers within the gates of the Old
Dominion, and in fitting words of sincere and merited commendation
approved and indorsed all that had been done and so well done at
Hampton.

Much more might be said; less could not be said. God will, it is
not doubted, continue to call from Hampton to His service Christian
men and women, _workers_ in His vineyard, who will illustrate that

      “Peace hath her victories
    No less renowned than War.”

The Hampton Institute is becoming more known and appreciated in
Virginia and the neighboring States. Its alumni are occupying
positions of practical usefulness, and discharge the high duties
of good citizens well and faithfully. Virginians believe that
Principal Armstrong is emphatically the right man in the right
place, and that, with General Marshall, Miss Mackie and others
on his staff, he will push forward the good work in which they
are engaged, and will continue to merit and receive the grateful
appreciation of the people of the commonwealth. Above all, they
invoke that blessing of God in the future which has been so
signally manifested in the past.

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY.

PROF. C. C. PAINTER.

No one can properly appreciate or understand Fisk University
who does not take into account the model school whose unique
anniversary exercises occurred on Thursday p. m., preceding those
of the University proper. The school is under the management of
Miss Irene Gilbert, who is assisted by students from the Normal
Department. The excellency of her work is not found alone in
the perfection of drill which every exercise shows, but in the
exquisite finish of whatever work is done. A recent graduate from
Williston Seminary and of the Sheffield Scientific School, with
whom I visited this school one day when it was not on exhibition,
and examined the children’s work in map drawing, declared that he
had never seen any work of the kind that compared with it. The
exhibition given by these children made it easier to understand the
uniformly excellent work apparent in all the classes of the higher
grades witnessed during the three days’ examinations of the next
week. Miss Gilbert trains up the child in the way he should go, and
in the higher departments he does not depart from it.

The Baccalaureate sermon of President Cravath on Sunday afternoon,
from Heb. xi. 27, “For he endured as seeing Him who is invisible,”
was able and timely; well calculated to inspire his hearers with
the faith and courage requisite for the great work which lies
before them as leaders of their emancipated people through the
wilderness which still surrounds and stretches out before them,
after sixteen years of wanderings.

A rainy evening gave a much smaller audience to hear Dr. G. D.
Pike’s missionary sermon than would otherwise have greeted him. He
must be a laggard indeed who, hearing the Doctor on his favorite
theme of missions, does not become inoculated with something of his
divine enthusiasm.

Space cannot be given for even a full programme of the exercises,
which filled to the full Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;
examinations in the mornings until 1 p. m., and exhibitions in
the evenings by the Normal School, the Literary Society and the
College Preparatory Class; and it would be exceedingly common-place
to say, what simple truth demands should be said, that they were
all excellent. One of the visitors said at the close of the Normal
School exhibition on Monday, that he did not expect to hear
anything better even from the graduating class; but on Thursday
candidly admitted his mistake, as there was just such advance as
there ought to have been to mark the advanced grade of the pupils.
Perhaps, instead of giving a programme of these exercises, it will
prove more profitable to state impressions derived from them.

This was the first time the writer has had the privilege of
attending the closing exercises of this or of any school for the
education of these people. Brought up among them, and always
accustomed to regard them as inferior, he shared until recently the
feeling so prevalent that in their education nothing more should
be attempted than a fair common school training. This is not the
place in which to argue that there is urgent need that the leaders
of 7,000,000 people, who are to be redeemed from ignorance and
lifted into a plane where they shall command the respect of those
who are now unjustly prejudiced against them, shall be thoroughly
disciplined and broadly educated; but it is the time to express
the opinion of the writer, and of several others who attended with
great interest these exercises, with something of his prejudices,
that these students showed conclusively that they are capable of
taking on the same culture, and under it of reaching the same
excellencies of thought and discipline, as the more favored whites
attain under like training; and that an objection to their higher
education must be based on other ground than their inability to
receive it, or the need of their race for such leaders as this
school is sending out from year to year.

A gentleman, native of Tennessee, who has recently been called
from the presidency of a Southern College to the management of the
educational work of the State, was present during the commencement
exercises, and contrasted them with those of the graduating class
of the first institution of the State for whites, in terms so
complimentary to the negro students, that, out of deference to the
whites, his language will be omitted.

This work is no longer tentative. Both the possibility and value
of it have been fully demonstrated, and the urgent demand is that
the University shall be fully equipped for it. The point has
been reached, in the estimation of all who know anything of its
history, needs and opportunities, when it must be enlarged or
suffer irreparably. It was, therefore, with gladness of heart that
a large number of its friends, white and black, from the city and
from other States, gathered to lay the corner-stone of Livingstone
Missionary Hall on Wednesday afternoon.

Gen. Fisk presided most felicitously, and the address of Dr.
Strieby was in every way happy and inspiring. It was a regular
love feast, not simply because there was so much of the Methodist
element in it, as represented by the General and his excellent
lady, and Dr. McFerrin—“a rebel who fought on the last ten acres
left for the rebellion to stand upon,” and who overcame great
obstacles to get out to the exercises, despite attractions in other
directions, and made a delightful speech, full of good feeling—but
because there was such a flowing together of hearts and good-will
from all classes as represented on the occasion. Dr. Strieby should
be requested to print his speech in full and distribute it all over
the land, and with it should go the eight or ten other excellent
shorter speeches which followed, one of which was by the city’s
treasurer, who came to represent the Historical Society.

There was a poem written for the occasion by Prof. Spence, and read
by one of the pupils, Miss Allen, who has remarkable powers as a
reader.

The address from Rev. C. H. Daniels, of Cincinnati, which followed
the graduating addresses of the class, was able and timely. His
theme was “The dignity and value of the individual man.” It was
every way a manful presentation of a manly subject, and was a
fitting _finale_ to the very able and manly addresses of the
graduating class.

The diplomas were presented by Gen. Fisk in a brief address full
of pathos and good sense, with happy allusions in each case to
the theme of the recipient’s address. After this came the Alumni
dinner, plain and substantial, and the speeches following, which
were fully up to those of older and more pretentious societies.

And thus closed the fullest and most hopeful year in the history of
this institution, which is beginning to excite the deepest interest
among the people of the State, who are awakening to the fact that
it is offering the only solution to many dark problems which to
them seemed without an answer, or at least one that had anything of
hope in it.

We cannot better close this article than by giving the following
extract from an editorial from the _American_, the ablest and most
influential paper of the State:

“In the proceedings at the Fisk University, yesterday, another
step forward was taken in the way of providing material means for
that moral and intellectual growth which is going on silently as
a great institution grows and roots itself firmly in the society
around it. Universities are not created in a day, nor at all by
money, although money is a necessary agency. They grow. The Fisk
is passing through with comparatively the early stages of growth,
when we compare it with the ideal which finds place in the dreams
of its enthusiastic laborers—dreams which enfold the future result.
We doubt if the public, although it lend a hearty sympathy and
approval, and expect good to flow from it, begins yet to realize
the work this institution is to perform. We doubt if there is such
appreciation anywhere existent or possible except in the dreams of
its enthusiast laborers. These in some way comprehend its future.
But the Fisk has had to adapt itself in more ways than one. At
first it encountered, as a matter of course, but cold approval from
the wealth and culture of Nashville—not hostility, but approval
from a languid and cold judgment. But perhaps the hardest task
has been to adapt itself to the negro himself. To secure the cold
approval of intelligent judgment was apparently easy; to go a
little further and secure aid, if it were necessary, would not be
hard; but to lift the negro up to appreciate New England culture
and conservatism and quiet labor, is like bringing him, in his
early religious experience, to accept the calm conservatism and
quiet demeanor of the Catholic, Presbyterian or Episcopal churches.
In vain is he solicited to enter the intellectual stage of
religious experience, when nature tells him that his stage is the
emotional, if indeed it be beyond the sensuous. This is the task
Fisk has set itself, and is performing, and performing well. It is
encountering, and has encountered, a world of prejudice from the
very race it seeks to elevate, and must content itself with working
upon and with the _creme de la creme_ of the race in the South,
while it cannot as yet reach the vast mass unless it let itself
down, and we believe that so long as its present laborers are at
the helm it will insist on drawing others up and never let itself
down. It has a great and widening field, which it is worthily
filling, and in the labor of regeneration of a race, no agency
will have a higher, or indeed so high a place as this conservative
school, which is filling so difficult a position.

“We are not unmindful also of the necessity for quite other
laborers in the regeneration of this race. It is just as necessary
in school as in church that this yet blind and emotional creature,
‘crying for the light with no language but a cry,’ shall have
tendance suited to his condition and upon his own level.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

The annual examinations in this institution began on Thursday, May
26th, continuing Friday and also Monday forenoon. Many friends
of students were present from various parts of the State. The
forenoon of Sunday was taken up with the Sunday-school, with its
very instructive lessons from the parable of the talents, and
immediately following this a temperance Bible reading, with its
intensely practical and stirring appeals. The latter was especially
timely, inasmuch as a large number of temperance tracts, pamphlets
and papers had been distributed to all the members, just before,
for circulation as they return this summer to their own homes, or
go forth to engage in teaching. Supplied in this way, the students
from this school are the means of disseminating through the State
a great deal of good temperance literature, and are enabled to
organize a multitude of little temperance societies.

It will not be amiss to note the fact, as illustrating the high
value of just this sort of work, that besides these societies
established by the students of this University, there is no kind of
temperance organization among the colored people in the State. At
the same time, the prevalence of drunkenness, and of the habit of
drinking among all classes, is appalling. The following incident
shows the crying need of a _reform movement_: A colored church not
far from here had communion service, and when it was concluded, the
pastor and deacons tarried, and following, as they believed, (?)
the instruction of the Bible, where it says, “drink ye all of it,”
consumed what was left of the generous supply of wine, and thus
made themselves beastly drunk.

Sunday was filled up with impressive services. In the afternoon the
Lord’s Supper was commemorated, and five of the students united
with the church, receiving the rite of baptism. In the evening,
Dr. Strieby preached a sermon from the text. “And now also the axe
is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree, therefore, which
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the
fire.” Every word was listened to with closest attention.

On Monday evening the Preparatory School Exhibition, under
the management of the teachers of the Primary and Preparatory
departments, was held in the chapel, presenting to a crowded
audience a varied programme, made up of recitations, declamations,
songs, &c. A prominent feature of this exhibition was a strong and
well appreciated temperance dialogue.

It was a manifest disappointment to all when Tuesday dawned cloudy
and dark, with every prospect of a rainy time. The exercises of
the day were accordingly held in the barn, instead of the grove,
for which all arrangements had been made. The forenoon was taken
up with the commencement exercises of the Normal department. The
orations and essays were presented by members of the Middle and
Junior Classes, with the single exception of an oration by the one
graduate from the Normal course. As was said on that day, what the
graduating class lacked in quantity was well made up in quality. We
expect a very high order of work and Christian influence from Henry
Lanier.

In the afternoon the interesting ceremony of laying the foundation
of “Strieby Hall,” the new boy’s dormitory, was followed by a
procession to the chapel again, where the annual address was given
by Dr. Strieby. This was a stirring presentation of the reason
why the American Missionary Association is to-day in the field of
Southern Freedmen education, and of exactly what it is aiming to do
for the colored race. It was shown how this Association was pioneer
in the work, and how, gradually, the most prominent and cultured of
Southern gentlemen have come to regard the higher education of the
race as possible, and, now, as a necessity to the prosperity and
the material advancement of the region.

Col. Power, who with other gentlemen from Jackson had been
present through the day to witness the exercises, was then called
upon to speak. He alluded to the exercises of the forenoon with
appreciation of the orations and essays presented, referring to one
of the former as “eloquent,” and added a glowing word of tribute to
the sweet music rendered by the students. He assured all present
that the white people of the State are now in hearty sympathy with
the work of the education of the colored race. Immediately after
the war, he frankly admitted, the people were not attracted by
the idea, but now a better opinion prevails, and they see that
education must be given to all, white and black.

                                                          H.

       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D., NEW ORLEANS.

We come to the close of another school year with a profound sense
of gratitude to God for His guiding Providence, and for His
blessing upon the work undertaken in His name. We have had 328
names upon our rolls, with a large average attendance. There has
been a marked advance in scholarship, and we are justified in
saying with regard to all the pupils, “Our labor has not been in
vain.” There have been years of decline, since the first burst
of enthusiasm after the war, in education; but a better and more
hopeful era has dawned, when interest in the general education
of the people, and the higher grades of scholarship, is in the
ascendant. From this time on, the demand for education among the
colored people will be more intelligent and abiding.


THE EXAMINATIONS.

showed thoroughness of instruction, and aptness in learning and
retaining what was taught. Many kind words of appreciation and
pleasure were spoken by the visitors and trustees. One of our
merchants who attended Professor Jewett’s examination of the class
in botany said: “What would the planters up in Ouchita Parish say
if they should happen in here now and hear a ‘nigger’ analyzing a
Morning Glory?”


THEOLOGICAL ANNIVERSARY.

While the Theological department has been in existence for eleven
years, we have never graduated a student till this year. The
theological and literary attainments of the students would never
have justified us in doing it. It is little less than a crime to
confer an unmerited degree upon a young man. It would not only
be a fraud, but a source of constant embarrassment to him. This
year we had as a student Mr. A. E. P. Albert, who studied some
time at Atlanta University, and who joined our senior class of
the University and the Theological school in October. He is a
regularly ordained minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church, a
young man of culture and ability. On Sunday night he delivered his
address, taking as his subject, “Like Priest, Like People.” It was
able, impressive, and appropriate for the time and the people. The
President followed with a plea for an “Educated Ministry;” and then
the degree of Bachelor of Divinity was conferred upon Mr. Albert. I
trust all subsequent degrees will be as worthily bestowed.


LITERARY EXHIBITION.

In the afternoon of Commencement day, our University chapel was
filled with an intelligent and interested audience. The exercises,
consisting of orations, compositions and recitations, were entirely
by the undergraduates. We furnished a pleasant entertainment to the
citizens, and identified the entire school with Commencement day.

At night Central Church was packed in every part, pews, aisles,
vestibule and gallery, with an eager, expectant audience,
comprising the best element of the colored population of New
Orleans. Such an assembly was never gathered in Central Church
before. The audience itself was an inspiration and showed a deep
and intelligent interest in the holy cause represented. A goodly
number of our white friends were present, and were among the most
enthusiastic in their congratulations.

Rev. H. M. Smith, D.D., editor of the _South-Western Presbyterian_,
offered the prayer, in which he thanked God for the existence of
Straight University and the good it had done.

The five young men composing the senior class, who made their
salutations to the audience, represented three of the Southern
States, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. Their orations were well
written and well delivered. One of the orations was solicited for
publication by two of the New Orleans papers represented in the
audience by their editors.

The music, both in the afternoon and evening, was exceptionally
fine, and so pronounced by all. It was entirely under the direction
of Professor J. M. McPherron, and reflected great credit upon his
method and excellence of instruction.


STONE HALL.

The new dormitory for girls will be entirely finished by July 15th.

It must be furnished by the 1st of October. Milwaukee, Wis., West
Newton, Mass., and Evansville, Ind., have already forwarded money
to furnish and name a room. Others have the money partly raised.
Dear friends, come to our help at once. Send $50, if you can. Send
$25, or $10, or $5. Do the best you can and at once. It is God’s
work, and we ask your aid in His name.

       *       *       *       *       *


LE MOYNE NORMAL INSTITUTE.

PROF. A. J. STEELE, MEMPHIS.

The passing months have again brought us to where we may look
back over the entire work of the year. While we grieve over
opportunities lost and efforts to all appearance fruitless, we can,
too, rejoice that the “Master of the harvest” has given increase.
The year has been one, on many accounts, unusually successful and
satisfactory. Never before have we known our pupils so susceptible
to all good influences and so ready to receive instruction and
guidance from their teachers.

During the year past, the school has experienced a most precious
revival, over forty of our young people professing conversion. In
our closing prayer meeting for the year, it was found that there
were but about a dozen students of the Normal department who had
not accepted the Saviour.

In way of school work we have never before secured so satisfactory
results as this year has shown. Our attendance has been more
constant, and consequently our work more thorough.

A class of eight—five young men and three young ladies—this year
complete the course of study, and go out to work at teaching in
three different States, one taking a prominent place in the schools
at Fort Smith, Ark.

We have for the entire year had the active sympathy and hearty
encouragement of the best people of the city; Gen. Humes, a very
prominent lawyer and formerly a major-general in the Confederate
army, giving the annual address, and the daily papers making full
reports of lectures, graduating exercises, &c.

Our industrial work has developed to our entire satisfaction, and
by all our patrons and friends is now regarded as a very important
and valuable feature of the school.

A class of girls has had careful instruction, with actual practice
in the experimental kitchen, in the nature, relative values and
healthful methods of cooking different articles of food, including
vegetables, meats, breads, pastry, &c., &c. Classes in needlework,
knitting, use of sewing machines, &c., have had daily lessons and
practice.

We are confident that instruction of this nature can be given in
connection with a day-school, without interfering with regular
school-work, and at slight expense and small increase of teaching
force. I am anxious to have a workshop fitted up where the boys
and young men shall receive instruction in wood-working and the
ordinary use of tools for that purpose.

We shall have a full and strong attendance for next year. We are
having more students from the country, and usually they are those
who put to good use the training and instruction they carry from
here. Not less than seventy of our students will be teaching during
vacation, those of former years with those going out from this
year’s work. I should look upon our work as of little importance
and value if our influence did not extend and multiply in this way.

       *       *       *       *       *


EMERSON INSTITUTE.

REV. O. D. CRAWFORD, MOBILE.

Three hundred and fifty pupils enrolled for the year, carries our
numbers above any point reached since the boarding accommodations
disappeared in the “Blue College” fire. Had we possessed boarding
facilities and sufficient school-room, the number would have been
as near 500 as 350.

Two days of this week were given to the final written examinations,
and in some of the departments three days were so used. Thursday
was devoted to oral examinations. About thirty visitors favored
us—among them Rev. Dr. Burgett, whose name is becoming familiar to
your readers as one that appreciates this work of the Association;
another, the Rev. W. G. Strong, pastor of the largest colored
church in the State. The common sentiment of these judges was that
the pupils did remarkably well, and showed that they had received
careful and thorough training.

Last night 800 people crowded the Third Baptist Church to witness
the closing exhibition. Although the aisles were filled with people
standing down to the middle of the house, many turned away from the
door. Dr. Burgett offered the opening prayer, and Rev. Mr. Strong
pronounced the benediction. All the exercises that came between
astonished many, especially the white people present, and gave
pleasure to all until the weariness of standing made many persons
about the door restless and unduly communicative. The popular
judgment is that much progress has been made during the year.
Personally, we think many exhibitions at white schools would suffer
in comparison with this one.

The future of this people is full of promise.

       *       *       *       *       *


SWAYNE SCHOOL.

REV. O. W. FAY, MONTGOMERY.

Prof. Martin and his efficient corps of assistants are deserving
of commendation for their hard and thorough work at this point
during the school-year just closed. The number in attendance has
been unusually large, (the whole enrolment being 644 against
484 last year); but in thoroughness of teaching and in all that
constitutes good discipline there has been a decided advance all
along the line. Recognizing the fact that the school building has a
seating capacity for only about 350, while the average attendance
for a part of the year has been 450, the necessity for enlarged
accommodations, as well as some of the difficulties encountered by
the teachers, will be apparent.

On the principle that what is good for a part is good also for
all, there was no favoritism shown in the assignment of parts in
the closing exercises. All, “from the least to the greatest,” were
given a _speech_. Although the average was somewhat reduced near
the close of the term, yet, with the more than three hundred to
take part, it will readily appear that the “Commencement Exercises”
of Swayne College (as the patrons call it), could not all be
crowded into a single day. Consequently, in order that a _good_
thing might last a good while, it was arranged to devote three
evenings to the speaking. Friday evening, May 20th, was given to
the exhibition of the Primary department; Friday evening, May 27th,
to the Intermediate; and Tuesday evening, May 31st, to the Higher
department. The Congregational church proving too small on the
first night, the exhibition was held the second and third nights
in the M. E. Zion church, with an audience on the last night,
which, admitting all members of the school free, and charging an
admittance fee of a nickel for adults, netted more than seventeen
dollars.

These exercises, consisting of declamations, dialogues, solos,
choruses, &c., were creditable entertainments, and gave evident
satisfaction to the members of the City Board of Education and
other white visitors in attendance, as well as to the patrons of
the school.

Monday and Tuesday, May 30th and 31st, were occupied with the
examinations of the several departments. These were entered into by
the pupils with a good deal of genuine enthusiasm, and evidenced to
the goodly number of visitors present that the efforts in “drill,”
on the part of the teachers had not been in vain. The “Swayne” is
doing good work.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH.

The school was brought to a successful close to-day. The year has
been one of interest and profit, although of trial, on account
of severe and, in some cases, protracted sickness on the part of
nearly all the workers in this field. The school has prospered,
and the progress made by some of the pupils has been very marked.
Differing degrees of attainment, as well as of ability to express
their knowledge, was clearly shown in the examinations. The closing
oratorical exercises this afternoon, in the presence of an audience
which crowded the chapel, were interesting in every particular.
Without any special expenditure of time and strength in preparing
for these, the most creditable results were shown. There was almost
no prompting. The original productions, chiefly having relation to
some country and the people inhabiting it, were well conceived and
well expressed. The reading was distinct. It is manifest that that
form of public address is doomed, and will soon be heard no more
among the colored people, which only “mouths” words, regardless
of sense and of the listening ear. Such scenes as that at “Beach”
to-day have only hope in them for our country and the colored race.

                                                              C.

       *       *       *       *       *


BYRON, GA.

BY REV. S. E. LATHROP.

I recently attended the closing exercises of Rev. P. W. Young’s
school at Byron. Going down on an evening freight train, I arrived
at 9 p. m., and proceeded with my little girl and Bro. Young to
the church, which is used also as a school-room. People in these
country places are slow in getting together, at night especially.
After working hard all day in the fields (it was just the busiest
“cotton-cropping” time), they have to go home, get their suppers,
dress up in their best clothes, and then go perhaps three or four
miles. So it was half-past ten o’clock before the audience arrived
in sufficient numbers; but finally the curtain was drawn and the
exercises began. Declamations, readings, dialogues and music were
given by the school, with much credit to themselves and their
teachers. These exercises were under the direction of Mrs. Amelia
Young, the pastor’s excellent wife, who showed decided talent in
managing. It was after midnight when the exercises closed, and then
your reporter was called on for a speech, which at that hour of
the night (or rather morning) turned out to have one merit—that of
brevity. A young neighboring teacher also made a speech, and the
session was closed.

Next morning came off the examination of the classes, which showed
commendable progress and encouraging attention to the studies.
These country schools have many disadvantages which are not felt in
larger places; but Bro. Young and his wife have evidently done a
good work here, and are elevating and helping the whole community
by their labors. A picnic dinner was spread in the church, as the
rain prevented its service in the beautiful grove surrounding.
After bountifully satisfying the inner man, and a little more
speech-making, we returned home well pleased.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE—LAYING OF CORNER-STONE.

PRESIDENT H. S. DE FOREST.

The corner-stone of the new dormitory which Mrs. Stone gives to
Talladega College was laid May 13th. Scripture was read and
prayer offered by President De Forest. Professor Andrews, the
veteran in American missionary service in Alabama, laid the stone
and gave an address, in which fitting reference was made to the
good lady who, having seen and known none of us here, with her
queenly benevolence, has blessed not only this school of Christian
learning, and others in the South, but indeed round the world.
The students were well represented by Spencer Snell, a member
both of the Normal and Theological departments; after which a
very appreciative address was delivered by Captain N. A. McAfee,
a citizen of the place and a friend of the college from its
foundation.

The sun was very hot that afternoon, and the services, beginning
at 5 o’clock, naturally ended in a collation, which was followed
by off-hand speeches, the singing of old-time songs, and music
from a brass band. Some references were made to the past, but
the prevailing thought was of gratitude to God for what He has
wrought, of the duties of the hour, and of preparation for the
auspicious future. Twelve years ago the corner-stone of Foster Hall
was laid, in the days of turmoil, fear and violence. The first
college building, now called Swayne Hall, was begun nearly thirty
years ago; and it is a noteworthy fact that one who worked as a
slave on that structure is the brick contractor of this, while his
home to-day is the place owned by his master at the time of the
surrender. The history of this man, who is a pillar in the college
church, as well as an influential citizen among both blacks and
whites, shows something of the possibilities and hopefulness of
this Southern work. More of it is to be done, and it is a privilege
to have a hand in it.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORTH CAROLINA CONFERENCE.

REV. ALFRED CONNET.

This Conference, organized two years ago at Raleigh, held its
third meeting with Bethany Church at McLeansville. The churches
were all represented. Rev. Islay Walden and his delegate, Deacon
Potter, together with three others, came fifty miles in a one-horse
wagon to attend the Conference. One of the party, Mrs. Hill, now
a widow, has had twelve children, forty grand-children and twelve
great-grand-children. She had never seen the cars nor heard a
railroad whistle till she came to the Conference.

The opening sermon was preached by Rev. David Peebles, of Dudley,
from John vii. 37. On Friday the Conference organized by electing
Rev. G. S. Smith, of Raleigh, Moderator, and re-electing Rev. David
Peebles, Clerk. The morning meeting for prayer and reports from the
churches was a precious season.

Rev. Mr. Peebles discussed Church and Sunday-school Singing and
Pictorial Preaching; Rev. W. H. Ellis, Children for Christ; Rev.
G. S. Smith, the A. M. A. Work and National Council. The sermon
Friday night was by Rev. Islay Walden; text, the first Psalm.
Saturday afternoon the Conference held an experience meeting, in
which some very interesting and touching reminiscences were given,
particularly that of the death and burial of the martyr, Rev. Mr.
Luke, related by Mr. Peebles. While this was in progress, Mr. James
Gilmore, who sold the A. M. A. the grounds for this mission, came
in, was made an honorary member, and sat, an interested listener,
until the close.

Saturday night, the Conference held a rousing temperance meeting
and took strong ground by a unanimous vote in favor of total
abstinence, the use of unfermented wine at communion, and in favor
of prohibition, as submitted to the people of this State by the
last legislature for their ratification next August. The leading
temperance speech was made by Deacon Jones, of Raleigh, whose
grave was gratuitously dug for him at Chapel Hill some years ago
by the Ku Klux, but which he declined to occupy. He tells us the
Congregational Church at Raleigh is known as the prohibition church.

On the Sabbath the Sunday-school occupied the hour from 10 to 11
a.m. Sermon at 11 by Dr. Roy on the Great Commission. Text, Matt.
xxviii. 18–20. In the afternoon one infant was baptized and nine
persons received into the church, the pastor, Rev. A. Connet,
officiating. Communion was administered by Revs. G. S. Smith and
David Peebles.

Sunday night was devoted to the cause of Missions. Rev. A. Connet,
for ten years in the employ of the A. H. M. S., presented the
cause of Home Missions. Rev. G. S. Smith presented in earnest and
eloquent words the cause of the A. M. A. He was followed by Rev.
J. E. Roy, D.D., who gave a clear outline of the discoveries and
missionary operations on the continent of Africa. He told us how
the Christian world is looking to the colored population of this
country to evangelize the “Dark Continent.”

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ORDINATION AT GOOD HOPE.

REV. H. M. LADD.

No little interest centered about the ordination of Kelly M. Kemp.
It took place at Good Hope Station, Sherbro’ Island, West Coast
of Africa, Sunday, April 10th.[A] Being the first ceremony of the
kind in which the church and community had ever participated, it
was naturally looked forward to by many, not only as a matter of
deep interest in itself, but also as the harbinger of a better
state of things for the enfeebled and almost discouraged church.
Yet the field was an important one and must not be given up. The
Lord had set His seal upon some faithful souls here, and they were
praying and hoping for better things. Here, in the little graveyard
adjoining the church, lay those who had given their lives that
Africa might be redeemed. Here, by their side, lay one of Africa’s
own sons, the gifted Barnabas Root, whose Christian graces of
character had endeared him to all who knew him, and whose brilliant
attainments had been to all the friends of the colored race at once
a promise and a fulfillment of their fondest expectations. Their
mute appeal, seconding the conviction that God had not forgotten
this station, was eloquent, and prevailed. Good Hope was not to be
given up. On the contrary, it was to be strengthened, so far as
human power could do so, with a good hope, true to its name, that
God would add His blessing in the fulfillment of the rich promises
of His grace.

The property of the mission here is on all sides acknowledged to
be the finest on the island. It consists of a large tract of land,
part of it well wooded, about a quarter of a mile wide and a mile
long, running back from the Sherbro’ River or Sound, and commanding
a fine view of its many beautiful islands, stretching across to
the native town of Bendoo on the opposite side. The mission house,
large and well built, the church and school-house, besides a large
number of “fakis,” or groups of native huts, are on this land. The
grounds in front of the mission house are neatly laid out with
gravel walks and shrubbery, and extend to the river road skirting
the bank, where lies the mission boat moored to its wharf. It may
be truly said of this place, in the words of the grand old hymn,
that

    “Every prospect pleases
    And only man is vile.”

The property was well enough, and there was work enough to be done
among the dense native population settled upon or near it; but an
ordained minister to be the pastor of the church, a married man,
a man fully qualified for the great and responsible work, one
after God’s own heart, earnest, energetic, efficient, spiritually
minded, with a paramount love for the lost souls of his own people,
was wanting. The good seed had been sown, but there was needed
some one to harrow it in, nurture the growth and reap the harvest.
In this extremity God raised up one who seems to be the right
man for the place. Mr. Kemp is a graduate of Lincoln University,
and ably represents the thorough and practical training of that
institution. With his coming and installation as pastor, the
struggling church took heart, and determined, forgetting those
things which were behind, to press forward toward those better
things which they believed were in store. The examination took
place on Saturday evening, April 9th, and was well attended, and
although Mr. Kemp was feeling somewhat unwell at the time he stood
the long and searching fire of questions, theological, wise and
otherwise, with credit to himself and with great satisfaction to
the council, which, besides the “my-doxy” members, was composed
of representatives of various shades of theological opinion. This
fact indeed formed one of the pleasantest features of the council.
Here in the midst of a heathenism rendered fouler and more corrupt
by contact with an immoral civilization, and in a common work
for a common Master and a common people, party names were wholly
forgotten. One of the best and most earnest prayers that I have
ever heard was offered on this occasion by an excellent brother
of the Church Missionary Society, and he had no book before him
or gown on his back. The ordination exercises on Sabbath morning
were attended by a full house, while a deep sense of the solemnity
of the hour seemed to pervade every heart. The Holy Spirit was
manifestly present to sanctify the new relationship with the
outpouring of His grace. As appropriate to the occasion, the third
chapter of the First Epistle to Timothy was read. The sermon, full
of earnestness and spiritual power, was preached by Brother Evans
of the Shengay Mission. The charge to the people by Brother Jowett
was partially historical, reviewing the course of the church in
times past, and counseling sound wisdom for the future. Brother
Nurse, who knew something of the wants of the field, gave the
charge to the pastor; and Brother Jackson, of whose growing work
at Avery Station a fuller account will be given at another time,
as his co-worker in the mission, very feelingly gave his brother
missionary the right hand of fellowship; while it was my privilege
to offer the ordaining prayer. After the benediction, pronounced
by their new pastor, the people, with tears of gladness in their
eyes, flocked around him and his good wife, whom they had already
learned to love, for a hearty hand-shaking, which, as some one has
truly said, is also one of the means of grace. Can it be necessary,
after this little glimpse, so hurriedly taken, of the hopeful
relation just entered into, to ask the sympathy and prayers of all
the friends of missions for the blessings of God to rest upon the
new missionary and his work at Sherbro’ Island? He will have many
trying hours in that dark land, where there are worse things to be
feared and harder to be contended against than physical death. But
the promises are his as well as ours, and unitedly we can plead
them at the throne of grace. The promises of God include Africa.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] The location of Mr. Kemp was a matter of such importance,
considering the fewness of the workers and the demands of the
work, that it called for and received the most careful thought and
attention. After considering the subject in its various bearings,
and after duly consulting with all the persons concerned, it was
finally decided to station Mr. Kemp and his wife at Good Hope.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

_Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association._

PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D.D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
Stone, D.D., Robert B. Forman, Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon. F. F. Low,
Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D.D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey,
D.D., Jacob S. Taber, Esq.

DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D.D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
Baker, James M. Haven. Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
A. L. Van Blarcon, Esq., George Harris, Esq., and the Secretary ex
officio.

SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARIES.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

Since my last communication was forwarded, the four Mission Schools
in San Francisco have held their anniversary at Bethany Church, a
crowded audience being held attentive and interested till nearly
10 o’clock. An address delivered on that occasion by Jee Gam
was forwarded in advance of delivery, and published in the last
MISSIONARY. Last evening, Sunday, May 22d, the anniversary of the
Sacramento Mission was held at the First Congregational Church in
that city. The _Record-Union_, the leading paper at our capital,
devotes nearly a whole column to a notice of it, including a
verbatim report of the address by our helper Lem Chung. I am sure
that I cannot put our columns in the MISSIONARY to better use this
month than by reproducing that address entire.


ADDRESS BY LEM CHUNG.

DEAR FRIENDS: I am a Chinese. Why I not be a heathen? A few years
ago I didn’t know anything about the Bible. I didn’t know about
Christ. I had not heard of the true and living God; but I heard of
this land, where so many of my countrymen came and I come too, and
here I found Christian people who loved Christ, and for His sake
love me and show me the way of life. When I first hear of the Bible
I didn’t think I like it. I said: If no other books, I don’t care
for this one; I don’t want such a book as this. I thought I didn’t
need any more gods, for I said I have all kinds in the temple, and
I could see them if I go there, but the God I hear of in America
I cannot see! When I learn in the Bible what it says about the
heathen gods that are made of silver and gold, the works of men’s
hands—how they have mouth and cannot speak, eyes cannot see, ears
and cannot hear, noses cannot smell, and hands but handle not—I
learn also the God of the Bible made all things and sees us all
the time, every thing is ruled by His hands. We must fear him, for
He is powerful and glorious, but the idols is unwise. I am obliged
to leave the idols and come to worship the true God, and trying to
observe His law and commandments the Bible shows me how sinful I
am, and if Christ had not come to the world to save me I am sure
get lost.

After I was converted I study the Bible more and more and learn
great deal, great wonder to me. Now the Bible is a precious book. I
am glad I accept the Saviour for my Saviour and His God for my God.
“I pass from death unto life, from darkness and bondage of sin into
the glorious light and liberty of a new creature in Christ Jesus.”
What I expect to do if I still be a heathen? I must be bound to
worshiping idols, bow down to all kinds of gods; great fear to them
and not dare to touch them. Whenever I enter the temple, cannot
without three bow to the idols.

The people of China are great superstitious; they believe every
things whatever chance to hear or think. Let me tell you how some
of the people doing when any of the family getting sick: They have
a doctor, but they think some kind of spirit troubling them, it may
chance their ancient father or friends or enemies who died before.
They think they must offer something for them to eat that they
may go away, or some times they go into the temple to pray to the
idols. They hope the idols may tell what are the reason with the
sick that they find out how they may do and get well. How the idols
can tell them? Let me make known to you: A piece of wood has been
smoothen in the shape of a banana and cut in equal size the longest
way. This they throw down before the idols that they may give a
certain condition according which they request before; may be they
say: If this is the spirit of an enemy let this pieces of wood fall
both the same way, or some other way, they may choose, till they
find out what is the matter and offer sacrifice that the spirit may
leave off troubling and let the sick get well. The thief can pray
the idols that he may get help to steal! The gambler can ask that
he may win the money; the robber that he may be able to get what
he wishing for. If any kind of business going to be taken up the
idols must first be asked about it. Every one is sure to say, “Now,
idols, if you help me good, I going to bring you something nice to
eat when I get success.”

When I was coming over to Cal., suddenly a storm came up, the wind
violent sweeping over the great ocean; the water dashing high upon
the boat. The sailors all at work to make the ship more safe. The
passengers all trembling with fear and desperate to arrive in San
Francisco. Is there any chance to be rescued from the storm? Yes,
soon there was heard one of our number calling: “Whosoever man
in this ship have any money let us have some of it, that we may
sacrifice to the goddess of the sea that she may deliver us out of
the storm and let us arrive safe to the land of Cal.” I had a small
sum of money. I gave half of it; others gave also. The man cast it
into the water and asked the goddess that she let no harm come to
us, and we promise more sacrifice if we get here.

There are many reasons for going before the idols, but I have no
chance to tell so much as I like to. A few weeks since I was in San
Francisco. I found some of the people from the town near my home in
China, getting money to send and build a temple over there. Every
one who give to help build it can have their names hang up in the
temple, but if any one who give $20 to $50 they have a present, and
at the time of first worship or dedication a band of music to honor
them on their way home. Some of them asked me to give, but I said,
“No, I cannot, I rather put money in the missionary fund.” They
said, “Your parents will feel sorrow and disgrace if they not see
your name; but if you don’t want your name you can give and have
your parent’s name put there; no one of your Christian men know it;
you can be a Christian just the same.” I said, “I do not wish to
help my parents to sin; I don’t believe idol worship and I cannot
help about it. If I be a Christian I must try to live like one.”

There is a great difference in the religion taught by the Saviour
and that of the heathen. It is great change to me to try to be a
Christian, to know the true God who sees us all the time. I have
worked many things for the idols. I feel thankful I shall do so no
more. Before I come to the light my life was gloomy, miserable,
hopeless; always was fearing the evil spirit going to trouble me;
but I don’t fear them now.

Would I go back to idolatry? No; the Bible says, “Thou shall not
make unto thee any graven image, or likeness of anything that is
in heaven above or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down thyself to them nor
serve them.” I cannot serve idols again; but I will try to serve
my heavenly Father, and bring all I can to bow down to Him. I wish
every one in China and America knew about the Bible. I thank all
Christian people that they led me to the true way. I hope you will
pray that I may always be faithful, and at last receive the crown
of life and dwell with God in the world to come.

       *       *       *       *       *




WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Room 20, Congregational House, Beacon St., Boston.

  MISS NATHALIE LORD, _Secretary_.
  MISS ABBY W. PEARSON, _Treasurer_.

       *       *       *       *       *


We are glad to bring before our friends this month the work among
the colored people in Washington, D.C., as it has been carried
on there by Mrs. C. B. Babcock. In her field, as in that of our
other Southern missionaries, the industrial work occupies a
prominent position. Here the women and children learn lessons
of practical value to them, as they are taught to cut and make
their own garments and repair old ones, while at the same time
they are instructed in truths of the highest importance. In a
letter recently received, Mrs. Babcock writes of this work: “The
ladies of the Congregational church have given 180 yards material
for the industrial work, and a few of them gave a supper to the
women’s class, numbering fifty. The women have made 102 new
garments besides mending 100 old ones during these three months.
This has been of untold help to them and their families.” Her
girl’s sewing-school numbers 135. The natural outgrowth of these
schools has been prayer-meetings for the women and young girls
respectively. “The mother’s prayer-meetings have been deeply
interesting of late,” she tells us.

There is much need of temperance work all through the South, and it
is encouraging to read of the new Band of Hope in Washington. “It
has succeeded beyond my expectations,” Mrs. Babcock writes, “not
only interesting the colored churches about us, but also bringing
in, as officers and helpers, some of the colored public school
teachers and students from Howard University. There has been a good
deal of enthusiasm about our meetings. Of course, our exercises
must be made interesting, and I work hard for it, but _it pays_,
when I see such audiences as we’ve had. And then I know that our
Scripture readings and lessons from the Temperance Catechism must
do good.”

Mrs. Babcock has worked in Washington in connection with the
Lincoln Memorial church, which was organized January 10th, and
Rev. S. P. Smith installed as pastor. Of this church she writes,
under date of June 3d: “Our little church is prospering, having
now twenty-one members, some being added as fruits of our revival.
* * Rev. Mr. Smith is greatly encouraged. I have made over an
old carpet for the platform, helped to buy chairs, Bible and
communion table, so that when our pulpit comes we shall be nicely
fixed. Our hall is very large and rather _dreary_ without any
pulpit furniture. Nobody knows but those who have worked in the
field, how great are the obstacles in the way of forming a colored
Congregational church. We have the same jealousy and bitter feeling
from the _churches around_ us that there is farther South.”

Speaking of the sickness and suffering among the colored people,
Mrs. Babcock says: “I feel that I’ve been greatly blessed in
having friends at the North respond so nobly to my appeals for
help. I have sold a great deal of clothing, and the money received
for it has done much good.”

In connection with this allusion to the generosity of Northern
friends, it may be well to mention that in the last six months
boxes and barrels of clothing, sewing materials, etc., have been
sent through this Association to the amount of $1,674.00, and, in
addition, books and papers valued at $93.88.

Since the annual meeting in October, six of the auxiliaries alone
have contributed $1,228.70, the largest contribution being from the
Second church in Dorchester, of $445.70.

We would gratefully acknowledge, too, the hearty response to the
appeal for Sunday-school papers for the colored schools in the
South. We have on hand still a long list of Sunday-schools waiting
for supply.

Receipts of the Association from April 25th to May 31st, 1881:

  From Auxiliaries       $349.45
    ”  Donations          174.50
    ”  Life Members        60.00
    ”  Annual Members      12.00
                          ——————
                         $595.95

Donation of Case’s Maps of United States, British Provinces, etc.,
from S. M. H.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE STORY OF REBECCA.

BY REV. J. E. ROY, D.D.

The following incident in the life of a freedwoman affected me very
much. Let me tell you her history.

In the old times, Col. Holly, of Middle Tennessee, was known as a
kind master; but failing in business, his slaves had to be sold;
then, hoping to retrieve his fortune, removed to Arkansas, taking
with him two little slave girls, one of whom was Rebecca, four and
a half years old. Here she grew up in his family, and was married
to a man who belonged to another master, and who hired his time,
paying one-half his wages as a mechanic.

In Tennessee her mother was, of course, taken away to another
family. Her father, who had not belonged to Col. Holly, had already
been sold to the Red River country, where he soon after died.

Recently, at Little Rock, I was a guest for five days in the house
of Rebecca. Her husband owned his home, together with two other
places. Her only son and a son-in-law were teaching school, and she
was mothering the two little girls of her deceased daughter. On the
centre table were a large family Bible and a copy of Shakespeare,
both rich in binding and illustration; and on the walls were some,
not costly, but tasteful and suggestive pictures, one of which
represented Abraham Lincoln, Charles Sumner and John Brown. Her
deportment was that of a lady; her company enjoyable. She said she
remembered well the time and the scene when she was taken from her
mother. The screaming was yet ringing in her ears. She bore in mind
the last words of her mother, as she put a little red flannel shawl
round her neck: “God bless my child! God bless my child!” She had
in memory also her own crying and bursting of heart. So, too, was
fresh in her mind, her weeping of nights in the new home, until,
upon the imperative chiding of master and mistress, she was obliged
to repress that relief of hidden sorrow.

Her young mistress, who was of about the same age, upon growing up,
was sent to the High School of the city, and she herself was kept
at home, and not allowed even to learn to read the Bible, out of
which she was to be judged at the last day. She did experience a
keen sense of injustice and of murmuring; but all of that she was
obliged to suppress.

But what had become of her mother? “After freedom,” twenty-one
and a half years since the parting, she came over to look up the
daughter. But how shall there be an unmistakable recognition? Col.
Holly and his wife have both passed away. Fortunately, a woman,
who came over with the family, still survived. She brought the
mother to the home of Rebecca, and pointing to her said, “That is
your daughter.” Then such hugging, kissing, and shouting of joy
and weeping, as is the sensation of the neighborhood. I am sure
that I never heard a daughter speak with more enthusiasm of love,
concerning her mother, than did Mrs. Solomon. She thought she
would have known her anyhow; and her mother half came to the same
conclusion when with such accuracy she depicted the scene of the
parting.

And now she must go to visit the old family. Though the master
and mistress are gone, in their place is left the daughter, whom
she had nursed upon her own breast, and who is now married to a
Northern man. Old times and scenes and friends are talked over, but
soon she gives vent to the pent-up sorrows of the mother’s heart.
With all the intensity of a great nature, she told of the grief at
her separation from Rebecca. It was as though she had dropped blood
from her heart; she went weeping and mourning every where. “I wept
as I was making the bread, and _them that eat the most of my bread
eat the most of my heart_.” So David had said: “Thou feedest them
with the bread of tears.” The old colored people told her she must
pray and the Lord would remove all that. In her prayer it seemed as
though there were deep waters and high mountains between her and
her child, and that the Lord would have to send men and remove the
mountains, and make a way over the waters so that she could come
to her child; and now He had done it all, and brought her to tell
her story to the remnant of the old household. The young mistress,
while her husband walks the floor in deep and mute emotion, herself
bursts into tears, and as her only relief, declares: “My father was
such a man that he never would have done that thing if he had not
got broke.” “Oh,” said the sable matron, now rising up from the
crushing of her womanhood, “I never thought anything about what
_caused_ it.” As Rebecca came to freedom she tried to learn, but
her work for bread and the clumsiness of her unused powers were
so great, she desisted, and now her Bible is read to her by the
children.

Will you who have heard this true story help the American
Missionary Association with your pennies and prayers, in their work
of educating these poor people?

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $132.04.

    Auburn. Mrs. B. J.                                        $1.00
    Bangor. First Cong. Ch.                                   19.37
    Bethel. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           8.60
    Brunswick. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Camden. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.00
    Kennebunk Port. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.
      $7.70; First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $5.50                   13.20
    North Yarmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         7.18
    Orono. Cong. Ch.                                           1.73
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc. $6; Infant
      Class, Cong. S. S., $2                                   8.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        43.96
    Waterford. S. E. Hersey                                    2.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $446.29.

    Acworth. Cong. Soc.                                       15.90
    Bath. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   7.00
    Bedford. Mrs. S. French, _for Student Aid,
      Williston Sch._                                          2.00
    Canterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            18.50
    East Jaffrey. Benj. Pierce                                 5.00
    Exeter. Second Ch.                                         5.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.61
    Hanover. Cong. Sab. Sch., by Chas. P. Chase,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           30.00
    Lebanon. Miss Mary L. Choate, to const. MRS.
      O. W. BALDWIN, L. M.                                    30.00
    Mason. Ladies, by Anna M. Hosmer, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        7.50
    Manchester. C. B. Southworth                              25.00
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.00
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20; Mrs. M. B.
      Pratt, $10                                              30.00
    Pembroke. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 11.13
    Plymouth. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        85.08
    Rindge. Cong Ch. and Soc.                                  2.17
    Rochester. “J. M. and Sister,” _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                            10.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.00
    Walpole. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. REV. FRED.
      L. ALLEN, L. M.                                         30.00
    Winchester. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               11.40
                                                             ——————
                                                            $376.29

    LEGACY.

    Gilsum. Estate of Mrs. Eunice F. Downing, by
      Sarah F. Hayward                                        70.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $446.29


  VERMONT, $110.33.

    Chelsea. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.00
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    Danby. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     2.30
    Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                16.88
    East Wallingford. Miss E. A. H., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         1.00
    Hinesburgh. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        11.00
    Lunenburgh. Chas. W. King                                  5.00
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Pawlet. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 9.81
    Pawlet. A. F.                                              1.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.34


  MASSACHUSETTS, $6,091.39.

    Andover. Francis H. Johnson, $100; C. L.
      Mills, $20                                             120.00
    Andover. G. W. W. Dove, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Ashfield. Henry Taylor                                     5.00
    Attleborough. Ebenezer Carpenter, _for Fisk
      U._ and to const. MRS. HATTIE E. CARPENTER,
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Barre. Evan. Ch. Sab. Sch.                                10.84
    Billingham. E. W., deceased, by J. T. Massey,
      Ex.                                                      0.75
    Blackstone. Mrs. Hannah Hodgson                            2.00
    Boston. J. T. Bailey, $100; Mrs. E. C. Ford,
      $25; “A Friend,” $10; Mrs. E. P. Eayrs, $5             140.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      _for Lady Missionaries in Southern States_             160.41
    Brimfield. Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    Brookline. S. B. White                                    10.00
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. of Pilgrim
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Refugees_
    Charlemont. E.G.                                           1.00
    Charlton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  4.68
    Chelsea. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $18.14;
      Third Cong. Ch. and Soc., $7.50                         25.64
    Conway. Cong. Ch.                                         34.65
    Clinton. First Evan. Ch. and Soc.                         75.00
    East Braintree. E. A. F.                                   0.50
    East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch.                         25.36
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              100.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.11
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        39.78
    Groton. Elizabeth Farnsworth                              20.00
    Halifax. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.06
    Holliston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            100.00
    Holliston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      Bbl. of C. _for Savannah, Ga._
    Hubbardston. “A Friend.”                                   5.00
    Hyde Park. Heart & Hand Soc., _for Athens,
      Ala._                                                   25.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Lee. J. W. B.                                              1.00
    Littleton. Mrs. James C. Houghton, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 7.00
    Lowell. Leonard Kimball, _for Fisk U._                   100.00
    Lowell. John St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       55.75
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                    3,500.00
    Millbury. M. E. Bond                                       3.50
    Monson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                57.51
    Montague. Cong. Ch.                                       23.65
    Natick. Mrs. S. E. Hammond, _for Tougaloo U._             25.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. I. H. Bartlett, Jr.                     20.00
    Newburyport. Prospect St. Ch. and Soc.,
      $26.87; North Cong. Ch. and Soc., $22.31                49.18
    Newton. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., to const. MRS. D. L. FURBER, L. M.                 30.00
    Newton Centre. Mrs. J. B. H.                               0.50
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C.,
      and $1 _for freight, for Atlanta, Ga._                   1.00
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                25.00
    Newtonville. “M. W. M.”                                    1.00
    North Abington. Bbl. of C., by N. Noyes, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Northampton. “A Friend.”                                 100.00
    Northampton. Mrs. F. E. G. Stoddard, Box of
      Books, _for Theo. Dept., Talladega C._, and
      $7.80 _for freight_                                      7.80
    North Amherst. Friends, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              7.00
    North Amherst. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of Bedding and C., _for Atlanta,
      Ga._
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             4.00
    North Somerville. “A Friend.”                              1.00
    Norwood. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Orange. Central Ev. Cong. Ch.                             10.35
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         12.78
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. J. F.
      MOULTON, L. M.                                          25.00
    Rutland. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Salem. Geo. Driver                                         2.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. Robert Tobey, _for Indian
      Student Aid, Hampton Inst._                              5.00
    Shelburne. Cong. Ch.                                      56.79
    Somerville. A. R.                                          0.50
    Southfield. Mrs. E. B. C.                                  1.00
    South Framingham. So. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 204.00
    South Natick. Young Eliot’s Miss. Circle, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               5.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      (ad’l) to const. MRS. JUSTINA A. TINKHAM and
      MISS JANE ELLEN LOUD, L. M’s                            46.00
    Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        170.35
    Springfield. Memorial Ch., $52.82; North Cong.
      Ch. and Soc. $25                                        77.82
    Springfield. Ira Merrill, $5; Mrs. Ira
      Merrill, $5, _for rebuilding Tougaloo, Miss._           10.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              $26.28
    Taunton. Union Ch. and Soc.                                9.80
    Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  5.00
    Warren. Mrs. Joseph Ramsdell, $5: _for Chinese
      M._, and $1 _for Mag._                                   6.00
    Westborough. Freedmen’s Miss. Assn., Bbl. of
      C., _for Savannah, Ga._
    West Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.00
    Westminster. Bbl. of C. _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    West Roxbury. South Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              66.06
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                15.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     109.00
    Worcester. Salem St. Cong. Ch.                            41.23
    Worthington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.76
    —— Three Bbl’s C., _for Marion, Ala._
    —— “A Friend.”                                           100.00


  RHODE ISLAND, $44.00.

    East Providence. Cong. Ch.                                20.00
    Pawtucket. Mrs. C. Blodgett                               10.00
    Providence. Ladies, by Miss Marsh, _for Byron,
      Ga._                                                    14.00


  CONNECTICUT, $8,428.78.

    Birmingham. W. E. Downes, _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                          100.00
    Brooklyn. “E. F. B.”                                      25.00
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch.                                      17.05
    Colebrook River. Miles Gillett                             2.00
    East Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
    Ekonk. Elizabeth W. Kasson                                10.00
    East Windsor. Mrs. Sarah L. Wells                          5.00
    Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                         20.68
    Hartford. Mrs. Ellery Hills, $350; A. S. K., $1          351.00
    Hartford. George Kellogg, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    Hartford. Benev. Soc. of Asylum Hill Cong.
      Ch., 2 Bbls. and a Box of Bedding and New
      C., and $3.90 _for freight, for Atlanta, Ga._            3.90
    Huntington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.00
    Kent. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     21.00
    Mansfield Centre. First Cong. Ch.                          8.00
    Mill Brook. Mrs. E. R. A.                                  1.00
    Orange. Rev. E. E. Rogers, _for freight_                   2.00
    New Britain. H. S. Walter, _for Straight U._              70.00
    New Haven. North Ch., $180.64; Mrs. S. A.
      Thomas, $5                                             185.64
    New Hartford. North Cong. Ch.                             20.10
    North Cornwall. Cong. Ch.                                 13.82
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch.                              100.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U., and to const._ ELIZABETH B.
      HUNTINGTON, SUSAN D. HUNTINGTON and JOHN P.
      HUNTINGTON, L. M’s                                     100.00
    Plantsville. Dea. T. Higgins, _for Tougaloo U._           25.00
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                      18.16
    South Coventry. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                    10.00
    South Windsor. Second. Cong. Ch.                          24.23
    Rockville. First. Cong. Ch.                              111.00
    Roxbury. Hervey M. Booth                                  10.00
    Warehouse Point. “Friend.”                                10.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.29
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                18.35
    —— “A Friend in Conn.”                                    50.00
    —— “A Friend in Conn.”                                    10.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,501.28

    LEGACIES.

    New Haven. Estate of Mrs. Mary A. Hotchkiss,
      by Richard E. Rice, Ex.                                470.00
    Orange. Estate of Mrs. Huldah Coe, by Leman W.
      Cutler, Ex.                                          6,457.50
                                                           ————————
                                                          $8,428.78


  NEW YORK, $878.82.

    Baldwinsville. Howard Carter                              10.00
    Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., ($30 of which to
      const. SAMUEL S. MARPLES, L. M.) $86.48;
      East Cong. Ch., $84.72; Church of the
      Pilgrims, $72; “A Friend,” $50                         293.20
    Buffalo. Two Bbls. C., _for Tougaloo, Miss._
    Cambria. Cong. Ch.                                       $15.00
    Candor. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                        1.00
    Columbus. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           4.50
    Crown Point. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     39.41
    Danby. First Cong. Ch., bal. to const. WILLIAM
      E. CHAPMAN, L. M.                                       18.00
    Eden. Mrs. H. McNett                                       2.00
    Fairport. Mrs. Rev. J. Butler                             10.00
    Gainesville. ——                                            1.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                            12.50
    Groton. Dr. C. Chapman                                     6.00
    Homer. Cong. Ch.                                          15.00
    Lake George. “G. H.”                                       1.00
    New York. Hon. Wm. E. Dodge, $200; Mrs. Wm. E.
      Dodge, $100; Robbins Battell, $25, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                               325.00
    New York. J. Goetschins                                    1.50
    Orient. Miss H. M. W.                                      1.00
    Parishville. Cong. Ch.                                     6.35
    Penn Yan. Mrs. D. B. Prosser                              15.00
    Perry Centre. Cong. Ch.                                   20.76
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Sherburne. Ladies, Bbl. of C., and $2.60 _for
      freight, for Talladega Ala._                             2.60
    Smyrna. First Cong. Ch.                                   20.00
    Turin. Mrs. Martha Woolworth                               5.00
    Verona. Cong. Ch.                                         18.00


  NEW JERSEY, $108.50.

    Boonton. G. W. Esten Bbl. of Books and Papers.
    Bound Brook. Cong. Ch.                                    13.50
    Newark. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
    Newark. Collection at General Association _for
      Lincoln Memorial Church, Washington D.C._               75.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $25.00.

    Hyde Park. Thomas Eynon and Mrs J. L. Eynon               25.00


  OHIO, $463.61.

    Ashtabula. James Hall                                      3.00
    Castalia. Cong. Ch. $6.85 and Sab. Sch., $2.15             9.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. S. A. Bradbury, $30; Rev. R.
      B. Johns, $5                                            35.00
    Crab Creek. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                5.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch., to const. REV. JAMES
      B. STOCKING, ROLLIN B. CARY and ALEXANDER
      LAMBERTON, L. Ms.                                      111.67
    Geneva. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo
      U._                                                     36.50
    Huntsburgh. Capt. A. E. Millard, $5; Mrs. M.
      E. Millard, $5                                          10.00
    Kelley’s Island. Cong. Ch., _for Fisk U._                 20.70
    Kent. Cong. Ch.                                           12.12
    Marietta. Cong. Ch.                                       57.70
    Mechanicsburgh. Rev. N. H.                                 1.00
    Medina. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C., and bal. to const._ MISS ELLEN
      J. MASON, L. M.                                         10.00
    Newark. “A Friend,” $50; MRS. J. C. WHEATON,
      $25 adl. to const. herself L. M.                        75.00
    North Benton. Simon Hartzel, _for Talladega C._            5.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 11.30
    Paddy’s Run. Cong. Ch.                                    27.00
    Parkman. Dea. J. S. H.                                     1.00
    Strongsville. L. Freeman, _for furnishing a
      room, Tougaloo U._                                      25.00
    Tallmadge. Mrs. D. B. T., by J. P.                         0.62
    Toledo. Second Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Willoughby. Bbl. Of C., Miss M. P. Hastings,
      $2 _for freight, for Tougaloo, Miss._                    2.00


  INDIANA, $1.00.

    Orland. Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._                       1.00


  ILLINOIS, $2,417.22.

    Chicago. C. G. Hammond, $1,000; Bethany Ch.,
      $15.37; Rev. E. N. Andrews, $5                       1,020.37
    Chicago. Jubilee Singers, special contribution
      at First Cong. Ch., _for Chapel, Nashville,
      Tenn._                                                 111.34
    Chicago. James W. Porter, $10; Neddie, Charles
      and Huntington Blatchford, $9, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        19.00
    Chicago. N. E. Cong. Ch., Ladies Miss. Soc.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                     11.41
    Chicago. Union Park Cong. Ch., _for Emerson
      Inst._                                                   2.00
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         22.45
    Dunlap. Elmira Jones                                      10.00
    Geneseo. H. Davison                                        2.00
    Highland Park. L. S. B.                                    0.50
    La Fayette. “P. M. H.”                                     1.00
    Lawn Ridge. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                5.00
    Lyndon. Mrs A. H., $1; Mrs. M. W. 50c.                     1.50
    Metamora. “Friends” by A. C. Rouse, _for
      rebuilding Tougaloo, Miss._                             20.75
    Newark. Horace Day                                         5.00
    Princeton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 7.43
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.                               120.86
    Seward. Cong. Ch., $22; and Sab. Sch., $8.
      (_Incorrectly ack. in June._)
    Seward. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                   2.00
    Waukegan. Young People’s Miss. Soc., _for
      Emerson Inst._                                          10.00
    Wyoming. Cong. Ch.                                         4.61
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,417.22

    LEGACY.

    Galesburg. Estate of Mrs. W. C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard, Ex.                             1,000.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           2,417.22


  MICHIGAN, $228.39.

    Battle Creek. Presb. and Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               6.00
    Battle Creek. Ladies, Box of C., and $2.21
      _for Freight, for Talladega, Ala._                       2.21
    Calumet. J. H.                                             0.50
    Canandaigua. Cong. Ch.                                     4.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Detroit. Miss J. Higley, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             4.00
    Frankfort. Mrs. J. B. C.                                   0.50
    Kalamo. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch. (ad’l), to const.
      WILLIS A. ANDERSON, GEORGE D. ALLEN, MRS.
      LOTTIE WARTZ, MILES B. MILLER, and MRS.
      ELIZA OLIVER, L. Ms.                                   100.00
    Leland. F. C.                                              1.00
    Milford. Mrs. E. G.                                        1.00
    Morenci. Cong. Ch.                                        10.00
    Northport. Cong. Ch.                                       8.43
    Olivet. “W. J. H.”                                        25.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        10.75


  WISCONSIN, $180.33.

    Arena. Cong. Ch.                                           5.70
    Beloit. J. E. T.                                           0.50
    Columbus. Calvin Baker                                     5.00
    Milwaukee. Mrs. Wm. Millard, _for Emerson
      Inst._                                                   5.00
    Racine. A. E. N., _for Indian M._                          1.00
    River Falls. “S. W.,” $19; “W. M. N.,” $6                 25.00
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch. $24.53, and Sab. Sch. $4             28.53
    Sparta. Individuals, _for Mag._                            1.50
    Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch., to const. ALFRED H.
      DUPREE and EMERY A. SWAN, L. Ms                         75.00


  IOWA, $125.97.

    Cedar Falls. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing
      a room, Talladega C._                                   12.00
    Cherokee Co. Second Cong. Ch.                              5.00
    Chester Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 45.25
    Creston. H. W. Perrigo                                    10.00
    Creston. Pilgrim Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             0.50
    Floris. “Mary and Martha.”                                 5.00
    Garden. ——, _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans,
      La._                                                     5.00
    Logan. Cong. Ch.                                           8.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                             $16.87
    Meriden. Cong. Ch.                                         3.35
    Meriden. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            2.00
    Quasqueton. Rev. A. Manson                                 5.00
    Storm Lake. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                        2.00
    West Liberty. Mrs. L. K. Sesson, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       6.00


  MISSOURI, $1.00.

    Saint Louis. Mrs. M. K. J.                                 1.00


  MINNESOTA, $37.07.

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $31.37; Second
      Cong. Ch., $1.20                                        32.57
    Rose Creek. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        2.50


  NEBRASKA, $3.00.

    Clarksville. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00


  COLORADO, $25.00.

    Colorado Springs. Young People’s Mission
      Circle, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._, and
      bal. to const. MRS. J. W. PICKETT, L. M.                25.00


  CALIFORNIA, $150.00.

    Oakland. Mrs. E. A. Gray, _for School-house in
      Georgia_                                               150.00


  OREGON, $38.50.

    Albany. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch., Prof. J. W. Marsh,
      $20; Capt. E. R. Merriman, $2; I. L. Smith
      and others, $1.50                                       23.50


  WASHINGTON TER., $5.51.

    Fidalgo. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., ($3.60 of which
      _for School-house in Ga._)                               5.00
    Skokomish. Rev. M. E.                                      0.51


  MARYLAND, $2.00.

    Emmitsburgh. David Gamble                                  2.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $112.93.

    Wilmington. Williston Sch., Tuition                      107.93
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $247.80.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         247.80


  TENNESSEE, $642.80.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        250.00
    Chattanooga. G. R. _for furnishing room,
      Tougaloo U._                                             1.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          207.15
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      159.65
    Nashville. Fisk University, Society for the
      Evangelization of Africa, _for Student Aid,
      Mendi M._                                               25.00


  GEORGIA, $1,053.08.

    Atlanta. Peabody Fund, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            400.00
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition $243.30, Rent, $3          246.30
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition $100.10; Rent $12           112.10
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Bainbridge. H. R. S.                                       1.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           62.85
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Marietta. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     30.00
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                     27.36
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $125; Rent $10           135.00
    Savannah. Cong. Ch., $6.19, and Sab. Sch.,
      $2.28                                                    8.47


  ALABAMA, $478.55.

    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           156.75
    Mobile. Emersonian Mission Band, ($20 of which
      _for Mendi M._)                                         45.60
    Montgomery. City Fund                                   $210.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          22.35
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          35.85
    Talladega. Wm. Savery, $5; D. Johnson, $2; N.
      L., $1, _for rebuilding barn, Talladega,
      Ala._                                                    8.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $119.45.

    Greenwood. By “R. W. J.,” _for rebuilding
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        11.00
    Jackson. Friends, by A. B. W., _for
      rebuilding, Tougaloo, Miss._                             2.10
    Madison. “Friends,” by A. B. W., _for
      rebuilding Tougaloo, Miss._                              9.60
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $73.75; Rent,
      $20                                                     93.75
    Tougaloo. Rev. G. S. Pope, _for Student Aid_               3.00


  LOUISIANA, $148.15.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        141.50
    New Orleans. Mrs. F. D., $1; Mrs. D. S., Mrs.
      C. J. and Mrs. B. C. 50c. ea.; Other sums by
      Rev. W. S. A. $4.15                                      6.65


  TEXAS, $318.24.

    Austin. Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Tuition               204.85
    Austin. Rev. W. E. Brooks, $92.09; Rev. E. B.
      Wright D.D., and wife $10; “A Friend,” $5;
      Eggleston Brothers, $5, _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                          112.09
    Corpus Christi. First Cong. Ch.                            1.30


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Unionville. Rev. Edward Ebbs                               5.00


  SWITZERLAND, $19.31.

    Geneva. Legacy of Henri Serment, by W. Serment            19.31


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $1,000.00.

    Sandwich Islands. “A Friend,”                          1,000.00


  LEGACIES, $210.00.

    Sundry Estates                                           210.00


  INCOME FUND, $278.87.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               278.87
                                                           ————————
        Total for May                                     24,577.93
        Total from Oct. 1st to May 31st                 $150,487.84


  FOR TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

    Portland, Me. C. M. Seales, _for furnishing a
      room_                                                   25.00
    Plainfield, N.H. Mrs. Hannah Stevens                      25.00
    Norwich, Conn. “A Friend.”                               400.00
    Plainville, Conn. Mrs. Clapp                               5.00
    Thomaston, Conn. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Mrs.
      Horace A. Potter, Sec., $13, and Bbl. of C.             13.00
    Watertown, Conn. Alma de F. Curtiss and Fannie
      E. Curtiss, by Mrs. Mary F. Curtiss                    100.00
    LeRoy, N.Y. Miss D. A. Phillips, _for
      furnishing a room_                                      25.00
                                                           ————————
        Total                                                593.00
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to April
      30th                                                 4,264.71
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,857.71


  FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

    New Jersey. “Anti-Slavery Friend”                        515.00
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to April
      30th                                                20,098.76
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $20,613.76
                                                         ==========

                                      H. W. Hubbard, _Treas._,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R.I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D.D., R.I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., N.J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D.D., D.C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D.D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N.Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Oregon.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D.D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M.D., N.H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Minn.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D.D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D.D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D., D.C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D.D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D.D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N.Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N.J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., N.Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N.Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    J. A. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,
    CHAS L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less
than twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be
advisory, and the Treasurer ex-officio, members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counseling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor
and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold
their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit; repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




The American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane
and Christian policy towards the INDIANS. It has also a mission in
AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—in Va., 1; N.C., 6; S.C., 2; Ga., 13; Ky.,
6; Tenn., 4; Ala., 14; La., 17; Miss., 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 2.
_Among the Indians_, 1. Total 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.;
and Austin, Texas, 8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington,
Raleigh, N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon,
Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis,
Tenn., 12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284;
among the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total,
330. STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75;
in other studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches—the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office, as below:

  NEW YORK       H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer, 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON         Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis’t Sec., Room 21
                   Congregational House.
  CHICAGO        Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis’t Sec., 112 West Washington
                   Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent, gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath Schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament, are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The will should be attested by three witnesses [in some States
three are required—in other States only two], who should write
against their names, their places of residence [if in cities,
their street and number]. The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said [A. B.] as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




              COPY OF THE REVISED NEW TESTAMENT FREE.

During the coming month we will send free by mail a copy of the
Revised Edition of the New Testament (Oxford Edition, limp cloth,
red edges), a very handsome book, to any subscriber who will renew
his subscription to the WITNESS now, by sending us $1.50 by money
order, bank draft, or registered letter. Even if subscription
is not due until next year, by remitting the amount now, the
subscription will be extended and the Testament sent at once. This
is the edition authorized by the English and American committees,
and it contains a history of the revision and an appendix giving
the list of American corrections which were not concurred in by the
English committee.

A club of three copies of WITNESS for a year, directed separately,
will be sent for $4 remitted direct to this office, and also three
copies of this Testament.

A club of six GEMS OF POETRY for a year will be $4, and three
copies of Revised New Testament will be sent gratis with it.

A club of nine SABBATH READING will be sent for a year for $4, and
three copies of Revised New Testament gratis.

All directed separately and all postpaid.

Address,

                           JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,
                                _No. 21 Vandewater Street, N.Y._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            BISCOTINE.

A most excellent, healthy and invigorating food for infants and
invalids. It is prepared from sweetened bread and other nutritious
substances, reduced to a fine powder so as to render them easily
soluble in milk or water.

As an article of common diet for infants, particularly those
suffering from delicate constitution, weak intestines, or looseness
of the bowels, it will be found to give health and strength with
more certainty than the crude substances now in use, and not, like
them, liable to sour on the stomach.

                           DELLUC & CO.,

             Importing and Dispensing French Chemists,

                     635 BROADWAY, N.Y. CITY.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        WHITE and DECORATED

         French China and English Porcelain at Low Prices.

  Fine White French China Dinner Sets, 149 pieces       $30 00
  Fine White French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces             7 00
  Fine Gold-band French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces         8 50
  Richly Decorated French China Tea Sets, 44 pieces      12 00
  Chamber Sets, 11 pieces, $4.00; white                   3 25
  White English Porcelain Dinner Sets, 100 pieces        14 00
  Silver plated dinner Knives, per doz.                   3 00

                 ALSO ALL HOUSE-FURNISHING GOODS.

Illustrated Catalogue and Price-List mailed free on application.
Estimates furnished.

              C. L. Hadley, Cooper Inst., N.Y. City.

Orders boxed and placed on Car or Steamer, free of charge. Sent C.
O. D. or P. O. Money Order.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                  =J. & R. LAMB=, 59 Carmine St.
                             NEW YORK.
                      ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS

                  MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                               MEMORIAL TABLETS.

                Sterling Silver Communion Services.
                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                 *       *       *       *       *


               NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

                              MASON
                               AND
                              HAMLIN
                              ORGANS


BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street,
Boston; 46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          MANHATTAN LIFE

                    INSURANCE CO. of NEW YORK.


                        ORGANIZED IN 1850.


             _Over Thirty Years’ Business Experience._

            =AGENTS WANTED.= Apply at the Home Office.

                              HENRY STOKES, President.
            J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      INVALID ROLLING-CHAIR.

[Illustration]

(RECLINING.)

A PRICELESS BOON to those who are UNABLE TO WALK. LEONARD BACON,
D.D., HON. A. H. STEVENS, M.C., and OTHERS recommend them. SEND FOR
CIRCULAR.

[Illustration]

FOLDING CHAIR CO., New Haven Ct.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE THIRTY-FIFTH VOLUME

OF THE

American Missionary.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall we not have a largely increased Subscription List for 1881?

We regard the _Missionary_ as the best means of communication with
our friends, and to them the best source of information regarding
our work.

A little effort on the part of our friends, when making their own
remittances, to induce their neighbors to unite in forming Clubs,
will easily double our list, and thus widen the influence of our
Magazine, and aid in the enlargement of our work.

Under editorial supervision at this office, aided by the steady
contributions of our intelligent missionaries and teachers in
all parts of the field, and with occasional communications from
careful observers and thinkers elsewhere, the _American Missionary_
furnishes a vivid and reliable picture of the work going forward
among the Indians, the Chinamen on the Pacific Coast, and the
Freedmen as citizens in the South and as missionaries in Africa.

It will be the vehicle of important views on all matters affecting
the races among which it labors, and will give a monthly summary of
current events relating to their welfare and progress. Patriots and
Christians interested in the education and Christianizing of these
despised races are asked to read it, and assist in its circulation.
Begin with the January number and the new year. The price is only
Fifty Cents per annum.

The Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if preferred, to the
persons indicated on page 224. Donations and subscriptions should
be sent to

                             H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                      56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO ADVERTISERS.

Special attention is invited to the advertising department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY. It numbers among its regular readers very
many frugal, well-to-do people in nearly every city and village
throughout our Northern and Western States. It is therefore a
specially valuable medium for advertising all articles commonly
used in families of liberal, industrious and enterprising habits of
life.

Advertisements must be received by the TENTH of the month, in order
to secure insertion in the following number. All communications in
relation to advertising should be addressed to

           THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT,
                                        56 Reade Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our friends who are interested in the Advertising Department of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY, can aid us in this respect by mentioning, when
ordering goods, that they saw them advertised in our Magazine.


DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.

Changed “mcereony” to “ceremony” on page 212.

Missing “k” replaced in “Lake George” on page 220.

Missing “t” replaced in “Ashtabula” on page 220.

Assumed “D” in “George D. Allen” in the Kalamazoo entry on page 220.

Missing “i” replaced in “Emersonian” in second Mobile entry on page
221.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 7, JULY, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.