Produced by Ian Crann, Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Cornell University Digital Collections)









VOL. XXXV.                                                  No. 10.


                                  THE

                          AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                 “To the Poor the Gospel is Preached.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

                             OCTOBER, 1881.




                              _CONTENTS_:


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—PARAGRAPHS                            289
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE (with Illustration)                292
    THE STRONG AND THE WEAK: Rev. G. N.
      Marden                                             295
    GIVING, FROM A COMMONPLACE STAND-POINT:
      Rev. Samuel Scoville                               296
    BENEFACTIONS                                         297
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese               298
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                 300


  THE FREEDMEN.

    KENTUCKY—Work at Berea: Dr. Mayo in
      _Journal of Education_                             301
    KENTUCKY—Sowing in Tears and Reaping
      in Joy: Rev. J. A. R. Rogers, Berea                303
    TENNESSEE—Letter from Miss Alice E.
      Carter, Nashville                                  304
    ALABAMA—Letter from Mrs. M. V. Curtis,
      Selma                                              304
    GEORGIA—Extract from a Fraternal Letter of
      Rev. T. L. Day                                     306
    TEXAS—Death of S. B. White, Paris                    306


  AFRICA.

    DEATH OF REV. MR. KEMP                               307


  THE INDIANS.

    WORK ON A SHORT TOUR: Rev. M. Eells                  308


  THE CHINESE.

    “STEADFAST, IMMOVABLE:” Rev. W. C.
      Pond                                               310

  GLEANINGS                                              313


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    A MISSIONARY POTATO                                  315


  RECEIPTS                                               316


  CONSTITUTION                                           319


  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                           320

                   *       *       *       *       *

                               NEW YORK:

           Published by the American Missionary Association,

                        ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in advance.

 Entered at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.




                    American Missionary Association,

                        56 READE STREET, N. Y.

                   *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT.

    HON. E. S. TOBEY, Boston.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D. D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D. D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R. I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D. D., R. I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D. D., N. J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D. D., D. C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D. D., N. H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D. D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D. D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N. Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, Washington Ter.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D. D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPAULDING, M. D., N. H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D. D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D. D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N. Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D. D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Mass.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D. D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D. D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D. D., D. C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D. D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D. D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N. Y.
    J. M. PINKERTON, Esq., Mass.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N. J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D. D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    A. L. WILLISTON, Esq., Mass.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D. D., N. Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R. I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D. D, Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D. D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D. D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D. D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D. D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D. D., N. Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D. D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D. D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    REV. G. D. PIKE, D. D., _New York_.
    REV. JAS. POWELL, _Chicago_.

    H. W. HUBBARD, ESQ., _Treasurer, N. Y._
    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, _Recording Secretary_.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    ALONZO S. BALL,
    A. S. BARNES,
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN,
    CLINTON B. FISK,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    S. B. HALLIDAY,
    J. A. HAMILTON,
    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    CHARLES A. HULL,

    CHAS. L. MEAD,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    WM. T. PRATT,
    J. A. SHOUDY,
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. PIKE, D. D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New
York, or when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




                                  THE

                         AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                 VOL. XXXV.   OCTOBER, 1881.   No. 10.

                   *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._


        *       *       *       *       *

The Thirty-fifth Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association
will be held in Worcester, Mass., commencing November 1st, at 3 P. M.
For particulars see fourth page of cover and the religious press.

        *       *       *       *       *

Our readers have already been informed of the death of Rev. K. M. Kemp
of the Mendi Mission, and it now becomes our painful duty to chronicle
the death of his beloved wife. The latest advices inform us that their
deaths were neither of them due wholly to the climate. Mrs. Kemp was a
brave, true woman, whose life and example will not soon be forgotten in
the field where so many had already learned to love her.

        *       *       *       *       *

By the time this reaches our readers, Superintendent Ladd and Dr. Snow
will be well on their way toward the Arthington Mission. It is their
purpose to push directly for the region of the Sobat in the heart of
Central Africa, with the view of locating the new mission. It will
give us pleasure to keep the public informed of the movements of their
expedition in this interesting portion of Africa. Two missionaries
are under appointment to occupy this field at the call of the
Superintendent.

        *       *       *       *       *

We take pleasure in announcing the safe arrival of Rev. O. H. White,
D. D., from England. After a continuous service of over six years of
earnest labor in the mother country, he well deserves the rest which
he now seeks. As Secretary of “The Freedmen’s Missions Aid Society,”
he has ably represented this Association in its great work for the
Negro, and has been enabled, we trust, to insure the success of the
Arthington Mission, by so far interesting our British friends in this
new and promising missionary enterprise, as to call forth many generous
contributions toward its support.

As this number of the MISSIONARY will be in the hands of our readers a
few days before the close of our fiscal year, September 30th, we make
this reminder to the churches and friends who have not yet made their
annual offering to our treasury.

We wish to pay every obligation, and report the year closed without
debt. If the gifts we have reason to hope for are promptly forwarded,
we shall be able to do this.

        *       *       *       *       *

One obstacle in the way of establishing missions in the interior
of Africa is illustrated by the difficulties experienced by the
missionaries of the American Board destined for Bihé. Messrs. Bagster,
Sanders and Miller landed at Benguela on the coast, 250 miles from
Bihé, November 13, 1880; May 1st, they had only reached Bailunda,
200 miles on their way, where they were still encamped awaiting the
arrival of supplies. Five months and seventeen days had been exhausted
by preparations and delays, and the end had not come at last reports.
Possibly, however, the knowledge gained meanwhile of the peculiarities
of the country and the language and habits of the people will quite
compensate for loss of time, and enable them to lay the foundations for
their future work far more wisely in consequence of the difficulties
thus experienced.

        *       *       *       *       *

The Le Moyne Institute, Memphis, Tenn., has established an industrial
department for the purpose of teaching the girls the art of cookery.
A kitchen has been furnished with all needful appliances. Lectures
are given on housekeeping and household economy, which are followed
by instruction in various methods of cooking different foods. The
girls all take turns in doing the work, and in this way get the full
advantage of the practice. The following list of questions on which a
class in cooking was examined at the last anniversary, illustrates the
scope of the work that is being done:

   1.  Name seven principal components of the human body.
   2.  Name some of the principal foods used to supply these elements.
   3.  At what time in the day is the most nutritious food required?
   4.  What is the object in cooking food?
   5.  Name three of the most healthful and economical modes of cooking
       meat.
   6.  Why are fried meats not healthful?
   7.  What should be remembered in boiling or roasting meat?
   8.  Give general principles for making soup.
   9.  What is essential in making good light bread?
  10.  How may bread be made “light” without the use of yeast or soda?
  11.  Give general principles for mixing cake.
  12.  Give receipt for making gruel.
  13.  How should potatoes be boiled?
  14.  Give rule for washing dishes and putting the kitchen in order.

        *       *       *       *       *

The work among the refugees in Kansas by the different agencies has
been carried forward with energy and success. According to the best
estimates there are upwards of 50,000 colored people in that State, and
the number is steadily increasing. The reports from our missionaries
are favorable, and indicate that much is to be done and that the
refugees are eager for the needed assistance. The interest taken in
behalf of the exodites by the English people is worthy of the imitation
of American philanthropists. During the last few months, friends in
Great Britain have sent to Mrs. Comstock for the Freedmen’s Relief
Association, $25,000 worth of supplies, consisting of wearing apparel,
household goods and kitchen utensils. There has also been received
from England during the last fifteen months $13,000 in money, making
a total amount of $80,000 for the treasury of the Relief Association;
two-thirds of this is said to have been given by the English people.
Our appeal, published some months since, for $2,500 to provide for the
work we have recently inaugurated in Kansas, has not yet met with such
response as we hoped to receive. When so much is being done by friends
abroad for this needy class of colored people, we believe the patrons
of the American Missionary Association would not have us do less
for the Kansas field than we have already undertaken. Will they not
contribute so liberally for this special object that we shall be able
to do a great deal more?

        *       *       *       *       *

We clip from the New York _Tribune_ a paragraph relating to the work
of the American Missionary Association in the South. It comes from the
pen of a special correspondent, who, as the editorial in the _Tribune_
says, “has already written with great intelligence and fairness of the
South and the Southern people.”


SUCCESS OF COLORED TEACHERS.

“The educational work in the South of the American Missionary
Association is of the highest character, and deserves all possible
recognition and assistance. The leading Southern people everywhere
speak of it gratefully and enthusiastically. At the Normal and
Agricultural Institute, Hampton, Va., at Talladega College, in Alabama,
Tougaloo University, Mississippi, Tillotson Normal School, Austin,
Texas, and in several other colleges and normal schools which I have
visited, though the money endowment of the schools is scanty compared
with the amounts which are needed, the endowments in personal qualities
and character, as represented by the teachers, are of a remarkably
high order. This is indispensable indeed, for the peculiar nature of
the work of educating the colored people of the South requires the
best teachers that can be obtained. In many of these institutions the
boys learn something of various trades or mechanical occupations, and
of farming; and the girls are taught sewing, cooking and the care of
a house. I have visited a great number of the negro common and high
schools, which are taught by graduates and students of the colleges and
normal schools which I have named, and I think it very wonderful that
so many of these negro teachers are successful. They generally have to
struggle against many disadvantages, but nearly all whom I have seen
have the confidence and respect of the leading white citizens where
they are at work. I have found a few fools among them, of course, but a
great majority appear to be sensible, earnest young men and women.”

        *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

PRESIDENT HENRY S. DE FOREST.

This issue of the MISSIONARY contains a view of Stone Hall, built of
Alabama bricks at Talladega. Its completion, it is believed, marks an
era in the history of the College. With better equipments than ever
before, with a field as large as it can wish, the College, backed by
the history of half of one generation, looks forward with hope to the
growing and unfolding future. From what has been we may attempt to
previse something of what may be.

In 1867, only fourteen years ago, when the Freedmen’s Bureau was acting
as Interex between past bloodshed and coming chaos, the building now
known as Swayne Hall, with ample and beautiful grounds, was purchased,
and the future College begun with spelling book and Bible primer. A
few wise men of the East were there at its birth. They wore blue and
carried swords, though in the scabbard. But many black men, who had
been waiting through a long and starless night, thought they heard an
angel chorus and forthwith were praising God. A white male high school
building, reared by the unrequited labor of the slave, was bought at
a mortgage sale and opened for the Christian training of all, without
respect to color or sex. Men, black either in pigment or in figment,
began to come, and the reconstructed building gave shelter to school
and church. But a home was needed, and two years later, in 1869,
Foster Hall was built, affording rooms for the girls and teachers, and
also table accommodations for the entire family. From the beginning,
Talladega has united the three great forces in shaping character,
namely, the school, the church and the home. The foundations of the
second building, Foster Hall, were laid while the Ku Klux Klan was
brandishing its weapons and grating its teeth. The Nehemiahs of that
time carried their weapons in one hand and wielded the trowel with
the other. But they built, and the God of Heaven prospered them. From
that time forward the quadrennial period has been observed. The year
following a Presidential election, Talladega College has inaugurated
some new thing. In 1873, Graves Hall with additional land was secured
for the theological department. In 1877, when President Hayes was
holding out the olive branch, we attempted more of the peaceful pursuit
of agriculture, and Winsted farm was bought. And now in the beginning
of President Garfield’s administration, the third brick building is
reared, and Stone Hall opens its door to eighty young men.

[Illustration: STONE HALL, TALLADEGA COLLEGE.]

Surely this is rapid progress. Not half of one generation has passed,
and the spelling book is supplemented by normal, college preparatory,
to some extent college, and theological studies. Some of those first
primary students are preachers now. The babes of those recent days
have become the leaders of their race. Figures are not juicy; but
it is noteworthy that one hundred and sixteen of our students were
teaching during the last summer vacation; that three hundred and
eighteen who had pursued something of Normal studies have gone thence
as pedagogues; that of our forty-two Theological students, fifteen
are pastors of A. M. A. churches; as many more are ministering in
other fields, and the remainder are still in training. Such facts are
inspiriting and full of hope. These results, let it be remembered,
have been realized with meagre resources and poor appliances. If
now our means could be made more commensurate with our necessities,
if our resources could compare with our opportunities, what a grand
work of patriotism and Christianity might not the College attempt and
expect in the near future. As regards the higher branches of learning,
the College has an unrivaled place in a great State, half of whose
population is black. It has in Alabama more than 600,000 colored people
from whom to draw its students. It cares for muscle as well as mind,
and for heart most of all. It teaches industry and thrift and economy.
It emphasizes the fundamentals, and believes that the foundations of
learning should be laid before the superstructure is attempted. Still
in its care for the masses, it is seeking for wise leaders, and wishes
to take certain elect souls through as long and as thorough a course of
study as the circumstances will allow. It aims especially to furnish
men well equipped for the Gospel ministry, and thinks it has found a
place for uplifting not only America, but Africa, and that by laboring
there among the foot-hills of our own Blue Ridge, it may help beautify
the Dark Continent with salvation. As long as cotton grows on those
black bottoms, or those hills yield their treasures of iron and coal,
so long will Talladega College be needed, and so long it hopes to stay.
It desires to grow with the generations and increase with the ages.
Already it feels its need of permanent investments, and is asking for
the beginning of an endowment. It calls for the personal service of
some, and asks for the gifts of others who cannot offer themselves.
In both cases it gives an opportunity for usefulness as large and as
lasting as can be desired.

        *       *       *       *       *

Rev. A. D. Mayo, D. D., writes in _The Christian Register_ of Talladega
College as follows:

“This year the institution numbers two hundred young men, women
and children, of whom eleven are in the theological, eleven in the
preparatory college, forty-eight in the normal, fifty-nine in the
intermediate, and seventy-two in the primary department. Rev. Henry
S. De Forest is president, and Rev. George W. Andrews pastor and
instructor in theology. Three men and six women teachers in addition
make up the teaching force; and an abler, more devoted, and more
attractive people we have never met in any seminary of learning in any
part of the country. They are all white, and represent every section
of the Union and the Dominion of Canada. Talladega may congratulate
itself on its “negro college,” for probably no institution in the State
represents more thoroughly the best modern ideas of education.”

        *       *       *       *       *


THE STRONG AND THE WEAK.

BY PROF. G. N. MARDEN, COLORADO SPRINGS, COL.

[Illustration:
  Large outer square labelled: WHITE POPULATION.
  Then three squares from bottom right.
  - 35% side, labelled: COLORED POPULATION.
  - 8% side labelled: INDIAN.
    with bottom fifth shaded grey
  - 5% side labelled: CHIN.]

Injustice seems never more flagrant than when committed by the
prosperous and powerful against the poor and weak. If the moral test of
civilization, as of society, is its care for its weakest members, we
hardly dare to measure our country by the history of its treatment of
the Negro, the Indian and the Chinaman.

The diagram above is designed to illustrate the numerical strength of
the white element of the United States, as compared with three other
elements of the population. The large bordered square (whose side is
ten centimeters) represents our country’s _total_ population—a round
fifty millions. The colored population—not less than six and a half
millions—is signified by the square in the lower right hand corner.
Close beside it is the little square which stands for the size of the
Indian—about three hundred thousand souls; the shaded portion of the
square means the _wild_ Indians—about fifty thousand. The dreaded
Chinese element of our population can be seen by looking for the minute
square, which represents one hundred thousand.

This diagram, in enlarged form, can be effectively used in the
Missionary Concert. To a large square of stout paper, smaller squares
of different colored paper may be pinned. Correct proportions for
paper or for blackboard illustrations would be, following the order
of the size of the population, 50, 18, 3.87 and 2.23 centimeters
respectively; or, in inches, about 19-2/3, 7-1/10, 1-1/2 and 7/8. These
figures denote the base lines of the respective squares.

How the powerful white man looms up and looms over the little group of
the three ill-treated races huddled in the corner!

The black block makes no insignificant figure, after all, and its
rapid growth suggests that to have, through neglect, a dense body of
such dimensions depressed by ignorance were a blunder matched only by
the wickedness of oppression. The size of the Indian and the Chinaman
suggests strongly the outrageous meanness of ill-using them; it makes
more striking the absurdity of a war policy against the red man, and
of the demagogue’s appeal to fear on account of the presence of the
Chinaman.

What an opportunity, on our own shores, for strength to help weakness,
for knowledge to help ignorance, for wealth to help poverty, and so to
fulfil the law of a Christian civilization!

Surely it is high time for us to heed the weighty saying of John
Milton: “_A nation ought to be but as one huge Christian personage, one
mighty growth or stature of an honest man, as big and compact in virtue
as in body; for look, what the ground and causes of single happiness to
one man, the same we shall find them to a whole state._”

        *       *       *       *       *


GIVING, VIEWED FROM A COMMONPLACE STAND-POINT.

REV. SAM’L SCOVILLE.

We think this whole matter of giving is put so high sometimes that it
gets clear out of sight of common people. We love now and then to put
it down upon the basis of common virtues and moralities and see how it
looks.

Motives, springing from the highest spiritual insight and experience,
are good and always in order, but they are not essential to a fair
judgment nor to proper action in this matter. A man may have much less
than John’s spirituality or Paul’s experience to decide that there is a
glaring inconsistency in praying for the building up of God’s kingdom
on the earth, and then withholding the means necessary to that end; in
praying that the Gospel may fly to earth’s remotest bound, and then
refusing to contribute to the amount of a single wing feather to help
its flight.

It does not take a great deal of spiritual insight to see that we
cannot serve God and mammon at the same time in our churches with
advantage, any more than we can in our own hearts, and that if the
Judas of worldliness carries the bag, there is going to be a betrayal
of the Master some day. The most common of common sense judgment is all
that is needed for so simple a conclusion.

And it is not necessarily any high revelation required, but only an
appreciation and approval of square dealing, to convince us that a
church must so raise its money, and to such amounts, that it will be
able to do its share towards carrying on the great work of evangelizing
the world.

In these days of missionary spirit every church is to broaden out its
parish lines until they meet only at the antipodes. All the dark places
of the earth belong to us to do something for, to do what we can for,
and we are not to raise our money nor use it so that this part of the
work is neglected. To cheat the heathen out of his portion of the
Gospel is an immorality. To help carry the Gospel to the heathen in the
uttermost parts of the earth must be accepted by every church as a part
of its moral obligation. This may make it necessary to put less expense
into church choirs, into adornments and improvements—that the minister
and the sexton shall receive smaller salaries. So be it; let the whole
field be looked over, and let each receive the share adapted to him.
This is good morals in this matter.

        *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

—Hamilton College receives $5,000 from Lemuel Brooks, of Churchville,
N. Y.

—Henry Villiard has given to the Oregon State University $70,000 to
relieve its indebtedness.

—D. O. Mills has given to the University of California $75,000 to endow
a chair of intellectual and moral philosophy.

—William H. Vanderbilt proposes to add to his previous gifts one-half
or two-thirds enough to erect and equip suitable buildings for the
Nashville Female College.

—Mr. George B. Babcock, of Plainfield, N. J., has recently given
$30,000 to Alfred University, and still later $10,000 to Wilson College
at Wilson, Wisconsin.

—The will of the widow of the late ex-President Millard Fillmore leaves
public bequests to the amount of $50,000, among which is one of $20,000
to the University of Rochester.

—Matthew Vassar, following in the good work of his uncle, bequeathed to
the college which bears the family name the handsome sum of $130,000;
to the Vassar Brothers Home for Aged Men, $15,000; and to the Vassar
Brothers Hospital, $85,000. These contributions are to be largely
increased by some residuary legacies.

—The following table shows the increase of endowments of the New
England colleges during the past year: Harvard, $500,000; Yale,
$250,000; Amherst, $75,000; Tufts, $120,000; Smith, $43,000; Dartmouth,
$110,000; University of Vermont, $50,000; Wesleyan, $100,000; Colby,
$30,000; total, $1,278,000.

—_Talladega College, Talladega, Ala., is erecting Stone Hall, by the
gift of Mrs. Stone—the fourth College building. Endowments now are
the great necessity. $25,000 will provide for a Professorship, and
there are four such needing endowment, one of these a Theological
Professorship._

        *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—Forty light-houses of great range have been established in the Red
Sea, to render navigation less dangerous during the night.

—Dr. Schweinfurth has returned to Suez after a month’s exploration
in the Island of Socotora, where he found a very abundant flora. The
forests constitute the principal riches of the isle.

—Following the massacre of the expedition Giulietti, two Italian
vessels have been sent to Assab, to be stationed there during the
inquest that the Egyptian Government has ordered, with a view of
discovering the murderers and punishing them. They will be supported by
an English vessel.

—Dr. Southern, of the London Missionary Society, has been laboring for
more than a year at Urambo, the capital of the noted chief Mirambo. He
has been received with much cordiality, and is able to report results
of his work in terms which are suggestive of a bright future for that
station.

—The Governor of the Gold Coast has placed, as a condition to the
conclusion of a treaty with the King of Achantis, the abolition of
human sacrifices in the states of the latter. The king having demanded
that a representative of the Governor should visit him, M. Maloney, the
Colonial Secretary, has accompanied Prince Buaki, who has returned to
Coomassie.

—The necessary materials for the construction of the railroad of
the Senegal have been transported over the upper river, the King of
Foutah guaranteeing the security of the passage. There is still some
difficulty with the King of Cayor on the subject of the passage of the
road over his territory, but they hope for a satisfactory solution.

—A business house in Hamburg has sent out an agent to attempt the
culture of coffee in the region of the Ogove. A clearing has been
made near Corisco bay, where several thousand coffee trees have
been planted, promising an abundant harvest this year. The American
Presbyterians have a mission some hundreds of miles up the Ogove river,
and the project is on foot to open a route this way to Stanley Pool on
the Congo.

—The Universities Mission to Central Africa, which was first
undertaken in 1860 through the influence of Dr. Livingstone, and
afterwards suspended, has recently entered upon a very hopeful career.
Bishop Steere has now a well equipped staff of thirty-one European
missionaries, of whom seven are ladies. He already understands the
language of the tribes among whom he labors. The present work of the
mission is threefold: First, that on the island of Zanzibar, which is
now of a comprehensive character, including many agencies; secondly,
the work at Magila and its surroundings, some forty miles from
Pangani, on the main land to the north of Zanzibar; and thirdly, the
missions on the main land to the south in the Rovuma district.

—The _Missionary Herald_ for August, the organ of the Baptist
Missionary Society of London, contains an admirable map of the Congo
from its mouth to Stanley Pool. This Society already has a mission at
San Salvador, south of the Congo, between one hundred and two hundred
miles from the coast. It recently sent two of its missionaries, Mr. H.
E. Crudgington and Mr. W. H. Bentley, on an exploring tour to Stanley
Pool for the purpose of fixing a site for a mission at the latter
point. The report of their exploration is given almost entire in the
_Herald_, and constitutes one of the most interesting and profitable
narratives of perseverance and heroism that has been given to the
public in the annals of missions.

—The C. M. S. of London has established a new mission at Uyui, a
collection of villages under the control of a governor appointed by the
Sultan of Zanzibar. It is described as a very large town for Africa.
Mr. Copplestone, one of the early missionaries for Mtesa’s kingdom,
took up his abode at Uyui in 1879, and in June 1880 was joined by Mr.
Litchfield, who came south from Uganda for the benefit of his health.
Mr. Copplestone, who has learned the Unyamnezi language, has built a
school-room where he teaches the natives. He is assisted by one of the
Frere Town African Christians.

        *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

—The Baptist Home Missionary Society has established at Tahiequah,
Indian Territory, the “Indian University,” and at present conducts a
school in their mission buildings. The society is out with an appeal
for buildings and endowments.

—The Board of Publication of the Presbyterian Church supports a Book,
Tract and Sunday-school missionary in the Indian Territory. Meetings
are held, families visited, and a large amount of religious literature
is scattered broadcast. The work is reported to be quite encouraging.

—Mr. Townsend, Special Agent of the Indian Department, has organized an
Indian police force among the Pimas. His squad consists of fifteen men
under the command of Captain Maichu, a very competent and trustworthy
Indian. The primary object of the force is to maintain order in a
quiet way, and to educate the tribe in the principles and practices of
civilization.

—Rev. Sheldon Jackson, D. D., to whom the country is so much indebted
for his admirable work on Alaska, is now on a visit to that territory,
superintending the building of two mission chapels, besides attending
to other duties. A recent gift of $1,000 from a lady in Zanesville,
Ohio, in aid of the one at Chileat, is mentioned as an important factor
in the movement.

        *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

—The chief official at the custom house near Bangkok, Siam, is a negro.
The position is a very responsible one, and was given to him on account
of his education, honesty and capacity. He is said to discharge his
duties with much efficiency and satisfaction to the government.

—Mr. S. A. Butler, a pure negro, at one time a protégé of Anson
Burlingame, is in charge of one of the most important departments of
the Chinese Steamship Company. He is a natural organizer, and when
employed by the company, systematized the business, brought order out
of chaos, introduced economy, enforced discipline, and rivaled the
Europeans in their steamship service. The result is that after two
years’ work this Chinese Steamship Company, instead of running at a
loss, has earned over $1,000,000 net profit.

—Some gentlemanly Chinese laborers in Chicago gave a banquet to about
two hundred of their American Christian friends, not long since, in the
rooms of the Young Men’s Christian Association. The sons of the Flowery
Kingdom were in full bloom, quiet, radiant and attentive. The tables
were beautifully adorned and sumptuously loaded. Speeches were made by
Rev. James Powell, Franklin Fisk and Ah Sing Get. The entertainment
was enlivened by the singing of a number of “Moody and Sankey” songs,
which lost nothing by the slight Chinese brogue with which they were so
earnestly rendered.

        *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

WOODBRIDGE, N. C.—Rev. W. H. Ellis reports a very interesting and
precious revival among the children growing out of the Band of Hope
temperance work.

BEAUFORT, N. C.—One of the colored bishops testified to a brother that
the church at Beaufort, though small, was a power for good that could
not be estimated.

MCINTOSH, LIBERTY CO., GA.—We feel especially thankful for the
beautiful organ presented to us by the Smith American Organ Company;
also for articles of clothing sent by the Ladies’ Benevolent Society,
2d Church, Keene, N. H., and the ladies of Framingham, Mass., to
distribute among the needy ones around us. A blind father, who has a
one-armed wife and seven children to care for, is just leaving us with
his quota.

WOODVILLE, GA.—Pilgrim church was crowded last night to witness the
reception of nine persons to the church. During the revival, still
going on, seven persons professed conversion, and two backsliders
returned home. Next Sunday night a thanksgiving service will be held
and a collection will be taken up to help rebuild three churches that
were blown down by the recent storm.

SAVANNAH, GA.—Special meetings were held in this church in the summer.
Rev. S. N. Brown, temporary supply, was aided by Rev. John McLean, of
Miller’s Station. More than a score of souls were hopefully joined to
Christ.

HELENA, TEXAS.—Rev. M. Thompson, pastor, rejoices over a revival in his
church. Nearly every unconverted person in the community was moved, and
not a few to a final reconciliation.

MEMPHIS, TENN.—Pastor Imes had his people come in upon him by way of
a surprise party, August 30th, to celebrate his wife’s birthday. Many
useful presents, of no small value, were the tokens of love.

        *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D. D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.


        *       *       *       *       *


KENTUCKY.

THE WORK AT BEREA.

Nestling in a charming “glade,” overshadowed by the North-western
foot-hills of the mighty Appalachian mountain world, is Berea College.
It is not exclusively a school for teachers, but includes the entire
organization of popular education from an effective primary school
up to a solid university class of twenty-five, with a normal course
for instruction in methods of teaching. Its pupils are of both sexes
and colors, and another year may possibly witness the white, negro
and Indian quietly at work in the same class-rooms, with no rivalry
except the honest pride to excel in good scholarship and manly or
womanly character. But in this, for the South, exceptional feature,
there comes in the most interesting peculiarity of this most “peculiar
institution.” With a few exceptions from the North and the blue-grass
region of Kentucky, the white students come from the great mountain
country that overlooks the college campus. This region, in Kentucky,
includes a country as extensive as the whole State of New Hampshire,
and not unlike it in shape. Here, in a mountain world, divided into
thirty counties, out of hearing of the railroad whistle, in many parts
traversed only on horseback, with no village containing five thousand
and very few one thousand people, dwells a population of nearly two
hundred thousand, more thoroughly isolated from the New America than
the settlers in Oregon or the latest hamlet in Dakota. Living almost
entirely from the land, in the narrowest way, on narrow means, with
few tolerable schools and a good deal of intolerable preaching, with
an almost total destitution of books, newspapers and ordinary means of
cultivation, completely shut off from social contact with the ruling
class of the State, this people is peculiar in many ways.

Out from this interesting region come the majority of the white
students of Berea. Few of them are able even to meet the yearly sum
of seventy-five dollars, for which their education is given them.
Many of them, even the girls, walk from their homes, and come in with
nothing but a stout suit of clothes, a good head and a brave heart,
paying their way as they go by such work as turns up, and the small
wages of mountain school-keeping in the long summer vacations. They
have no leisure to discuss the vexed topic of co-education that worries
grave professors and doubting students at Yale and Harvard; indeed,
the young fellow not unfrequently brings in his sister, cousin and
prospective “annex” to sit down at the same table of knowledge. He is
more anxious to lift his own end of a problem than to quarrel with the
colored boy who is tugging at the other end. Indeed, at Berea one seems
to be in that ideal university where an overpowering desire for study
lifts the entire body of students above a whole class of questions that
even yet convulse politicians and people, schoolmen and churches, South
and North. They live together; the girls, of course, under careful
supervision; study, work, recite, play and worship together; students
and teachers, children and grown men and women, in one family. Probably
no American school of three hundred and seventy students goes through
the year with so little disturbance, is so easily governed, or so
generally absorbed in the work in hand. This year the faculty consists
of thirteen professors and teachers under President E. H. Fairchild,
and three hundred and sixty-nine students, of whom nine are in the
college classical and twenty-five in the literary course, forty-five
in the normal, and the remainder in the preparatory department. The
average age is sixteen. Two hundred and forty-nine are colored and one
hundred and twenty are white; two hundred and six males and one hundred
and sixty-three females.

The instruction is excellent, probably equal in quality to any school
in the State; and the proficiency of the pupils remarkable, considering
their previous estate. The primary school-room contains twenty stout
fellows ranging from eighteen to twenty-five years of age; but it
is not uncommon for one of these boys to go forth as a tolerable
school-master among the colored people after two years’ hard work at
Berea. Indeed, if one were to look for signs of mental power, he need
not go outside the beautiful campus of this school. We positively
never witnessed such progress in learning as is the common talk
among these teachers. These stalwart young men and resolute maidens
from the mountains buckle to their books with a will that knows no
discouragement. They go back to their homes to become the pride of
their friends and the hope of their neighborhood. Nearly every student
is a member of the church and the temperance society, and the carrying
of arms is cause of expulsion. All classes of the Southern people are
good listeners. We never addressed an audience of three hundred people
that put us more decisively on our mettle than the crowd of students
and villagers that did us the favor to crowd the chapel on four
unpleasant nights to listen to our talks on education.

We do not propose to defend Berea against any objector. A school with
such tough Kentucky roots as Fee, Hanson, and their compeers; with a
history so romantic in its heroic past and so startling in its recent
growth; with a foundation on three hundred acres of “sacred soil,” two
hundred thousand dollars worth of excellent buildings, in a situation
unrivaled in beauty; a faculty representing the best culture and
character of the North-west, with the rising ability of the South; and
a population of five hundred friendly people within sound of chapel
bells; can be trusted to plead its own cause against all comers. It
is already commending itself to many of the best people of Kentucky,
receiving students from families of highest respectability in the
neighborhood, and on commencement days the great tabernacle is crammed
with three thousand people, from the humblest to the highest in the
proud old State. Berea is a great American fact, comprehensible only
to a man who has read, pondered and inwardly digested the Sermon on
the Mount and its corollary, the Constitution of the United States. If
no similar college should ever exist, this will live in its own place
in American history, a splendid evidence of the power of a consecrated
education to bind together all sorts and conditions of good women and
earnest men.—_Dr. Mayo in Journal of Education._

        *       *       *       *       *


SOWING IN TEARS AND REAPING IN JOY—BEREA COLLEGE.

REV. J. A. R. ROGERS.

The rule is that a long time must elapse between the sowing and the
reaping. Abraham’s patience in Canaan for long years seemed destined
to be fruitless in those things which God had promised him; not a
foot of Canaan did he own, and he was still childless; his faith was
tried to the uttermost, and only by a great struggle was he kept from
despair. After centuries, that sowing began to produce a harvest,
not yet but partially reaped. The recent addition of $50,000 to the
endowment of Berea College calls to mind the long, weary days of
struggle and almost despair in its early history. The apparent success
for a time, to be followed by every sort of discouragement, was not
the least of the trials of those whose labors were the occasion for
Berea College. Churches were formed, and many seemed heartily in favor
of the Gospel of Christ, which commands and secures love; and then
persecutions would arise, and such a perfect torrent of public opinion
against the “abolitionists,” that large numbers would succumb to the
adverse influences, and the love of many would wax cold. Again, such
persecutions would arise, that for a time only women were regarded as
safe in attending the preaching services of Mr. Fee and others. After
the school was started in 1858, which culminated in Berea College,
there were still those great alternations of prosperity and apparent
defeat which are so hard to bear. One term, large numbers of students
would come, including the children of slaveholders, and the next, only
those would apply for admission who could endure the reproach of being
called “_nigger lovers_.” Even after the war, when two or three colored
children entered the primary department, there was such a stampede from
every department, that the principal, in sorrow, said to the few that
timidly remained, “Will ye also go away?”

Those years from ’55 to ’66 were years of sowing in great sorrow. The
missionaries of the A. M. A. were very poor; their salaries were $400
per year, and some of that sum must be expended for those still poorer.
They lived in almost constant terror of their lives. If for any cause
they were north of the Ohio River for a few weeks, they breathed such a
free atmosphere that it seemed almost like getting into Heaven. By many
they were regarded with suspicion and contempt. The writer remembers
what cringing of the nerves he often had to endure, in walking the
streets of one of the central towns of Kentucky. People would stare at
him as if he were a hyena let loose. It is not easy to describe what
were the sorrows of those years, the greatest of which was that so many
professed friends fell away in time of danger, and that so many bearing
the name of Christ at those times were ready to deny their faith.

But this sowing has in some respects given way to reaping, even in
the lifetime of those who watered the ground with their tears. Now at
Berea is a college in some respects unlike any other in the land. Here,
three hundred in all, are seen white and colored students in about
equal numbers. Here is a sort of Mecca for the colored people of the
State, and a door of hope for many in the mountain region, who, though
white, have had but few religious and educational privileges. Here is a
college ably manned, with the confidence of the North, and growing in
the regard of the South, sending forth its streams of blessing in every
direction. If the tears of sorrow were many, the tears of joy and
thanksgiving to God have been much more abundant.

        *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

MISS ALICE E. CARTER, NASHVILLE.

Among the men of Tennessee, the great and crying need seems to be the
very practical knowledge of some trade; the range of their individual
usefulness is so often limited to gardening, grooming, rock-beating and
shoveling.

The talent for gardening is a dormant one in winter; rock-beating
cannot be followed in the coldest weather, and it is easy to see that
the other ranks may at times be filled to overflowing, and those not
fortunate enough to get in, are out of employment.

What a noble enterprise for someone to found an industrial school for
colored boys, which shall draw in the bright-eyed ragged boys, now
lounging on the street corners or quarreling in the alleys, learning
nothing except evil, daily!

To help a few such boys, though temporarily, I hold in my room,
one evening in the week, a little reception. Good stories, earnest
conversation, plenty of books and papers to look over while here, are
the means put forth to help those who come. When they go away they
carry with them text-cards and old numbers of _St. Nicholas_ from my
very primitive “circulating library.”

My cottage Sunday-school is a very interesting undertaking. Compassion
for the pitiful little street waifs, too small to find their way to
the remote city Sunday-schools, led me to try to make a bright spot in
their day. It was a simple thing to gain permission of a woman, with
four tiny girls, to hold Sunday-school in her cottage, and the simplest
matter to fill the small room with children. To walk through the alley
and say “Come” to any ragged, deformed or dirty little child was all
that was necessary. How well our Lord understood the willingness of the
people of the “highways and hedges!”

Each Sunday the little ones come with ludicrously solemn faces and
decorous manners; and sitting on the beds, or a board between two
chairs, and on the hearth before the fire-place, are as happy as can be.

Not one can read; not one knew the name of Jesus, except one boy whose
father’s oaths made him know it; yet all know and love the story now.
The teaching is necessarily by dictation, and my great wonder is that
the little minds remember so much.

Their singing they do with faces all smiles, and when the moment comes
for distributing the text-cards and child papers full of beautiful
pictures, their joy knows no bounds. These may be loaves and fishes
for which the children come, and yet, like the multitude of old, they
perhaps carry away with them something better.

        *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

MRS. M. V. CURTIS, SELMA.

Have I ever written for the MISSIONARY? Well, no; but then why not?
since I have something very particular to say to my friends in the
North; and I have neither head nor hand for all the letters I want to
write; for there is the concert for August 30, (proceeds to be put
into the winter’s supply of coal, this being the month when prices are
down); and the “Harvest Home” (a literary entertainment to be given by
our “Young People’s Guild” some time in October), to be arranged for;
also some appropriate music to be prepared for the evening when our two
“political refugees” are to lecture on Arkansas, where they have been
teaching and traveling during the past two years.

Why won’t it be a stroke of policy to let that press away off in
New York do the work for me, for manifolding letters is not easy,
and the inspiration is lost after the first recital? I wonder if my
correspondents will not count this as an individual letter and send me
letters in return.

How I do wish that you all could have been of the number that gathered
in our pretty church a week ago Sabbath night—our pretty church, with
its white walls, its wood-work of rich yellow pine, exquisite with
God’s own graining, and the crimson carpet for the two platforms, the
walnut table, vase and bracket, all the gift of the ladies of the
church.

The night was matchless, and at an early hour a good audience had
gathered (A. M. A. pastors have not always the encouragement of
numbers). We had reached out into the homes through the Sunday-school
children, and the result showed the wisdom of our course.

After the opening exercises, Mr. C. read to an attentive audience,
Mr. De Forest’s racy letter of his experiences in the theatres of
Tottori, Japan. A quartet then besought us in song to “Tell it out,”
this story of Christ, to the heathen, a sermon indeed in song. One of
our young teachers read of the two _mice_ the little Sunday-school
scholar brought as her two _mites_, for so she understood it. Another
gave a crumb for the boys, found in the MISSIONARY; and when a sweet
soprano and alto pled for Burmah, and Burmah herself seemed to speak
in the plaintive strains, that were borne to our ears through an open
window, the effect was impressive, and the surprise and pleasure of the
audience was manifest. The “Little Zulu Band” sang a sweet song of the
needs of Zululand.

And now I have come to the crowning exercise of the evening; for surely
that patient little group on the front seat, conscious of a secret
hidden behind the white cards they wore, was not there for nothing.
They knew that the reason they were bidden to wait till the last was
just because theirs was to be the best of all, and so it proved.

Quietly they filed up the opposite aisles, making a semicircle in the
alcove back of the pulpit (which, by the way, had been removed). Above
their heads, on the white walls of the alcove, was the reminder of
our Conference, two years ago, the motto, “Praise ye the Lord.” Then
those pretty evergreen letters, that did duty at Burlington, Wis.,
were employed again to spell out the sweet motto, “All for Jesus.” The
recitations, concert exercises, questions and answers that followed,
were well given, and were a little sermon in themselves. How we prayed
that God would bless them to each one present! But the climax was
reached when one of our young men came forward, and taking up a large
globe that had been standing upon the table, said: “To-night we will
unite and extend the motto to ‘All the world for Jesus.’” His manner
was dignified and his words impressive, as he went on to tell of the
needs of the whole world. Then came from each of the eleven, in answer
to his question, “From what countries they should come who before Jesus
in white should stand?” the names of country after country, the wide
world over.

Turning to the audience the speaker told us not to say that time was
too far off, and surprised most of us by saying that if each one now
living, who had taken “All for Jesus” for his life motto, should bring
one soul to Jesus each year, the whole world would soon be converted.

The same young girls who had sung “Zulu Band,” came forward and sang
sweetly, “All for Jesus,” the others joining in the chorus. The groups
remained in their places while the audience arose and joined in the
doxology, and with reverent heads received the benediction.

Our W. M. A. gathered for its second “Missionary Tea Party” on Friday
of the same week. The reading of letters from our absent sisters and
from “The Morning Star,” together with the singing of missionary
songs, occupied an hour, and while we discussed our tea, we chatted of
what we could do for our Selma boys at Tougaloo, and decided to call
our September meeting a “Missionary Quilting,” and put on and off two
quilts. The ladies say it can be done.

        *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

Extract from a fraternal letter of Rev. T. L. Day, in behalf of the
National Council to the General Conference of the Congregational
Methodists, in session at Fredonia, Ga.:

“We feel that you agree with us when we express the hope that the time
will come when there will be no distinction of North and South, but
when our whole people will understand and trust and love each other.
Political parties pass away and new ones take their places; but, God
helping us, the Congregational method of church government shall never
pass away, but it shall be (as long as grass grows and streamlets
flow) a firm _bond_ of _union_ and brotherly love between us and you
and all other Christians who accept it in its purity. The spirit of
the Congregationalism we honor laments both the bigotry of sect and
the bitterness of sectional politics. It teaches us, both as citizens
and Christians, to love each other. In this spirit of love some of the
ablest and most devoted ministers and educators of our denomination
have been giving their best strength to our missionary institutions of
education in the South. This work is supported by the self-sacrificing
contributions of our churches. They believe (what your leading men have
told us) that the race for which they do this missionary work must
have a training and education in morality and in religious principle,
or they will be the greatest source of danger and evil to the South.
We know that these brethren are striving to work wholly in the spirit
of Christ; and that every noble-minded Southerner, if he could only
see their hearts and their devotion to the future of your fair land,
would wish them God-speed. And if any of you, who are our brethren in
the faith, should ever come to see good results from their efforts,
and should be moved to speak the word of sympathy to those engaged in
this lonely and difficult work, it will surely be reckoned to you by
our Lord and Master as the ‘cup of cold water,’ given in the name of a
disciple.”

        *       *       *       *       *


TEXAS.

DEATH OF S. B. WHITE.

REV. J. W. ROBERTS, PARIS.

Our faithful missionary, S. B. White, died about three o’clock
yesterday, of congestive chills and fever.

He closed a very successful school session here the first of July. He
went out north of Paris, on Red River, to teach. The water and climate
did not agree with him. He made out to teach one month and a few days
by hard struggle, and came up Friday before last, looking like the very
shadow of death, conducted Sunday-school on Sunday, and was here to
preaching that night. Two o’clock Sunday night he started back to his
school, notwithstanding he was warned not to return. He reached there
through hard struggle, and was there from Tuesday to Friday, trying to
get some conveyance to bring him home. On Friday, August 19, he heard
of a wagon that was coming in, so he walked two miles from the place
where he was boarding, to take passage, which walk was too exhausting
for his already diseased frame. Thus he had to come in a rough wagon
in all of Friday’s scorching sun, a distance of some twenty-one or
twenty-two miles, with frequent fainting spells. He reached here Friday
afternoon at 6 o’clock, where he had the best attention shown him both
by his friends and physician. He was not confined to the bed until
Monday night.

He had not the least fear of dying. He said: “Don’t fret for me; but I
want you all to meet me in Heaven. I am going to that beautiful land of
rest to live with Jesus. ‘There is a fountain filled with blood, drawn
from Immanuel’s veins,’” etc. He described the kind of coffin he wished
to be buried in. He was the most faithful Christian I ever saw. We have
lost a noble Christian worker.

        *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

        *       *       *       *       *


We have the following information relating to the death of Mr. Kemp at
the Mendi Mission, from Rev. J. M. Williams, missionary at Kaw Mendi.
Mr. Williams’ long experience in Africa has qualified his heart and
mind to sympathize most fully with the afflicted. He is a colored man,
born in British Guiana, South America, and has rendered much good
service to the cause of missions during the past sixteen years.

Mr. Williams writes:—Of the dangerous illness of Mrs. Kemp and of
the death of Mr. Kemp, I had not heard a word till I arrived at Good
Hope on Saturday. I knocked at the door of the mission house with the
fullest expectation of enjoying the company of Mr. and Mrs. Kemp. The
closed doors and windows might have awakened apprehension that all was
not well, but they did not. The death-like silence that was within,
after my repeated knocking at the door, created not the slightest
suspicion or foreboding that sickness and death had preceded me, and
forever removed my beloved and esteemed friend. After the third rapping
at the door, the watchman came to the foot of the stairs and said: “No
pusson there, sir;” and in reply to my questions, he further said:
“Missis done gone to town. The new massa that came t’other day, he done
died.” I could not, and did not, believe the man till after he replied
three times to my half-frantic interrogations, “Massa Kemp done died.”
Words are inadequate to express my feelings then and now. During my
sixteen years’ residence in Africa no event has so sadly affected me as
the death of Mr. Kemp, except the death of my two children. I feel it
keenly. I deeply sympathize with Mrs. Kemp and with the Association. It
is a severe blow to us all, and especially to this station and mission.
Although the residence of the Kemps here was short, yet they were much
respected and beloved by the inhabitants of Bonthe. By the Europeans,
from the Commandant downward, and by the colored people, I have heard
them spoken of in the most flattering terms.

While still suffering from the intensity of grief produced by such
sudden and unexpected intelligence, Mr. Jowett came and confirmed
what I had heard from the watchman. I was informed by Mr. Jowett that
Brother Kemp left Good Hope Station for Avery to see Mr. Jackson on the
11th of May, and returned on the 13th. On the way home he was exposed
to several heavy showers of rain. About two days after his return he
was attacked with intermittent fever. Mrs. Kemp was also dangerously
ill and not expected to recover. This kept him up when he ought to have
been in bed. Under the combined weight of a disordered mind and body,
he sank rapidly until life departed. He had a strong presentiment, two
days before his death, that his end was near and his work on earth
done, and informed Mrs. Kemp of his convictions. He said: “The doctor
has done all he can do. I am ready to die. I commend you to God.”
During his illness he was attended by Brother Jowett, Mrs. During, and
other kind friends.

He died on Sunday morning, May 29th, at 10 o’clock, without a struggle
or groan. He fell asleep in Jesus, and his disembodied spirit took its
happy flight to join the great congregation in Heaven. His remains
were moved to the chapel at 4 P. M., and from thence to the mission
cemetery, followed by a large concourse of every color, rank and
station in the community. According to his request, his body now lies
at the entrance of the grave-yard under the shade of a large mango
tree. I shall do my best to get a few iron-tree posts, and to have
the grave enclosed as soon as possible after I return to Kaw Mendi,
and I cherish the hope that the friends of the mission will procure a
desirable tombstone to be erected over the grave, and send from the
States a marble inscription to be put into the chapel.

Mr. Jowett is now taking charge of the Station, and Mr. Goodman is
teaching the school at Debia. I sincerely wish you could find a
dozen such men as Mr. Kemp to send to Africa; only be sure that they
come with sound livers, and be entirely free from heart disease. The
climate, I think, is more favorable to lung disease than America. I
believe men of any color will live as long in health in Africa as
elsewhere, provided they visit America or Europe, for a change, once in
every two or three years.

        *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

        *       *       *       *       *


WORK ON A SHORT TOUR.

REV. MYRON EELLS, SKOKOMISH, WASH. TER.

We have been made sad by the death of one of our most prominent church
members, John F. Palmer. He was at the time of his death working at a
saw-mill, when he was accidentally knocked off from a platform, about
ten feet below.

He was the first Indian to join this church. He lived, however, to
see his wife and her two sisters, whom he brought up, members of the
church; the oldest one married, and her daughter the first Indian
child who received the rite of infant baptism. He was far ahead in
many respects of any other of the Indians, especially in regard to old
religious superstitions. While many of the Indians seem willing to give
up their old ideas as a religion, they find it very difficult to get
rid of a superstitious fear. He, however, seemed to have overcome this
entirely. This was partly due to his early life. When he was about ten
years old he went to live with a white family in this Territory. He
afterwards spent several years on board a sailing vessel, and about
twelve years ago he came to this reservation, where he served as
interpreter ten years. He understood the Twana, Nisqually, Clallam,
Russian and English languages, and could read and write the latter,
though he never went to school more than about three weeks. Kind
persons in the family in which he lived and on the ship taught him, and
he had a library at the time of his death worth fifty or sixty dollars,
and took several papers and magazines, both eastern and western, and
even wrote a few articles for the papers.

“Jack at all trades and good at some,” was the pleasant way in which
Dr. Schaff put it, when some of the students in the Theological
Seminary at Hartford had done up some furniture for him to send to New
Haven. I have often been reminded of this expression, and especially
during a short tour I lately made to Dunginess. We missionaries have to
be the first part of the sentence, and we console ourselves with the
hope that the latter part may sometimes be true. When three miles from
home, the first duty was to stop and attend the funeral of a white man
who had recently died. Forty-five miles on, the evening of the next
day until late at night was spent in assisting one of the Government
employees in holding court over four Indians who had been drunk; a
fifth had escaped to the British side, and was free from the trial.
This kind of business occasionally comes in as an aid to the agent. I
seldom have anything to do with it on the reservation, as the agent can
attend to it; but when among Indians, off from the reservation, where
neither of us can be more than once in six months or thereabouts, it
sometimes saves him much trouble and expense, and seems to do as much
good as a sermon. It is of but little use to preach to drunken Indians,
and a little law sometimes helps the Gospel. The agent reciprocates by
talking Gospel to them on the Sabbath on his trips.

On reaching Dunginess the afternoon was spent in introducing an
Indian from British Columbia, who had taken me there in his canoe, to
the Clallam Indians and the school, and in comforting two parents,
Christian Indians, whose youngest child lay at the point of death. The
next morning she died, and as no minister had ever been among these
Indians at any previous funeral, they needed some instruction; so it
was my duty to help dig the grave and make the coffin, comfort them,
and attend the funeral in a snow-storm.

The Sabbath was spent in holding two services with them, one mainly
a service of song; and as there was a part of the day not occupied,
at the request of the whites near by, I gave them a sermon. The next
day I found that “blue Monday” had to be adjourned. Years ago the
Indians purchased their land, but owing to a mistake of the surveyor,
it was necessary that the deeds should be made out again; so, in
order to get all the Indians together who were needed, and the proper
officer, I walked fourteen miles and rode six in a canoe, and then saw
that nineteen deeds were properly signed, which required sixty-two
signatures, besides the witnessing, acknowledging and filing of
them, which required seventy-six names more. The plat of their town,
Jamestown, was also filed and recorded, and all after half-past three
o’clock. When this was done, I assisted the Indians to get two marriage
licenses, when we went to the church, where I addressed them on two
different subjects, after which the two weddings took place, and by
nine o’clock we were done. The monotony of the next day was varied by a
visit to the school, helping the chief to select a burying ground (for
their dead had been buried in various places), a walk of ten miles, and
a wedding of a white couple, who had been very kind to me in my work
there, one of them being a member of our church.

On my way home, while waiting for the steamers to connect, I took a
trip of about fifty miles to help in regard to the finishing of the
Indian census of last year for General Walker and Major Powell, and
then on my way home, by the kindness of the captain of the steamer,
who waited half an hour for me, I was able to catch and take to the
reservation the fifth Indian at Port Gamble who had been drunk, and had
returned from the British side.

I have never had a vacation since I have been here, almost seven
years, unless such things as these may be called vacations. They are
recreation, work, and vacation, all at once.

While at Dunginess I learned one thing which somewhat pleased me. A
few weeks before, a medicine man made a feast on Sabbath evening, and
invited all the Indians to it. In connection with it there was also
a large amount of their incantations. The feast was a bait, and the
Indians went, the members of the church as well as the others leaving
the evening service for it. Mr. Blakeslee, the school-teacher there,
wrote me, as he felt very sad about it. On reaching the place, I found
that on the same Sabbath evening, before the feast was over, those
Christian Indians, feeling that they were doing wrong, left the place
and went to one of their houses, where they confessed their sin and
held a prayer meeting over it, and on the following Thursday evening,
at the general prayer meeting, made a public statement of it. We could
ask for nothing more, but could thank the Holy Spirit for inclining
them thus to do, before any white person had spoken to them on the
subject.

        *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

        *       *       *       *       *


“CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION.”

_Auxiliary to the American Missionary Association._

    PRESIDENT: Rev. J. K. McLean, D. D. VICE-PRESIDENTS: Rev. A. L.
    Stone, D. D., Robert B. Forman, Rev. T. K. Noble, Hon F. F. Low,
    Rev. I. E. Dwinell, D. D., Hon. Samuel Cross, Rev. S. H. Willey, D.
    D., Jacob S. Taber.

    DIRECTORS: Rev. George Mooar, D. D., Hon. E. D. Sawyer, Rev. E. P.
    Baker, James M. Haven, Esq., Rev. Joseph Rowell, Rev. John Kimball,
    A. L. Van Blarcon, Esq., George Harris, Esq., and the Secretary ex
    officio.

    SECRETARY: Rev. W. C. Pond. TREASURER: E. Palache, Esq.

        *       *       *       *       *


“STEADFAST, IMMOVABLE.”

BY REV. WM. C. POND.

It was in the last week in July that one of our Chinese brethren at
Marysville, a lad of only 13 years—Ng Gan Don by name—called on one of
his cousins to inquire whether money which he had deposited with this
cousin to be sent to his father in China, had yet gone forward. The
cousin declined to satisfy him upon this point, but wished himself to
be satisfied upon another. So, taking Gan Don with yet another cousin
into an inner apartment, they inquired into his religious views and
practices. They had been specially commissioned, so they said, by Gan
Don’s mother, to see to it that what he might hear and see in the land
of the Golden Mountains should work no detriment to the religious
ideas she had instilled in his mind. Gan Don acknowledged that he had
exchanged those views and practices for some which he saw to be wiser
and more true; that he no longer worshipped idols or ancestors, but
that he believed in Jesus and was going to worship Him. They argued
with him, but found him more than a match for them on that arena; and
so, being two against one, and that one but a boy, they were easily
emboldened to see what virtue there might be in blows. The blows fell
fast and hard, and the poor lad’s head on which they fell was suffering
sorely, but he maintained his integrity, and told them that he would
never worship idols, even if they should undertake to kill him. At
length he was released, and went, battered and bleeding, to the mission
house. Our brethren, thinking that a little insight into Christian laws
might do these persecutors good, entered a complaint against them, and
they were fined $30 each.

        *       *       *       *       *


EXCITEMENT IN SACRAMENTO.

The _Record-Union_, of Sacramento, tells the story under this
heading:—“CHINATOWN PREACHING. CHINESE MISSIONARIES KU-KLUXED, BUT
NOT TERRIFIED.” I wish you had space for the entire article, but it
would cover too many pages. Suffice it to say, that in connection with
other Chinese Christians, our helper, Lem Chung, maintains a regular
street-preaching service each Sabbath afternoon, in the very heart
of the Sacramento Chinatown. Last Sabbath (August 14), as he and his
companions approached the place, they found themselves confronted by
a large _white_ poster covered with Chinese characters. White is the
emblem of mourning among the Chinese, and gave to the poster much the
same significance that black, emblazoned with skull and crossbones,
would have done to the colored voters of the South some years ago. Many
of the heathen Chinese had gathered to watch the effect of this woful
paper on the advocates of the American heresy; and mingled surprise
and horror seized them when Lem Chung proceeded coolly to take it down
from the wall and read it aloud to them all. I give you his translation
of its contents;—“It is claimed by the Christian preachers that Christ
is the Lord of heaven and earth and the Creator. They only preach to
make money, and it is useless to dispute with them; but something must
be said to inform the people against this new false religion. It is
learned from Christianity that Jesus was born only 1,881 years ago,
which proves that it is false that he made the world; and telling a
falsehood about this, they cannot be believed about anything else. Or,
if Jesus was born before the world was made, then there was no world
to hold Him when He was first born, or for Him to be upon, and His
parents would have starved to death. How is it that you fellows keep so
happy when you preach such news as this to us? Notice is hereby given
that such of the Chinese people as have been converted to Christianity
must not follow that way any more. Moreover, this religion must not
be preached any more on the street, and if any shall do so they shall
be arrested by the Six Companies and punished for preaching false
doctrines and deceiving the people. They shall be given eighty lashes,
and then dragged to the grave-yard and buried alive; their bones shall
not be taken back to China, but shall remain foreign ghosts forever;
and then they can believe in Jesus all they are a mind to. Whoever
shall dare to take this white notice down shall be the son of no
father.”

The effect of the placard was simply to secure a larger audience and a
closer attention at the preaching service, to demonstrate the futility
of gods that men could make and men destroy, and to give our helper
and his friends the best possible opportunity to do two things: 1st,
to show that Confucius urges all men to study and seek for the truth
wherever they can find it, and those who propose to beat and kill and
doom men for doing this, are no followers of that great master; and,
2d, to illustrate the Christian spirit by inviting those who had “put
up the white poster to come to the mission-house, where they would be
kindly treated,” and find themselves in the midst of good friends.

        *       *       *       *       *


FONG GET LOY IN CHINA.

Fong Get Loy was one of our earliest converts, and though only a
house servant, has long been a pillar in our Sacramento mission
work. Somewhat more than a year ago he returned to China and spent
several months. I have been greatly interested in his account of his
experiences there, and at my request he has written them out, as
follows, (the original in Chinese; the translation by Lem Chung):

Dear Brother in Christ: According to your request, I will at this time
send you account of my late visit in China; and what I doing while
there. When I sailed from San Francisco, two of our Sacramento mission
boys go with me on the ship. Every day we prayed together and talk
about Jesus. We take thirty-three days sailing to Hong Kong. Before we
landed, just as we casting anchor, we three gathered to hold prayer
meeting, that God keep us from evil and temptation in China, and help
us to work for Him. At the same time our heathen countrymen sacrificed
to the goddess of the sea. I met our Christian brother, Fung Affoo, in
Hong Kong; stayed there one day and two nights. Then I take Chinese
schooner, sail hundred fifty miles to my own town, which took two days
more before I get home. One year before I return to China I sent have
house built. When I arrived home, I found idols in some of the rooms
to worship: in the kitchen, to the god who takes care the cooking;
at the front door, the one who looks and guards the door to let no
evil spirits come in to trouble us; also, in the parlor I found the
one who watches the whole house. I found blocks of wood with names
of ancestors, carefully keep time of birth and death. All these they
expect me to worship on my return. I told them: “My father dead—gone
away. If he bad man when he live, God punish him now. He would be shut
up in prison; can he come? They say ‘No.’ I say: ‘If my father good
man, he happy now; he in a good place; he don’t want to come here, eat
anything.’ I tell them: ‘You put up the god to take care the cooking;
you sit down, do nothing; by-and-by you not have anything to cook.
Somebody else have no god in the kitchen; they go to work; by and by
they have something to eat!’ I say: ‘You place the idol by the front
door; you leave the door open, not watch; you think no thief come? God
made all things. He is the one to worship. Idols cannot help you.’
They say to me: ‘You no worship idol, by and by you have no house, no
children, no money.’ I answer: ‘Other nations that not worship idols
have more money and better houses than any we have in China. We go work
for them to get money. We do not have to worship idols to get money.’
I say: ‘Whomsoever worship gods made by men’s hands, it is transgress
to God.’ They say: ‘How is this our nation so great, so many wise
men all worshipping idols; are they all transgress to Him? Is your
experience higher than they?’ I say to them: ‘The idols and ancestors
have no spirit nor power to help them any.’ Once in a while the people
are crowded at my door. They shouted and said: ‘Well, if you dare to
destroy your gods and ancestors, and nothing happen to your family, we
will believe you.’ I then took a chair, got up in the parlor, took the
goddess which my wife put there, and most all the family help her. I
take a hatchet, chop it into pieces, and boil the tea with it. Oh! what
astonishment to them! So they disperse. After that, my wife and my son
both received the doctrine of the Bible, and every morning and evening
we all would offer prayer, and at our meals asked God’s blessing. My
wife more faithful than I. She willing to put away the idols, and like
to go from house to house, when she have a chance, to tell the people
about Jesus. My son attends school. All his school-mates laugh at him,
but still he pray to God that He give him more faith, that he not care
about the laughing. At the school they have a person’s name which they
required to worship, that he may help them study and learn; but my
son not want to worship him, after he believe in Jesus. He told them:
‘That’s nothing, only a piece of paper.’ The teacher compel him to do
like the others. One day a woman in my town came to me, and asked me to
pray for her son. He gone away from her. He send no money to support
her. She said: ‘Pray for me that he thinks what he doing now, and may
change his conduct, send something to help me.’ I knelt down with her,
and pray God that He answer our prayer and bless this woman. Not many
days after this God answered that prayer, and sent the money, and,
with it, a new heart, for she believe, and thank our Heavenly Father,
and came to be a Christian. Now a few others with her and my family
keep the holy Sabbath, and have a meeting together. Sometimes they go
to the mission station a few miles off, to hear the Gospel. Before,
when I went back to China [_i.e._, on his former visit to his home],
no Christian or missionary at that part of the province of Canton, but
last year I find several hundreds become Christians not far from my
home. Many times I go to hear the missionary talk about Christ. Oh,
how I thank the Lord that He sent the missionary over there to speak
the Gospel to them, and take away the darkness, that they may, by and
by, more and more come into the sheep-fold and glorify God! I stayed
at home seven months. Every day I work for Jesus while I there. When
the time come for me to say good-by, and return to California, I feel
I like great deal better to stay and work there for Christ. I promise
myself, as soon as I can gain enough to live upon, I will return and
give my whole time to work for my countrymen, and bring all I can to
bow down to the true God.”

When will the American Missionary Association be ready to keep such men
at work in their native land, preaching Jesus?

        *       *       *       *       *




GLEANINGS.


—A friend has anonymously contributed the entire cost of the new steel
boat required for the Baptist expedition on the African Lakes, and it
is to be named the Plymouth.

—A Virginia negro has recently taken out a patent for a fire escape,
which is composed of lattice work that can be shut up into very small
space or extended into a safe ladder, and can also be used as a pike to
throw in tottering walls.

—The following plan for the abolition of slavery in Egypt has been
approved by Col. Gordon, and will probably be adopted by the Khedive’s
Government:

1.—Registration of all existing slaves in the Mudiriehs of the Soudan,
and of Cairo (Lower Egypt), by the Governors.

2.—Registers to be kept in each Government office of the names of
slaves and their owners, with description of each.

3.—Every slave to be free if not registered after expiration of six
months (the period given for registration). All slaves born after
signature of this decree to be free.

4.—Register books to be closed forever after the expiration of six
months.

5.—Owners of slaves thus registered to be bound to produce Government
certificates corresponding with the register books, when required to do
so by the Government of Egypt.

6.—The Governors of Egypt and of the Soudan to proclaim this throughout
the land.

7.—All purchases or sales of slaves from family to family are to be
endorsed on the registration papers and inscribed in the Government
books of registry.—_Anti-Slavery Reporter._

—One of the most successful and trustworthy farmers in Georgia is a
negro named Harper, who has just paid $32,000 for 2,100 acres of land
lying on Broad River, in Oglethorpe County. He is reported to be one of
the best farmers in the country. He is economical; his family all work:
most of his money was made by renting land and growing cotton.

—Prof. Wm. S. Scarborough, formerly a pupil at Atlanta University,
has published a neat volume of 150 pages, entitled “First Lessons in
Greek.” The work was designed to be an imitation of Jones’ “First
Lessons in Latin,” and to give a clear and concise statement of the
rudimentary forms of the language, with copious notes and references
to the grammars of Goodwin and Hadley. Under Part II. Mr. Scarborough
gives a few selections taken from the Anabasis and Memorabilia of
Xenophon. The work is a good indication of what may be expected from
the colored people when they shall have had the advantages of a higher
education.

—“Worship in Song,” edited by Jos. P. Holbrook, Mus. Doc., and
published by A. S. Barnes & Co., contains 450 pages, and is handsomely
bound and attractive. Those best acquainted with Dr. Holbrook recognize
his excellent judgment and taste, and the great attractiveness of his
compositions. The author and publishers invite a practical test of
their book, and it appears to quite meet the expectations of those who
may adopt it for public worship.

—Bishop Hurst, in the _Quarterly Review_, writes on this wise
respecting the work of the Methodist Episcopal and the Congregational
churches at the South:

The two churches which are pre-eminently American, which have grown out
of the ideas, convictions and the religious wants of the people under
the free institutions of this country, are the Methodist Episcopal
and the Congregational. They have laid foundations in the north and
west which will endure for all coming time, and both are now doing the
same in the South. If considered as antagonistic, which it is not, but
rather co-operative, the real rival of the Methodist Episcopal church
in the South is the Congregational, with its institutions of learning
sustained by the American Missionary Association. It moves upon those
lines which will give it a future, while other and older denominations
are sleeping, apparently unconscious of the mighty revolution that has
taken place, and indifferent to those principles which will inevitably
impress themselves upon the church of the next century. Intelligence
and morality are everywhere seen in that communion. That it is gaining
a foot-hold in the South is obvious to every observer—a fact for which
we are thankful. It is not carrying New England ideas into the cabins
of the colored people, but it is doing better by bringing them out of
their cabins and squalor and ignorance into the New England atmosphere
and society created among themselves and for their posterity. We do
not entertain a doubt that this denomination will become strong in the
South, and we shall rejoice to see the time when it will devote as much
attention to the white people as it now does to the colored. Southern
ecclesiastical bourbonism is sadly, if not hopelessly, fossilized,
and it is very desirable that various churches unite in bringing new
spiritual life to the masses in the South, both white and colored.

—Some have made a considerable ado about “Yankee school-teachers” in
the negro schools in the South, and in some cases our heathen have
acted much as the heathen of Canterbury Green (Ct.) acted in 1831.
Perhaps some of them have not been altogether to our taste; perhaps
some of them have mixed in with the “three R’s” some things not to our
edification. But what else could be done? Would qualified Southern men
and women have taken these places when the Northern teachers came?
Would they do it now? Not generally, though some of the best would,
as a very few of the best have begun to do. Suppose these Northern
teachers had not come—that nobody had taught the negroes, set free and
citizens! The South would have been uninhabitable by this time. Some
may resent this. Be it so; they resent the truth.—_From “Our Brother in
Black” by Atticus G. Haygood, D. D., Pres. of Emory College, Oxford,
Ga._

        *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

        *       *       *       *       *


A MISSIONARY POTATO.

The missionary concert at the Congregational church, last Sunday night,
was interesting, and in some respects novel. There is a bit of history
connected with it. Two little girls belonging to the Sunday-school some
time ago became so inspired with missionary zeal that, after casting
about for ways to get money for the purpose, they devised a doll show,
and carried it through here last winter with considerable success,
netting five dollars. That money they sent to Fisk University, with
request for report concerning its use. A letter came back, enclosing
a letter from a Fisk student, written from Mississippi, where the
young man was teaching to earn money to continue his studies at the
University. That letter told of a colored boy, one of the pupils in
the student’s school, and made an appeal for him. The boy was the
son of his mother’s former master, and since she was emancipated the
mother had married. The step-father hired the boy to horse-racers and
saloon-keepers, and in various ways kept him under bad influences and
away from school. The boy and his mother were ambitious that he should
be educated; and when, a short time previous, the step-father had
sickened and died, one obstacle seemed removed.

Another obstacle was lack of means, and for that the student appealed,
in a letter written in answer to one from our people here, and it was
for that purpose that the concert of last Sunday night was given by the
Young People’s Missionary Circle of the Congregational Sabbath-school,
organized since the little girls’ doll show enterprise. But now the
enterprise is shared with them by the other churches, for they all
suspended their services on this occasion, and Messrs. Sanders, Walter
and Monroe participated in the devotional exercises, and their people
swelled the congregation. The exercises, recitations, essays and
Jubilee Songs were creditable and entertaining.

A collection was taken for the benefit of Master Walter, the ambitious
Mississippi boy, and then a novel feature was introduced. Mr. Dickinson
stated that last spring one of the boys in the congregation had noticed
for two Sundays, in one corner of the church, a potato, from some
source unknown. The thought came to the boy that he would take it home
and plant it, for the benefit of missionary interests. He had done so,
and now brought the proceeds, some twenty or thirty potatoes, big and
little, but mostly little, and desired them to be sold to separate
persons who would, make the same use of them next year.

The potatoes were thereupon offered for sale, and bought up, mostly at
ten cents apiece; and we may expect to hear more about that missionary
potato next year. Potatoes, $2.25.

The proceeds of the evening amounted to $15.05, which is forwarded
to the student at the University, where he has already taken the boy
Walter, trusting that the needed help will come. The student’s name is
McClellan.—_Cambridge (Ill.) Chronicle._

        *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR AUGUST, 1881.

        *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $241.91.

    Bangor. First Cong. Ch.                                  $20.17
    Bath. Winter St. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MICHAEL F. GANNETT, L. M.                               35.10
    Brunswick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       70.00
    Dennysville. Peter E. Vose, $5; Mrs. Sam’l Eastman,
      $5                                                      10.00
    Eastport. Cong. Sab. Sch., $5; G. A. P., $1                6.00
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                29.59
    Hallowell. Girls’ Sunday afternoon prayer meeting of
      Classical Academy, _for furnishing a room, Atlanta
      U._                                                     27.00
    Hampden. Cong. Ch.                                        12.75
    Machias. “A. R. T.,” $5; “A Friend,” $2                    7.00
    South Berwick. Hugh and Philip Lewis                       5.00
    Waterford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        8.30
    West Auburn. First Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    Wilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Woolwich. “A widow’s gift”                                 1.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $315.37.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        15.20
    Colebrook. “E. C. W. and Wife”                             2.00
    Cornish. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), to const. REV.
      JAMES T. JACKSON, L. M.                                  7.16
    East Jaffrey. Miss Eliza A. Parker                        20.00
    Francestown. AMASA DOWNS, to const. himself, L. M.        50.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $32.16; “A Friend,”
      $30.00, to const. MRS. MARIA J. STOWELL, L. M.          62.16
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     11.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.50
    North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         19.39
    Pembroke. Cong. Ch.                                       18.31
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 1.40
    Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.00
    West Concord. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          14.35
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            39.50
                                                             ——————
                                                             296.97

    LEGACY.

    Cornish. Estate of Mrs. Sarah W. Westgate, by Albert
      E. Wellman, a Trustee                                   18.40
                                                             ——————
                                                             315.37


  VERMONT, $1,561.86.
    Barton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.31
    Brookfield. “A Friend,” _for Tougaloo U._, and to
      const. REV. WM. M. GAY and MRS. WM. M. GAY, L.
      M’s.                                                    50.00
    Craftsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            16.33
    East Hardwick. S. W. O.                                    0.52
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.00
    Ludlow. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.81
    Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley, $45; Mrs. Cone, $15,
      for _Student Aid, Talladega C._                         60.00
    Montgomery. Heman Watkins                                  4.00
    North Cambridge. M. K.                                     1.00
    West Fairlee. Mrs. C. M. H.                                0.50
    West Glover. Cong Ch. and Soc.                             9.25
    Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.00
    Woodstock. Cong. and Soc.                                 17.22
    ——— “L. G.”                                               25.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             206.94

    LEGACIES.

    Charlotte. Estate of Salome Strong, by W. W. Higbee,
      Admr.                                                1,095.30
    Springfield. Estate of Dea. Charles Haywood, by Geo.
      P. Haywood, Ex.                                        259.62
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,561.86


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,454.31.

    Abington. Mrs. H. P.                                       2.00
    Amherst. Agricultural College, Class of 1882, _for
      furnishing a room, Stone Hall, Talladega, Ala._         30.00
    Andover. Rev. Joseph Emerson, $10; West Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $10                                               20.00
    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                          2.00
    Billerica. Mrs. E. R. Goales, _for Macon, Ga._             3.00
    Boston. Mary R. Sturges, $15; Mrs. G. S. Curtis,
      $10, _for Athens, Ala._                                 25.00
    Boston. “A. B. H. J.”                                      2.00
    Bradford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        25.05
    Braintree. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.65
    Cambridge. North Av. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $224.43, to
      const. MRS. B. F. SANDS, REV. CHARLES F. THWING,
      M. L. WALTON, DAVID BOWIE, JOHN HARRINGTON and
      FRANK FOXCROFT, L. M’s.; “A Friend,” $5                229.43
    Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.00
    Chelsea. J. P. Payson, _for freight_                       2.00
    Concord. “A Friend”                                        1.00
    Danvers. Maple St. Ch. and Soc.                          109.52
    Danvers. Maple Leaf Mission Circle, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      60.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               35.00
    Falmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              41.00
    Grafton. Mrs. S. A.                                        1.00
    Georgetown. A. H.                                          1.00
    Greenfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., bbl. of C. _for
      Union Point_
    Haverhill. “Friend,” _for furnishing room, Tougaloo
      U._                                                      1.00
    Holden. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Holliston. D. B. Fitts                                     3.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                20.00
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.00
    Lawrence. Cong Ch. and Soc.                              100.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           16.73
    Lunenburgh. “Wilson family,” _for furnishing a room,
      Stone Hall, Straight U._                                25.00
    Lynn. Central Ch. and Soc.                                16.50
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for buildings,
      Wilmington, N. C._                                   1,500.00
    Medford. Mystic Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. D. W.
      WILCOX, L. M.                                          100.00
    Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                       17.00
    Natick. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., bundle of C.
    Newtonville. J. K.                                         1.00
    Northampton. Sab. Sch. of First Ch. _for ed. of an
      Indian, Hampton N. and A. Inst._                        20.00
    North Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           3.80
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.35
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.01
    Peabody. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega C._        1.20
    Pepperell. “Friends,” _for furnishing room, Stone
      Hall, Straight U._                                      25.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      54.43
    Randolph. “Randolph,” _for furnishing room, Stone
      Hall, Straight U._                                      50.00
    Randolph. Miss Abby W. Turner                             10.00
    Royalston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      112.00
    Somerville. “A Friend”                                     1.00
    South Attleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               4.59
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    35.00
    Southville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             5.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. SARAH JANE TIRRELL, L. M.                          44.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $45.01; Sec.
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $37.54; Ira Merrill, $3             85.55
    Sunderland. “A Friend,” $5; “Friends,” $2                  7.00
    Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $130; H. H. Fish,
      $25                                                    155.00
    Walpole. Mrs. C. F. M.                                     1.00
    Waltham. N. S. and W. J. S., $1;—— Package of
      Papers                                                   1.00
    Warwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.00
    Webster. First Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
    West Boylston. Geo. W. Ames, $3; Polly Ames, $3            6.00
    Westhampton. “A Friend,”                                  20.00
    West Medway. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing a
      room, Stone Hall, Straight U._                          25.00
    West Springfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                21.00
    Wilbraham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              9.50
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.00
    Woburn. Mrs. Simon Holden                                  5.00
    Wollaston Heights. Mrs. Caroline C. Shaw                   6.00
    Worcester. Saml. R. Heywood, to const. HON. GEO. F.
      HOAR, L. M.                                             30.00
    ——— Church of Christ, North Leominster, $7; Sab.
      Sch., Shirley Village, $8.50; Sab. Sch.,
      Lunenburgh, $9.50, _for furnishing a room, Stone
      Hall, Straight U._                                      25.00
    ———“A Friend,” _for furnishing a room, Stone Hall,
      Straight U._                                            50.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           3,354.31

    LEGACY.

    Franklin. Estate of Mrs. Nancy C. Fisher                 100.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           3,454.31


  CONNECTICUT, $1,744.67.

    Berlin. “A Friend,” _for aid of a young man
      preparing for Africa_                                   50.00
    Bridgeport. C. K. B.                                       0.50
    Chester. Cong. Ch.                                        50.25
    Danbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. E.
      THOMPSON, J. W. BACON, WM. J. RIDER and AMZI T.
      ROGERS, L. M’s.                                        160.00
    East Windsor Hill. Mrs. Ira Tracy                          2.00
    Fair Haven. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Colored
      Children_, and to const. MRS. HARRIET W. BARBOUR
      and ALBERT W. HART, L. M’s.                             63.00
    Goshen. “A Friend”                                        20.00
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   10.21
    Hadlyme. Richard E. Hungerford, $100; Cong. Ch.,
      $5.46                                                  105.46
    Hanover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Hartford. J. E. Cushman, $200; D. H. Wells, $25          225.00
    Hebron. Rev. J. B. Cook                                    3.00
    Huntington. Mrs. S. A. N.                                  1.00
    Lebanon. First Ch.                                        68.53
    Mansfield Centre. “A Friend,” $35, _for furnishing a
      room, Stone Hall_; Cong. Sab. Sch. $10, _for
      Needmore Chapel_; Mrs. B. Swift, $25; Chas.
      Ramsdell, $2; Dea. G. S., $1; Mrs. W. T., $1, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              74.00
    Middletown. “A. B. C.”                                     5.00
    New Haven. Rev. J. J. Abbott, $20; “A Friend,” $20        40.00
    New Preston. “S. A. W.”                                    2.00
    North Stonington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         15.00
    Norwich. First Cong. Ch.                                 120.00
    Pomfret. First Cong. Ch.                                  41.86
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           6.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                        7.55
    South Britain. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.75
    Southington. “A Friend”                                    1.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., to const. JOHN CORNELIUS
      GREGGS, CHARLES I. ALLEN, SILAS A. GRIDLEY, GEORGE
      T. WINSLOW, JUDAH W. CLARK, WILLIAM BATES, GEORGE
      H. BATES, BURR S. BEACH and STEPHEN FENN, L. M’s.      303.80
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      50.80
    Waterbury. Mrs. Chas. Benedict, _for Macon, Ga._           3.00
    West Chester. Cong. Ch.                                    8.50
    Westville. Cong. Ch.                                      28.00
    Winsted. First Cong. Ch.                                  38.17
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch.                           154.29
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.00
    ———“Gratitude,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                15.00


  NEW YORK, $5,246.32.

    Amsterdam. Mrs. L. M. Bell, $25; “A few Members
      Presb. Ch.” by C. Bartlett, $67                         92.00
    Auburn. S. B. O.                                           0.50
    Brooklyn. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Chittenango. Mrs. Edwin Lewis, $10; Mrs. Amelia L.
      Brown, $5                                               15.00
    Copenhagen. Miss A. E. W.                                  0.25
    Coventryville. Cong. Ch.                                  15.00
    Eaton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 11.00
    Elmira. Miss C. Thurston                                   5.00
    Gerry. Mrs. Mary A. Sears                                178.36
    Goshen. “Friend of President Garfield” ($1 _of which
      for Bibles and Testaments_)                              2.00
    Hamilton. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    Homer. Mrs. E. B. Dean                                     7.00
    Lebanon. Alfred Seymour, $6.50; Marvin Day, $6;
      Thomas Hitchcock, $6; Thomas Williamson, $2; J. A.
      Head, $1.50; G. A. Curtiss, $1.25; Others, $6.75,
      by Rev. G. A. Curtiss                                   30.00
    Milton. Miss F., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._           0.50
    Nelson. Cong. Ch.                                          8.20
    New York. Gen. Wager Swayne, _for repairs on Swayne
      Hall_                                                  100.00
    New York. N. Y. Colored Mission Sab. Sch. 135 West
      30th St.                                                 2.41
    Onondaga Valley. A. L. G.                                  1.00
    Oswego. J. G.                                              1.00
    Owasco. Mrs. A. Stewart                                    2.00
    Poughkeepsie. Mrs. M. J. Myers                            20.00
    Pratham. Edward Halsey                                     2.00
    Rensselaer Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.00
    Rochester. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             19.44
    Rome. John. B. Jervis                                     25.00
    Sherburne. Joshua Pratt, $500; Lucius Newton, $2,
      _for Talladega C._; Miss E. A. Rexford, $5, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                             507.00
    Smyrna. H. M. Dixon, $5; Dea. C., $1, _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega, Ala._                                 6.00
    Syracuse. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              48.91
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                10.00
    Walton. Mrs. C. H. Ladd, $100, _for Mendi M._ “_John
      Brown Steamer_”; “The Little Helpers,” Box of C.,
      _for School at Avery Station, Mendi M._                100.00
    Walton. By Rev. H. M. Ladd, _for Mag._                     1.50
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch.                              3.25
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,236.32

    LEGACIES.

    Coventryville. Estate of Mrs. Esther Reed, by Rev.
      W. W. Warner                                            10.00
    Palmyra. Estate of Mrs. Mary Ann Woodward, by Daniel
      C. Lillie, Ex.                                       4,000.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           5,246.32


  NEW JERSEY, $5.00.

    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch., _for repairs, Talladega
      C._                                                      5.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $525.00.

    Mercer. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Worth. John Burgess                                        5.00
                                                              —————
                                                              25.00

    LEGACY.

    Philadelphia. Estate of A. Claxton, _for Mendi M._       500.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             525.00


  OHIO, $1,255.94.

    Berea. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._                      62.15
    Adam’s Mills. Mrs. M. A. Smith                            10.00
    Cleveland. S. H. Sheldon, $26.50, _for furnishing
      room, Ladies’ Hall_; M. S. Hinman, $10, _for
      furnishing room, Strieby Hall, Tougaloo, Miss._         36.50
    Claridon. Rev. C. C. Starbuck, _for Talladega C._          3.00
    Elyria. Heman Ely, _for Talladega C._                     50.00
    Geneva. Mrs. H. A. W.                                      1.00
    Gomer. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                    52.75
    Hudson. C. E. H.                                           0.50
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., $37.30; Second Cong. Ch.,
      $11.87; L. F., $1                                       50.17
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                               75.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing
      room, Ladies’ Hall, Tougaloo, Miss._                    25.00
    Saint Clairsville. Wm. Lee, Sen.                           3.00
    Steuben. Levi Platt                                        1.50
    Strongsville. Mrs. K. Pomeroy, $30, _for furnishing
      room, Strieby Hall_; T. J. Bartlett, $5, _for
      furnishing room, Ladies’ Hall, Tougaloo, Miss._         35.00
    Sullivan. Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._                       23.61
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  26.76
                                                             ——————
                                                             455.94

    LEGACIES.

    Cherry Valley. Estate of Mrs. Fanny Slater, by W. W.
      Hopkins, Ex.                                           100.00
    Cleveland. Estate of Brewster Pelton, by John G.
      Jennings, _for Mendi M._                               500.00
    Geneva. Estate of Mrs. Amy Roberts, by Mrs. Harriet
      A. Wood                                                200.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,255.94


  ILLINOIS, $992.37.

    Chicago. “A Friend,”                                     200.00
    Chicago. Ladies of South Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            5.50
    Galesburg. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Galva. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     25.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        75.00
    Highland Park. Mrs. Elisha Gray, $10; Fred. Fisher,
      $5; Mrs. H. McD., $1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        16.00
    Kewanee. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Savannah, Ga._                                          20.00
    La Harpe. Cong. Ch.                                       23.00
    Moline. Charles Atkinson, _for President’s House,
      Talladega C._                                          100.00
    Moline. Thomas Jewett, _for building Ladies’ Hall,
      Tougaloo, Miss._                                        75.00
    Naperville. A. A. Smith                                    5.00
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch.                                       56.45
    Oak Park. Girls’ Mission Circle, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Prospect Park. Mrs. Emma Floyd                             5.00
    Rochelle. C. F. Holcomb                                   12.00
    Rochelle. W. H. H., Sen., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       1.00
    Rockford. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              50.00
    Rockford. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Rockford. “Rockford Lamplighters,” _for Indian M._        11.79
    Streator. Samuel Plumb, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        50.00
    Sycamore. J. H. Rogers, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       104.00
    Wataga. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    9.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                      11.13
    Wyamet. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                12.50


  MICHIGAN, $366.53.

    Alpena. First Cong. Ch.                                  134.00
    Detroit. Woodward Ave. Cong. Ch., $65.25; E. P. B.,
      56c.                                                    65.81
    Frankfort. First Cong. Ch.                                 3.40
    Grand Rapids. Mrs. E. G. Furness                           5.00
    Hillsdale. J. W. Ford                                      2.00
    Leland. Cong. Ch.                                          6.31
    Litchfield. Mrs. J. B. S.                                  0.50
    Mankato. Cong. Ch.                                         2.23
    Moline. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                          8.05
    Romeo. Miss Mary A. Dickinson, _for rebuilding,
      Tougaloo U._                                           100.00
    Summit. Woman’s Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                    3.40
    Warren. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Whitehall. First Cong. Ch.                                 5.83


  IOWA, $130.64.

    Atlantic. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         27.57
    Denmark. Isaac Field                                      15.00
    Grinnell. T. P. Carleton                                   2.00
    Keokuk. Mrs. E. M. Wilson                                  5.00
    Iowa Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      9.90
    Marshalltown. G. W.                                        0.50
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             23.82
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                              16.40
    Muscatine. Dr. I. L. Graham, _for furnishing room,
      Stone Hall, Talladega, Ala._                             5.00
    New Hampton. Ladies’ Cent. Soc.                            2.45
    Stacyville. Woman’s Miss. Soc.                             3.00
    Traer. Cong. Ch.                                          20.00


  WISCONSIN, $160.68.

    Arena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Talladega, Ala._                                         2.00
    Beloit. Mrs. S. M. Clary, $5, and Box of C., _for
      Macon, Ga._                                              5.00
    Cooksville. Edward Gilley                                  5.00
    Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                        45.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                    1.75
    Leeds. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                    0.50
    Madison. First Cong. Ch.                                  50.00
    Pewaukee. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00
    Racine. First Presb. Ch.                                  33.43
    Rockland. Thomas H. Eynon                                 10.00
    Stoughton. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00


  MISSOURI, $19.40.

    Breckenridge. Rev. T. A. H.                                0.50
    DeKalb. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Athens, Ala._                5.00
    Kidder. Cong. Ch.                                          7.50
    Saint Louis. Cong. Ch.                                     6.40


  MINNESOTA, $71.21.

    Austin. Mrs. S. C. Bacon                                  10.00
    Minneapolis. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           20.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 24.46
    Spring Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  16.75


  KANSAS, $3.00.

    Brookville. Rev. S. G. Wright, $2.50; Mrs. E. E. S.,
      50c.                                                     3.00


  NEBRASKA, $28.45.

    Omaha. “K. and C.”                                        10.00
    Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                  18.45


  CALIFORNIA, $3.00.

    Rocklin. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00


  OREGON, $20.00.

    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00


  DELAWARE, $1.00.

    Wilmington. Mrs. N. T. J.                                  1.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $15.00.

    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $11.25.

    Almeda. “Friends” by R. G. Holmes, _for Almeda, S.
      C._                                                     11.25


  TENNESSEE, $8.00.

    Memphis. By Prof. A. J. Steele                             8.00


  GEORGIA, $256.60.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $253.60; Rent, $3         256.60


  ALABAMA, $214.20.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             50.50
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          2.05
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                    120.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch. ($2.35 _of which for Mendi
      M._)                                                    21.65
    Talladega. Rev. H. B. De Forest, $10; Prof. Geo. N.
      Ellis, $10, _for Needmore Chapel, Talladega, Ala._      20.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $13.10.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                            13.10


  TEXAS, $57.75.

    Austin. Tillotson C. and N. Ins., Tuition                 57.75


  INCOME FUND, $120.50.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi Mission_                           85.50
    Greenwich, N.Y. Town Bonds, _for Straight U._             35.00


  SCOTLAND, $63.73.

    Perth. No. United Presb. Ch., £9; “Friend,” by D.
      Morton, 5s.; J. Balman, _for Chinese M._, £2;
      “Friend,” _for “John Brown Steamer,”_ £2                63.73
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             16,906.79
    Total from Oct. 1st to Aug. 31st                    $207,731.58


          *       *       *       *       *


    FOR TILLOTSON C. & N. INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

      Bridgeport, Conn. S. C. Kingman                          100.00
      West Haven, Conn. Mrs. Emeline Smith                      10.00
                                                               ——————
          Total                                                110.00
      Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to July 31st     4,974.71
                                                             ————————
          Total                                             $5,084.71


          *       *       *       *       *


    FOR MISSIONS IN AFRICA.

      From Oct. 1st to July 31st                           $26,289.62

  H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
       56 Reade St., N. Y.

        *       *       *       *       *




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

        *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”


ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct Christian
missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries which are destitute of
them, or which present open and urgent fields of effort.


ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the practice
of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds, may become a
member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty dollars, a life
member; provided that children and others who have not professed their
faith may be constituted life members without the privilege of voting.


ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of September,
October or November, for the election of officers and the transaction
of other business, at such time and place as shall be designated by the
Executive Committee.


ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting, and
of delegates from churches, local missionary societies, and other
co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one representative.


ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors, and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory, and
the Treasurer ex officio, members.


ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counseling, sustaining and
dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and agents;
the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the transaction of
all such business as usually appertains to the executive committees of
missionary and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings to
be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which shall,
by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the complaints of any
aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision of such reference shall
be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call, in
all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and general
conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the diffusion of
the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous promotion of the
missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business.


ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields of labor
and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor particularly to
discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the known fruits of
unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment those who hold their
fellow-beings as slaves.


ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.


ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular annual
meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been submitted to
a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in season to be
published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if so submitted) in
the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a belief
in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a Saviour; the
Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, the
only Saviour of the world; the necessity of regeneration by the Holy
Spirit; repentance, faith and holy obedience in order to salvation; the
immortality of the soul; and the retributions of the judgment in the
eternal punishment of the wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

        *       *       *       *       *




_The American Missionary Association._

        *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As closely
related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted CHINESE
in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its humane and
Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In Virginia, 1; North Carolina, 6; South
Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 6; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14;
Louisiana, 17; Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 2. _Among the
Indians_, 1. Total, 76.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE SOUTH.—_Chartered_:
Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.; Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville,
Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans, La.; and Austin, Texas—8. _Graded
or Normal Schools_: at Wilmington, Raleigh, N. C.; Charleston,
Greenwood, S. C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.; Montgomery, Mobile,
Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—12. _Other Schools_, 31. Total, 51.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 284; among
the Chinese, 22; among the Indians, 11; in Africa, 13. Total, 330.
STUDENTS—In Theology, 102; Law, 23; in College Course, 75; in other
studies, 7,852. Total, 8,052. Scholars taught by former pupils of
our schools, estimated at 150,000. INDIANS under the care of the
Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the growing
work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and _larger_
contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for the
new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and pious, for
these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as below:

  NEW YORK     H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer, 56 Reade Street.
  BOSTON       Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis’t Sec., Room 21 Congregational
               House.
  CHICAGO      Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis’t Sec., 112 West Washington Street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries; to
Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does not
prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year not less
than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in their
last Will and Testament are earnestly requested to use the following


FORM OF BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ——— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ——— days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses (in some States three
are required, in other States only two), who should write against
their names their places of residence (if in cities, their street and
number). The following form of attestation will answer for every State
in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published and declared by the said (A.
B.) as his last Will and Testament, in presence of us, who, at the
request of the said A. B., and in his presence, and in the presence of
each other, have hereunto subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some
States it is required that the Will should be made at least two months
before the death of the testator.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                               PAYSON’S

                             Indelible Ink,

                     FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                         COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                              PREPARATION.


It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                        _THE SIMPLEST & BEST._

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                              INQUIRE FOR

                         PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many Fancy
Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                  *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Fleur-de-lis]

                   _=J. & R. LAMB=, 59 Carmine St.
                                    NEW YORK._
                       _ARTISTIC STAIN’D GLASS_

                     MEMORIAL WINDOWS,
                                   MEMORIAL TABLETS.


                Sterling Silver Communion Services.
                    Send for Hand Book by Mail.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                 NEW AND IMPROVED STYLES THIS SEASON.

                                MASON
                                 AND
                                HAMLIN
                                ORGANS


BEST IN THE WORLD: winners of highest distinction at EVERY GREAT
WORLD’S FAIR FOR THIRTEEN YEARS. Prices, $51, $57, $66, $84, $108,
to $508 and upward. For easy payments, $6.30 a quarter and upward.
Catalogues free. MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN CO., 154 Tremont Street, Boston;
46 East 14th Street, NEW YORK; 149 Wabash Ave., CHICAGO.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                           MANHATTAN LIFE

                     INSURANCE CO. of NEW YORK.


                          ORGANIZED IN 1850.


               _Over Thirty Years’ Business Experience._

               =AGENTS WANTED.= Apply at the Home Office.

                                 HENRY STOKES, President.
               J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                        INVALID ROLLING-CHAIR.
                             (RECLINING.)

[Illustration: Wheelchair with reclining passenger]

A PRICELESS BOON to those who are UNABLE TO WALK. LEONARD BACON, D. D.,
HON. A. H. STEVENS, M. C., and OTHERS recommend them. SEND FOR CIRCULAR.

[Illustration: Wheelchair with sitting passenger]

FOLDING CHAIR CO., New Haven Ct.


                  *       *       *       *       *


                       COPY OF THE REVISED NEW
                           TESTAMENT FREE.

During the coming month we will send free by mail a copy of the Revised
Edition of the New Testament (Oxford Edition, limp cloth, red edges), a
very handsome book, to any subscriber who will renew his subscription
to the WITNESS now, by sending us $1.50 by money order, bank draft, or
registered letter. Even if subscription is not due until next year, by
remitting the amount now, the subscription will be extended and the
Testament sent at once. This is the edition authorized by the English
and American committees, and it contains a history of the revision and
an appendix giving the list of American corrections which were not
concurred in by the English committee.

A club of three copies of WITNESS for a year, directed separately, will
be sent for $4 remitted direct to this office, and also three copies of
this Testament.

A club of six GEMS OF POETRY for a year will be $4, and three copies of
Revised New Testament will be sent gratis with it.

A club of nine SABBATH READING will be sent for a year for $4, and
three copies of Revised New Testament gratis.

All directed separately and all postpaid.

Address,

                     JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,
                             _No. 21 Vandewater Street, N. Y._


                  *       *       *       *       *


                         Northfield Meetings.


                         AN EXCELLENT REPORT

                                OF THE

                        Meetings at Northfield

                         WILL BE FOUND IN THE

New York Witness of August 11, 18, 25 and September 1st.


The Four Copies will be sent post-paid for =TEN CENTS=, or for =25
Cents= the Witness will be sent to any address =THREE MONTHS, ON TRIAL=.

                     JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,
                             _21 Vandewater St._,
                                        NEW YORK.


                  *       *       *       *       *




Annual Meeting.

                  *       *       *       *       *


The American Missionary Association will hold its Thirty-fifth
Anniversary in the city of Worcester, November 1-3.

On Tuesday, at three o’clock P. M., the Executive Committee will render
their Annual Report.

At 7.30 o’clock, Tuesday evening, the Annual Sermon will be preached by
Rev. C. D. Hartranft, D. D., of Hartford, Communion following.

On Wednesday morning, papers will be read on topics of special interest
relating to the work.

Wednesday afternoon and Thursday will be occupied with Reports of
Committees and addresses thereon.

On Wednesday and Thursday evenings, there will be addresses from
Senator George F. Hoar, Gen. O. O. Howard, President M. H. Buckham, and
other distinguished speakers.

The Committees on hospitality, reduction of railroad fares, and other
matters of detail pertaining to the meeting, will be duly published in
the religious papers.

The Executive Committee proposes the following amendments to the
Constitution of the American Missionary Association to be submitted to
the Annual Meeting for action thereon, viz.:

    ART. III. Any person who contributes to the funds of the
    Association may become a member thereof for the current year by
    requesting to be enrolled as such at the time such contribution is
    paid into the treasury of the Association, and any contributor to
    the amount of thirty dollars, at one time, may, on request to that
    effect, be enrolled as a Life Member.

    ART. V. The Annual Meeting shall consist of the Officers, Life
    Members who have been such prior to the first day of October
    preceding the time of such meeting, such persons as have been
    enrolled as members within one year prior to that date, and of
    delegates from churches that have within the year contributed
    to the funds of the Society, and from State Associations and
    Conferences, each of such churches, associations and conferences to
    be entitled to one delegate.

    ART. VI. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
    Vice-Presidents, Corresponding Secretaries, (who shall also keep
    the records of the Association,) Treasurer, Auditors, and an
    Executive Committee of not less than twelve members.

    ART. VII. After “dismissing,” omit the parenthesis. Omit ART.
    VIII., and number ARTS. IX. and X. respectively VIII. and IX.

                  *       *       *       *       *

DAVID H. GILDERSLEEVE, PRINTER, 101 CHAMBERS STREET, NEW YORK.

                  *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Spelling and puntuation were changed only where the error appears
to be a printing error. Capitalization and punctuation in the
Receipts section is inconsistent, and was retained as printed.
The remaining corrected punctuation changes are too numerous to
list; the others are as follows:

Page number 283 changed to 289 on title page.

Totals for Massachusetts changed to agree with heading.

Gratton changed to Grafton in receipts for Massachusetts.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 35, NO. 10, OCTOBER, 1881 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.