Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: JANUARY, 1887.

  VOL. XLI.

  NO. 1.

  The American Missionary]

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: CONTENTS]


  EDITORIAL.

                                                             PAGE
    HAPPY NEW YEAR,                                             1
    PARAGRAPHS,                                                 2
    REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONER OF INDIAN AFFAIRS,               3
    WHAT SOME WOMEN ARE DOING. Rev. A. H. Bradford, D.D.,       4
    THE INDIAN PROBLEM. Pres. J. H. Seelye, D.D.,               7
    ADDRESS OF REV. Dr. C. I. SMITH,                           10
    WELL SAID. REV. A. G. Haygood, D.D.,                       11


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE. Supt. C. J. Ryder,                    12
    A CONTRAST,                                                14


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SECRETARY,                            16
    WORK AMONG THE FREEDMEN. Miss Bertha Robertson,            19
    WORK AMONG THE INDIANS. Miss H. B. Ilsley,                 23


  RECEIPTS,                                                    27

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._
      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._
      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. L. WITHROW.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._
      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New
York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.




                               THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 VOL. XLI.  JANUARY, 1887.  NO. 1.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


1887.

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY wishes all its readers and
friends a “Happy New Year.” The memory of the old year makes this
salutation a hearty one. God has blessed our work in a signal
manner both at the North and at the South. Our appeals have been
heard and have met with generous responses. The religious press
has rendered us most valuable aid. Friends have interested friends
in our behalf. The debt has been almost wiped out. The year of
1886 stands conspicuous in its attestation of the favor God has
given the Association in the eyes of the churches. Our greeting,
therefore, is not merely formal. We have occasion to be grateful.
Will our friends then please be assured of our gratitude, as
entering upon the work of 1887 we wish for them, one and all, a
“Happy New Year.”

This is the time to make resolutions. Good resolutions now formed
and faithfully carried out will be certain to make the new year
a happy one. We would suggest that the resolutions passed at the
National Council at Chicago and adopted as its own by our annual
meeting at New Haven, asking for $350,000 from the churches
this year for our work, be approved by every reader of THE
MISSIONARY, with this one added, “_Resolved_, that I will do
my part as an individual to make these resolutions effectual.”
If this resolution is heartily adopted and lived up to, then
certain results will follow: (1) The sixty per cent. increase
upon the contributions of last year, that the amount called for
necessitates, will be secured. (2) A larger number of churches will
be found among those contributing to the A. M. A. than has ever yet
been recorded. (3) Special appeals will not be heard. (4) Demanded
enlargement of work at a number of points will be made, and new
fields entered. (5) Our missionaries will be made happy in the
knowledge that their work is to be sustained.

We feel that we can ask God’s blessing upon all who thus resolve
with an assurance of faith that the blessing will be bestowed where
the resolution is kept.

One of the crying evils of the times is the severe tax put upon the
eyes by reading small print. THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY has
been an offender in this respect, but it has seen the error of its
ways and promises to try to do better. It has selected the first
month of the new year in which to inaugurate the reform. Small
print has been banished from its pages of reading matter. We trust
that this effort of The Missionary to make its pages more readable
will be responded to by a great increase in the number of its
readers. The annual subscription is only fifty cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES IN THE SADDLE, by Field-Superintendent Ryder, is
a heading under which will be found, on another page, some good
reading. We hope to continue these _notes_ during the year. We
caution our readers against falling into the phonetic craze when
they read this announcement. We are not responsible for the way in
which our Superintendent spells his name, but we presume he follows
the analogy of “ancient t_y_me.” At any rate, he who in the saddle,
with reins over the neck and speed unchecked, can make notes, must
be an expert _rider_, no matter how we spell or pronounce his name.

       *       *       *       *       *

We ask the special attention of our lady readers to the present
number of _The Missionary_. They will find Miss Emerson’s report
and the papers presented by Miss Robertson and Miss Ilsley at the
New Haven meeting, which we print elsewhere, to be most interesting
reading. We are very sorry that space does not permit us to also
print the most excellent address of Mrs. St. Clair. Any lady
who has the January Missionary in her possession and allows the
next Woman’s Missionary Meeting to be a dull one, ought to be
disciplined for not living up to her privileges. Just read this
number through and see if you don’t think so too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Immediately following the annual meeting, under the charge of
Secretary Shelton, Rev. A. L. Riggs, with Pastor Ehnamani and the
Santee School Indian students, started through New England upon a
speaking and singing campaign in behalf of our Indian Missions. At
the same time, Secretary Roy, accompanied by Rev. Geo. V. Clark, of
Athens, Ga., an ex-slave and a child of the A. M. A., started in
upon a similar campaign through Ohio. For six weeks, meetings were
held almost every night in the week, with occasional meetings in
the afternoon. On Sundays three meetings were usually held. Large
audiences, sometimes crowded, even on week nights, have greeted and
with interest listened to them. At Cleveland both forces joined,
devoting a Sabbath to the Congregational churches in that city.
The Monday evening following, a final meeting of the Ohio campaign
was held in Oberlin, where the magnificent audience and spirit
of the meeting were a worthy close to the series and in perfect
keeping with the historic record of Oberlin on the subject of
missions. Here the bands separated to meet at the end of one week
in Oak Park, where Secretary Roy with his family resides, and where
Secretary Shelton formerly resided. The Congregational church of
Oak Park was crowded to its utmost capacity with those who came to
attend the final meetings of the two campaigns and to listen to the
singing and the speaking of both forces. A beautiful incident in
this meeting was the solo singing of a slave song by Mr. Clark, the
chorus to which was taken up by the Indian students; and another
incident in the same direction was the rendering of a slave song,
in the chorus to which both the audience and the students responded.

       *       *       *       *       *

To repair the damage done our mission home and school buildings
by the earthquake at Charleston a careful estimate calls for not
less than $2,500. One of our teachers, Mr. E. A. Lawrence, has
been meeting the emergency by holding school in a barn. The time
has come when the necessary repairs must be made, both upon the
home and school. Hundreds of scholars are waiting and parents are
begging that Avery Institute be again opened. In response to our
former appeals for Charleston some special donations have been
received, but they are entirely inadequate to meet the emergency.
We beg leave to remind our friends that the money needed to make
these repairs must be furnished either by special contributions
or else taken out of money already appropriated to other work. We
trust they will not leave us to be compelled to do the latter. It
may also be added that to delay these repairs much longer will
result in the ruin of the buildings.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONER OF INDIAN AFFAIRS.

The Second Annual Report of Commissioner Atkins is a candid and
comprehensive document, dealing briefly but frankly with the
several problems growing out of the relations of the Government to
the Indians. We have not space for a review of the Report, but we
wish to call special attention to the facts which it incidentally
presents as to the neglect of Congress, and especially of the
House of Representatives, to act upon a number of important
bills touching Indian affairs. No less than eight such bills are
mentioned—six of them passed the Senate, but failed to receive
final action in the House—and some of these are by far the most
essential to the welfare of the Indians. Three of these bills we
wish particularly to name: The Dawes’ Bill for the Allotment of
Lands in Severalty; the Sioux Bill for the Division of the great
Sioux Reservation into six reservations; and the Bill for the
Relief of the Mission Indians in California. The first of these is
fundamental to the settlement of the Indians in separate homes,
and consequently to their becoming American citizens; the second
has the same end in view; and the third is a simple act of justice,
long and shamefully deferred, to the suffering and deserving
Indians, whose sad case has been so pathetically depicted by Mrs.
Helen Hunt Jackson in her touching story of Romona.

We ask attention to these bills for a practical purpose. Congress
should be urged to act upon them at once. The present session is
the short one, ending March 4th. If this session closes without
passing these bills, the whole subject will be deferred almost
indefinitely. The next Congress will be a new one; the Members to
some extent will be new; the committees maybe wholly so, and they
may need years of petitioning, educating and inspiring to move them
to proper action on these essential topics. No time can be lost.
No influence is so great upon the average Congressman as letters
directly from his constituents. We therefore urge every reader of
these pages to write at once to the Member of Congress from his
district, or to others whom he may know, asking for prompt and
energetic efforts for the passage of these bills.

On another page of THE MISSIONARY will be found the
admirable address of President Seelye, presenting the paramount
importance of religious effort on the part of the churches in
behalf of the Indians. We are in full accord with this view. But
the Government has also its responsibilities, and all that it does
in the lines we have suggested will only facilitate the work of
preparing the Indians for what we wish them all ultimately to be,
intelligent, self-supporting Christian citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT SOME WOMEN ARE DOING.

REV. A. H. BRADFORD, D.D.

This is woman’s era. Her influence and presence are in all spheres.
Within a quarter of a century there were few in stores, and none in
public offices. To-day they are clerks, operators in the factories,
teachers in schools; they are in telegraph, and telephone, and
post-offices; they are artists and traders; a few are captains
of steamboats; a few are lawyers; now and then one ventures to
preach; and even the mysteries of Wall Street are not terrifying to
them, for they have commenced competition with the brokers. Women
have already won recognition in the practice of medicine, and are
among the most successful practitioners in all great cities. They
are among the most popular lecturers. At least one of the most
successful publishing houses in New York is owned and managed by
a woman. In business and on the platform she has ceased to be a
curiosity.

The power of woman in politics is not appreciated, but it is one
of the most vital forces of this century. No Anarchist in Paris
could influence the Faubourgs quicker than Louise Michel. In
the history of Nihilism in Russia no names have been regarded
with more devotion by those struggling for wider liberty, and
none more dreaded by the existing order, than Sophie Perovskaia,
Jessy Helfman and Vera Zassulic. Charles Dickens never exhibited
a truer insight into human nature than when he made a woman the
impersonation of remorseless vengeance.

But notwithstanding all that women are doing in trades, industries,
politics, it still remains that in works of reform, charity and
missions, she is especially distinguishing herself.

Two of the largest and most efficient charitable institutions
in the world, viz: “The Deaconesses’ Institution of Rhenish
Westphalia, at Kaiserwent,” and “The Mildmay Conference Hall and
Deaconesses’ Home, in London,” are almost exclusively in the hands
of women. The influence of these two noble charities reaches around
the world, not only in works of beneficence, but also in active
evangelistic ministry.

The first person to call attention to the horrible condition
of English prisons was Elizabeth Fry. The horrors of war were
immeasurably mitigated by Florence Nightingale. She gave an impetus
to the work of training nurses, which has grown into enthusiasm in
all civilized lands. Agnes Jones changed the work-house hospitals
of Great Britain, from places of torture into places of blessing.
Sister Dora glorified the “Black Country” by her heroism and
self-sacrifice. The first person to make practical a good plan for
improved tenement houses was Octavia Hill. Her efforts reach the
people which such houses as those built by the Peabody estate only
displace.

In this country the most conspicuous effort to improve the
low-class of tenement houses has also been made by a woman. The
success Miss Collins has won in Gotham Court is one of the most
noticeable in the history of such efforts. The Bureau of Charities
in New York is very largely managed by Mrs. Lowell and her devoted
co-workers. The President of the American Branch of the Red Cross
Society, that non-sectarian, but most Christian Association, which
extends its arms of blessing wherever human suffering is found, is
that American Florence Nightingale, whose heroism and sacrifice on
Southern battle-fields can never be too highly appreciated—Clara
Barton. And these are only hints, here and there, of woman’s work
in charity.

If now we turn to her service in Reform we are met, at once, by
the fact that not even the fiery eloquence of Phillips, nor the
unconquerable agitations of Garrison did so much to hasten the
abolition of slavery as the persuasion and persuasive eloquence of
Mrs. Stowe, in Uncle Tom’s Cabin. People were beguiled into reading
that, who would not have listened to a word from the equally
sincere, but more rampant agitators.

After the abolition of slavery there remained that other relic
of barbarism, entrenched in a far more impregnable position, the
rum-power. Intemperance has had to meet many who have attacked it
in past days, but never yet an organization so tireless in effort,
so fertile in expedients, and so exhaustless in resources as the
Women’s Christian Temperance Union. That association has made many
mistakes, and is in danger of making many more, but one of the
elements of its power is its willingness to learn. If it cannot
fight with one weapon it adopts another. The brewers and distillers
have millions of money at their command, but millions of money are
not so formidable as millions of motherly hearts.

If now we turn to that other evil, more subtly and surely ruinous
even than intemperance, impurity and the social evil, we find a new
organization rising with great promise of power, viz.: The White
Cross Society. The aim of that Association is to promote purity. It
reaches out its hands to young men and women alike, and that work,
in its organized form, owes its existence to the fertile brain
and motherly heart of Josephine Butler, the wife of a canon of an
English cathedral.

If woman works for the salvation of the physical life of her
brothers and sisters, of course she must be equally anxious for
the salvation of their souls. Woman has an instinct for religion.
Living a life of greater seclusion than man, her heart in the
silence, like a flower in the darkness, has grown toward the light.
And this spiritual faculty has found the natural field for its
operations in missionary work. The first American missionary martyr
was Harriet Newell. Grand as was the life, and courageous as was
the heart of Adoniram Judson, in all that called for heroism and
consecration he was surpassed by his first wife, the beautiful, the
almost preternaturally heroic Ann Hasseltine.

Women preponderate in all the departments of missionary activity.
They are in distant lands as teachers, Bible-readers, nurses,
physicians, missionaries’ wives. They go enthusiastically to homes
in dug-out houses, and teach school and rear and train children,
and keep the house, and do the drudgery, and then go to heaven,
without complaining of earthly obscurity. They are among the
Indians on their reservations, and in the Chinese quarters of the
Pacific cities. But it has sometimes seemed to me that the most
difficult and unattractive work for Christ that woman has ever
undertaken, has been among the millions of blacks in the South. The
work itself in many instances, if not all, has been disagreeable,
if not repulsive. It has been at home, and has not inspired the
enthusiastic admiration which has been given to those who have been
in the foreign field. It has been attended with misconception,
social ostracism, and sometimes with personal danger not found in
any other branch of missionary service. But in all parts of the
South are women at work with no motive but the love of Christ and
humanity, winning souls by their Christ-like examples, and refining
the uncultivated and vicious by the sweetness and purity of their
unconsciously beautiful lives.

Woman’s work for woman among the blacks of the United States is
the most important of all work for that people. Pure women have
lessons to teach their own sex who have been degraded by a century
of bondage, or who are the inheritors of the legacies of slavery,
that none others can teach, and which must be well learned before
there can be much progress in the moral amelioration of the race.

Her enthusiasm, her swift hostility to the more degrading sins,
her sympathy which bears all the sorrows of those around her, her
intuition of the Divine Fatherhood, and her patience, qualify woman
for kinds of work which most men can never do so well. But there
is one thing that men can do—they can remember the Apostle’s
injunction, “Help those women.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN PROBLEM.

ADDRESS OF PRES. JULIUS H. SEELYE, D.D., AT NEW HAVEN.

The whole number of Indians in the United States, including Alaska,
probably is not far from 300,000, of whom about one-half now wear
citizen’s dress, and about one-fourth speak the English language
sufficiently to be understood. Some of these people are citizens,
and some are wards of the nation. They differ from each other as
they differ from us, in their languages and thoughts and ways. They
represent nearly every grade of civilized and savage life. Their
original rights to a large portion of our national domain we have
recognized by purchase and by treaties, which have plighted the
faith of the nation for their protection and support. We certainly
desire to live in peace with them, but with many of them we are in
constant danger of war. What shall we do with them and for them?
How shall we wisely maintain our rights respecting them, and at the
same time righteously fulfill our obligations? How shall the Indian
cease to disturb us, and become a blessing to the nation?

There is really but one solution to the Indian problem, though many
have been prominently attempted. We have tried to force the Indian.
We have fought him. We have shut him in upon reservations. We have
made a pretence of feeding and clothing him. We have tried our hand
at civilization, have built school-houses, provided teachers, and
gathered Indian children together, and taught them the rudiments
of learning. We have furnished them with implements and helps to
agriculture, and some of the mechanic arts. But the results, it
must be admitted, are not re-assuring. When we fight Indians,
they fight too, and their fighting is apt to be, in proportion to
their numbers, much more successful than ours. In the Report of
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for 1868, there is an estimate
of the expenditure of some late Indian wars, from which we learn
that it has cost the United States Government on an average one
million of dollars, and the lives of twenty-five white men to kill
an Indian. “There is no good Indian but a dead Indian,” said Gen.
Sheridan, Lieutenant-general of our army, but the process of making
the Indians good in this way is at least a costly one, and the
prospect of success can hardly be considered hopeful.

It may be doubted whether any Governmental efforts yet made to
subdue or civilize these people have essentially improved either
the Indians themselves or their relations to us. Indian wars have
not made the Indians peaceable; Indian schools have not civilized
them; Indian rations and reservations have not satisfied the
requirements of even their bodily comfort and sustenance; and
the proposal now made and loudly advocated, of breaking up all
their tribal privileges and allotting the property of the tribe
to the members of the tribe in severalty, while encompassed by
grave difficulties from the ignorance of the Indian and his need
of guardianship, would endanger that sense of common rights and
privileges, that communal relationship, on which not only the very
existence of human society depends, but in which is the germ of
whatever is distinctively human. We are not educated up to our
individual rights in spite of our communal relations, but because
of these.

I am not speaking here of what Governmental efforts should have
been, or should now be, but I speak of the actual facts of the past
and the present, and I say that the Governmental procedure thus
far, instead of solving the Indian problem, has only increased
prodigiously the difficulty of its solution. Incidents illustrative
of this might be cited by the hour, but would be impertinent in an
audience as intelligent as that here assembled.

And yet the solution of the Indian problem is not a matter of
theory or of speculation, but is an accomplished fact. It has
been wrought out before our eyes. Wild, savage Indian tribes, as
fierce, as lawless, as intractable as any now existing, have been
tamed, have been taught the arts and ways of peace, have subjected
themselves to law, and are now living in orderly, peaceable,
industrious communities. The Cherokees, and the Delawares and
Shawnees now united with them, the Choctaws, the Chickasaws, the
Creeks, and the Seminoles—who are known as the five civilized
tribes—now have their constitutions and laws, their supreme court
and their district courts, their well-arranged public school
system, and “indeed every provision of law and organization
requisite in a State founded on the consent of the governed,
controlled by officers chosen by the people, and suited to an
advancing civilization,” (U.S. Senate Rep., I.: XVII.). Pauperism
among them is unknown, and, by the best reports, crime is less
frequent in proportion to numbers than among the adjoining whites.
The Report of the United States Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
made to the Senate July 4, 1886, says of the Cherokee nation, that
“it is difficult, after a searching criticism, to point out any
serious defects in their constitution or statutes. In some respects
several of our State constitutions could be amended with advantage
by adopting some of the provisions of the Cherokee constitution.
Their situation, and that of each of the five tribes, was full of
difficulties, but they have met them skillfully.” (I.: XVII.)

“Fifty years ago,” in the language of this same report, “these five
nations—now blessed with a Christian civilization, in which many
thousands are active and intelligent workers, while the common
sentiment of the whole people reverently supports their efforts,
and approves their influence—were pagans.”

Fifty years ago the Sioux, now gathered at Santee and Sissiton,
in Christian communities and homes and schools, with churches
enrolled on the same records as those of New York and Philadelphia,
in connection with Presbytery and Synod and General Assembly,
were savage hordes, roaming through the Northwest as wild as the
wildest. These savages have been changed. The facts are before our
eyes. How was the transformation wrought? The answer is clear. No
one can, no one does, mistake it. The United States Senate Report,
from which I have quoted, acknowledges these to be the results
of Christian missions. Where the Government has totally failed,
the voluntary efforts of the churches have been crowned with this
success. The preaching of the Gospel has done this work, and it
alone. This ought not to surprise us. It will not surprise any
historical student. The same agency by which our ancestors have
gained their law and liberty and civilization—who a few centuries
ago were savages and cannibals, offering human sacrifices, hanging
the skulls of their slain enemies in their houses and using them
as drinking-cups in their feasts—the same agency by which in
our time the cannibals of the Fijis, and the cruel tribes of
Madagascar, have found themselves possessed of a peaceable and
progressive civilization, has broken the darkness and rolled away
the shadows from these Indian tribes, as quietly, as peacefully and
as gloriously as the coming of the sun has brought in the morning.
Only the changes which in our ancestors required centuries for
their accomplishment, have been wrought among these Indians in as
many decades.

Here is the solution of the Indian problem—the only solution—and
here is the work to which we are to gird ourselves afresh. Our
first great work, the work which holds in itself all other agencies
for Indian civilization, as the oak is held in the acorn, is the
preaching of the Gospel to these people, the patient, earnest,
loving presentation to them of the glad tidings that “God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”
Instruction in letters, instruction even in virtue is idle without
this, and with this all other instruction follows as flowers open
at the sunshine. The great trouble with us, brethren, is we are too
unbelieving in the efficacy of the Gospel. We seek to supplement
it; we think it needs other things; we forget that the Gospel is,
and that it alone is, the power of God unto salvation, and we
forget, too, what a broad term salvation is, that it covers the
godliness which hath the promise of the life that now is, as well
as of that which is to come. The Gospel of Christ is the power of
God unto the salvation of the body, the salvation of the intellect,
the salvation of manners and customs, the salvation of society, and
it is this power to every one that believeth, to the Jew first,
and also to the Greek. What wonders it has wrought! What wonders
it is working now! How would every difficulty in our social state,
our vice and crime and poverty, our selfishness and sensuality and
woe, all disappear if the Gospel only dwelt among us, a living
principle in every heart! We need no other evidence of its divine
all-sufficiency than the adaptation it has already shown to every
human need, and we need no other motive to its proclamation than
the privilege of being co-worker with Him, “Who shall deliver the
needy when he crieth, the poor also, and him that hath no helper.
He shall spare the poor and the needy, and shall save the soul of
the needy. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and
precious shall their blood be in his sight.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS OF REV. DR. C. I. SMITH

AT THE NATIONAL COUNCIL.

[The National Council at Concord decided to send fraternal
delegates to the African M. E. Zion General Conference, and the
African M. E. General Conference; and so Dr. Wm. H. Ward and Rev.
Joseph E. Smith, of Chattanooga, were appointed to visit the
former, and Revs. J. E. Roy and Wm. A. Sinclair, of Nashville, the
latter. The first pair of delegates presented the salutations of
the Congregational churches to the Zion Conference meeting in this
city in May, 1884; and the second pair did their duty in the other
Conference, which met the same month in Baltimore. Whereupon the
last-named body appointed Rev. Dr. C. I. Smith, Secretary of its
Sunday-school work, to respond at the Chicago National Council.
He appeared, and the following is the substance of his eloquent
address:]

We are all proud of the work which your Church, through the
American Missionary Association, is doing in the South. It is
impossible to measure the good results growing out of the efforts
of the A. M. A. for the Christian education of colored youth.
Through its instrumentalities, thousands of our youth have been
measurably prepared for the successful discharge of the substantial
and higher duties of life, and it must be gratifying to you to
learn that most of those are doing life’s work well. The leading
philanthropists of the South regard the colored youth now being
educated in your institutions in that section as destined to exert
a powerful influence for the conservation of healthy social and
moral forces.

Many of the graduates of your Southern institutions are the
recognized leaders in their respective communities for the advocacy
and advancement of every question of social and moral reform. Their
fidelity to the principles of temperance is remarkable. In the
memorable contest at Atlanta, Ga., none did more valiant work for
prohibition than the students of your institution in that city.
They are exerting an influence upon the thought and conscience of
the South that must eventually show itself in favor of maintaining
the better life among all classes. I might say that you do not know
the amount of good you are doing in the South; for, if you did, I
verily believe that you would try to do more.

We do not look upon the Congregational Church in the South as an
unfriendly rival, but as a stalwart ally in emphasizing the great
principle of the brotherhood of man. Thus far you have refused
to compromise with the spirit of evil by establishing churches
and schools on the basis of what is known as the “color-line.”
In this refusal you have answered to the highest needs of the
hour. Unfortunately this cannot be said of all the Christian
societies that are at work in the South. Color-line churches and
schools, under the patronage of Christian organizations, have been
established among us. This we greatly deplore, especially when
such proceedings are begun and carried on by Northern societies.
Christian churches and schools, like the gates of heaven, should be
open to all, and we bitterly regret that anything further should
be done to outrage the enlightened Christian conscience that this
century has developed. It is mere mockery to cut off the branches
from a tree of evil and leave its roots and trunk untouched. Lay
the axe to the root of the tree, and the work of reformation,
though necessarily slow, will prove substantial and enduring.
Berea College, in Kentucky, has successfully demonstrated that the
co-education of the two races is both possible and practicable, and
what it has done all other institutions of learning in the South
can and should do.

In Nashville, Tenn., we have two great institutions of learning,
Vanderbilt and Fisk Universities; each gazing upon the other, yet
widely differing as to their influence and aim, and the age which
they represent. Vanderbilt represents the age that was and is; Fisk
the age that is to be—the age when every worthy man shall be to
every worthy fellowman a brother. Fisk University is your child,
and one of which you can justly be proud, and may you fully nourish
and protect it. It is a great light in a dark land—an oasis of
living thought in a vast desert of parched and stupid ideas. May
its light never diminish nor its fountains cease to flow.

Through the work of the A. M. A. you have firmly imbedded
yourselves in the deepest affections and highest gratitude of the
colored people of the South. No words can express our gratitude for
the firm stand which you have taken in favor of the New Testament
idea of human equality. You have made for yourselves a glorious
name, and your work will endure so long as the thought of God sways
the minds of men.

       *       *       *       *       *


WELL SAID.

FROM ADDRESS OF REV. A. G. HAYGOOD, D.D.

But back of the courts there must be educational work. There must
be among the people a better sense of essential righteousness.
There must be a justice that will not and cannot sentence a poor
wretch, who steals a coat or a piece of bacon for a longer term
than the rich man who breaks a bank and robs a thousand people;
that will not and cannot send a poor man without friends or money
to prison for a longer term than a rich man with both money and
friends who has committed the same offense; that will not and
cannot send a Negro or a Chinaman to prison for a longer term than
it will send a white man for the same offense. Among the people
there needs to be developed a better conscience as to the sanctity
of an oath, and the sacred majesty and divine authority of law that
knows no conditions of society and no distinctions of race. With
such a conscience paramount, even among the leaders of opinion,
prison reform will be easy.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER.

There is no department of work in the great field which is being
developed by the A. M. A. more thrillingly interesting than that
of the mountains of Kentucky and Tennessee. A recent trip, one of
several already made through that region, has greatly increased
my appreciation of this work, and confidence in the grand success
which is even now opening before us. I have just been over the
ground covered by our missionary work and have been impressed with
the vast opportunities, as well as the imperative needs which exist
on every hand in this mountain region. Let us go over that field
together. New and strange phases of life meet us at every turn.

We enter the mountain regions of Kentucky in which the A. M. A. has
schools and churches, a few miles north of Knoxville. Indeed the
first station of the Kentucky missions is in Tennessee. This part
of the work is under the direction of Rev. A. A. Myers. This region
has only recently been opened to the outside world. Coal fields
are abundant, and timber of the very best kinds still stands in
vast forests on the hillsides and along the streams. These trees
shoulder against each other like an army of giants marshalled
to defend the wild freedom of their mountain home against the
impertinent intrusion of the “humans,” as the mountaineers call
men. These brave defenders, however, are fast falling beneath the
axe of the lumberman. In the yard of a single mill, seven million
five hundred thousand feet of walnut timber was piled ready for
the market. This same mill cuts on an average ten million feet of
lumber, of all kinds, in a week.

A rough, but interesting mountaineer, who sat near me in the
freight caboose, in which I rode from Knoxville northward into the
mountain region, told me that he kept eight yoke of cattle at work
all the time in bringing lumber from the “benches” on the sides of
the mountains to the “slides.” These benches are small plains, or
miniature plateaus upon which the larger forests grow, as the soil
is deeper and richer, being formed from the wash of the mountains
above. They draw the logs to the edges of these benches and let
them over the slides, down which they dart, as the arrow flies from
the string of a bow. It is in this country, so rich in mineral and
timbered wealth, that a large part of the mountain work of the A.
M. A. lies.

The vast army of men crowding into this region to gather its
wonderful wealth, makes still more imperative the necessity for
Christian work here immediately. A new railroad is pushing its way
from Corbin through Barboursville, and pointing toward Cumberland
Gap, through which it will probably pass out into Virginia. The
whistle of the locomotive is the reveille awakening other thousands
to the possibilities of this region, and bringing them together
here. You see, therefore, that this field claims our attention
and our help, just as every new region of the West does, as it is
rapidly filling up through emigration from other parts of our own
country and from other lands. There are also the communities of
mountaineers, for whom these churches and schools were planted, who
have a claim upon us. Within a few years, hundreds of coal mines
will pour out their black streams along the railroads, many of
which are as yet unbuilt. Furnace fires will light up the darkness
of the night along the hillsides. These small towns will be great
centers of commercial and industrial importance.

Such is the country, and such are the circumstances, surrounding
the work here. “What has actually been done?” you ask, and it
is a very natural question. Nine churches have been organized,
and are doing faithful work for the Master in this region. Four
schools have been wholly or partially supported by the A. M. A.
for some time, and their influence is felt far and wide. In the
Williamsburgh Academy, between one and two hundred bright, earnest
young people gathered in the chapel for the opening exercises
of the school. These scholars range in their studies from first
primary to higher normal. Many teachers from other schools come
here to complete their otherwise imperfect preparation for their
work. The work of the academy is not that of intellectual training,
with a little religion tacked on to make it palatable with
Christian people; it is Christian training which the pupils receive
here.

I rode with Brother Myers forty-four miles on horseback, much of
the way through a driving rain-storm, to visit some stations which
we could not conveniently reach by rail. At Corbin, which is to be
the junction of the new railroad with the present railroad, we have
a beautiful site for a church building—some lumber already on the
ground—and we ought to push the building to completion at once.
People came out from their cabins along the roadside as we rode
past, and eagerly asked: “When are you coming to take up a meeting
with us again?” Children especially crowded around our horses when
we stopped, to inquire about the Sunday-school, to get a pleasant
word from Bro. Myers, which he never failed to give, and to receive
some little paper, or brightly colored card with a Scripture gem
upon it. His pockets seemed to be always full of these children’s
traps.

There are four church buildings ready to be dedicated, and two
pastors, native mountaineers, one a graduate of Berea College,
awaiting ordination. And so the work moves on in a wonderful way,
for it is God’s way.

This is only one part of the work which the A. M. A. is pressing
forward in these mountain regions. I had hoped to have space to
speak of the work in Scott and Morgan and Cumberland Counties,
Tenn., but cannot now. The large academy building at Mount
Pleasant, Tenn., of which our readers of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
have heard an occasional word, is already completed, and will
be ready for dedication in a few weeks. It is a grand building,
a cause of wonderment to the simple mountain people, who ride
for tens of miles to see it. I shall speak of it more at length
hereafter. This school and church work is like the rising of the
sun of a brighter and better day over this Cumberland plateau.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CONTRAST.

BY A TEACHER.

It was twelve o’clock of a hot May day in the noisy Southern city.
Out upon the scorching sidewalk it seemed almost impossible to
escape the remorseless heat of the sun, and so I turned gladly
down the narrow alleyway and climbed the rickety stairs of an old
building at its end. In a little low room at the top, through whose
small windows very few breezes could find their way, were the old
man and woman for whom I was seeking. The room itself was so gloomy
that I tried to forget both heat and weariness, and put all of
cheerfulness possible into my voice as I bade them “good morning”
and inquired after their health. It seemed a relief to the poor old
woman to tell me of her own pain and her husband’s failing mind,
and so I let her talk on, suggesting occasionally little things
which might make them more comfortable, and promising aid where
that was best. Gradually we came to talk of other things, and then
I spoke of God and asked her if they loved him. She shook her head
sadly and answered, “No, we are two poor old sinners together,”
while the old man, hearing that name which to so many brings joy
and peace, muttered over and over, “No hope, no hope; I’ve sinned
away my day of grace.”

For a moment my heart failed me, but, after a quick prayer for
help, I tried to tell them the “old, old story” so simply that the
truth could reach their darkened minds. Over and over I repeated
Christ’s own words, “Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise
cast out,” and then we knelt and asked the dear Father who loves
all to help them. Saying “good bye” to them and promising soon to
come again, I descended the stair and knocked at the door of the
son’s room, which stood wide open. I was invited into the not very
tidy room by a pretty-looking woman with her head tightly bandaged
with a handkerchief. On inquiring her trouble she told me she was
suffering from nervous headache, and, as I know something of that,
I was able to suggest remedies which she said were effective.
On the bed in the corner, stretched out at full length, lay her
husband. The faithful wife said he was sick, but to me he looked
lazy. We talked together of many things, and I found that neither
this husband or wife were Christians, though she seemed very
anxious to know the way. I read to them from that blessed word, the
word of which God Himself said, “It shall not return unto me void,
but shall accomplish that whereunto it is sent,” and with a little
word of prayer left them, glad in my faith in God’s transforming
power.

It was two o’clock when I reached home, and I had only time for a
lunch and a short resting spell before starting to make another
call, which proved to be full of pleasantness and encouragement.
My friend and I were piloted on this trip by a dark-eyed, but
fair-skinned girl, who was a pupil of our school. We rode as far
as the street car would carry us, and then walked through country
paths and fields until we reached her home. It was a luxury to rest
in the easy rocking-chair in the pleasant little parlor, while
fresh country breezes rustled the simple white curtains at the
windows. And when, in addition to the pleasant words of greeting,
clear water was brought us from the well, and large, sweet berries
from the garden, we felt that our welcome was complete. After
visiting for a little time, we were asked by the children if we
didn’t want to see the farm, and following them out found that the
farm, though not large, was carefully cultivated, and that the
peas, beans, potatoes, cabbages and other vegetables which grew
there, found a ready market in the great city. I have heard and
seen much of the thriftlessness of the South, but here at least was
thrift and prosperity. Coming back to the house we were introduced
to the father, a dark-browed but fine-looking man, who by honest
toil is trying to support his family, and give to his children the
opportunities which shall make of them good men and women. These
children are sent to the Sunday-school and day-school regularly.
Can we doubt that from these they shall gain that which shall make
them a blessing to their race and to the world?

Against the dark background of thriftlessness and ignorance and
poverty which we find among the colored people, such homes as
these stand out in bright relief, and they should be a source of
encouragement to all who are trying to do God’s work in the world.
And so, dear friends, I have told you of these homes, that seeing
the difference and what may be accomplished in all these homes by
Christian education, you may not grow weary, but may look forward
to that harvest-time when the seed which your prayers and gifts
have sown shall spring up and bear fruit even an hundredfold.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL REPORT.

BY MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

It is apparent to any who study the character of the field of the
American Missionary Association, that not only is there ample
opportunity for women to work, but that it becomes a necessity to
the successful accomplishment of the good designed. As well might
we say to the impoverished, “Be ye warmed and filled,” giving none
of those things needful to the body, as to provide churches and
schools for the degraded and destitute, without supplying those
influences which will permeate and mould the homes, in the arousing
and uplifting of the women from their condition of ignorance and
indifference. Yet to secure this, we do not need a distinct and
separate class of missionaries. The work is combined, and so it is
that the schools of the American Missionary Association include
other lines of instruction than those usually involved—instruction
pertaining to home life, given to the youth in the school-room and
to the parents in the cabins; and the teachers become missionaries.
Selecting these according to the need of the field, it results that
a large number of those employed are women—236 having been engaged
in this missionary service during the past year.

What part has the Bureau of Woman’s Work had in this? Just so large
a part and so helpful as the Christian women of the North have
permitted; and we rejoice to record an advance both in interest
and in contributions. In addition to the donations by women to the
general work of the Association, twenty-six of these missionary
teachers have been sustained by funds raised in Ladies’ and
Children’s Missionary Societies of our Congregational churches,
or by special collection. In every instance the contributors have
been put into correspondence with their missionary representative
through the system of monthly letters direct from the field, and
thus a better knowledge of the work has been obtained.

These missionary letters have proved an effective agency in
imparting information and increasing interest, as many have
testified, and one letter per month serves as report to the
Association and also to contributors. Is it not reasonable that the
excess of letter-writing by teachers should be thus relieved, since
their time is so valuable to the needy people about them? Referring
to her large correspondence, one of our faithful missionaries
writes: “If for all the help we receive in our work so much is
required, we shall have but little time for anything else.” Let us
reduce all this writing to one letter per month and use each such
letter for its full worth, by free circulation.

Desiring to interest children and youth, that they may become
familiar with the American Missionary Association and its work,
and contribute habitually to its support, we have selected a
“Children’s Missionary” to write especially for little children in
mission bands and Sunday-schools, and one who will write also for
the young people, both boys and girls, that they may early imbibe
a missionary spirit, in consecration of money and of personal
service. A collecting card, called “The A. M. A. ‘True Blue’ Card,”
has been prepared as an aid in raising money, and this card will be
furnished to all who wish the missionary letters.

During the year the Woman’s Bureau has been given direct
representation by its Secretary at the meetings of the ladies in
their State Unions, and in connection with State Conferences East
and West, thereby establishing an acquaintance and confidence of
exceeding value, while giving more full intelligence of this great
mission field.

This has helped to develop the plan for the ladies of any one
church or association of churches to take some definite part in
aiding the American Missionary Association to carry forward its
work. The suggestion has been cordially acted upon, and with good
results. Maine, Vermont, Connecticut, New York, Ohio, Illinois,
Iowa, Minnesota and Wisconsin now have each their special schools
or missionaries under the American Missionary Association, with
whom they have communication through the Bureau of Woman’s Work.
Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Michigan are beginning to respond
to this call, and we are led to hope that we shall have from each
of these States also the help found in concentration and union,
thus making twelve States in which this work is hopefully begun.

In this plan for woman’s work in definite lines, it is not our
purpose to divert funds from the usual church contributions. There
would be nothing lost in this, but neither would there be anything
gained. What the American Missionary Association needs is more help
than it has hitherto received, and that without diminishing the
usual church contributions the ladies will by special measures make
a cash contribution annually in the support of teachers. In order
to secure the results of the work in schools and homes, prompt
action is taken in the establishment of preaching missions and
churches, thus requiring a constant advance. It is for this reason,
ladies, that we urge upon your attention the fact that a portion
of the field is peculiarly yours. If you will do your part, the
advance can be made.

Look in upon a single mission station. A group of three buildings
attracts our attention as a bit of New England transplanted, a
church, a good-sized school-house, and between the two a neat white
painted cottage. The missionaries number four, of whom three are
ladies from the North. Over 200 children and youth come daily to
the school, where these missionary teachers instruct in branches
usual in primary to grammar grades, and also in Christian morals
and manners, with the Bible for a text-book, seeking earnestly to
develop heart, mind and body to honor and righteousness. The little
New England home gives practical illustration of what otherwise
would be but dimly comprehended by those who have never known
a home. It is open, day and evening, to all who will come. The
morning devotions, the pleasant social meals, the group around the
table in the evening, which the older pupils often join, are phases
of home life sharply in contrast to the shiftless, joyless homes
about them. With the influence of this home as a starting-point,
these teachers, in visiting from house to house, suggest, advise,
encourage, finding always the children the most ambitious to
improve and make the little cabin like the teacher’s home. You
would think this sufficient to occupy these three ladies, and so
doubtless they would were it not for the dire need about them. So
time is found for a sewing-school, for meetings with the women,
for temperance societies, for mission Sunday-schools, and numerous
other forms of systematic work—for the purifying of the home life,
and to guard the children from the fate of the parents. Who but
women could win an entrance into such homes and hearts? It is to
counteract the ignorance and desolation of womanhood that woman’s
help is needed in this broad field.

But is it more the duty of these to go and teach, than for us who
remain in the enjoyment of our great home privileges, to send them?
Can any lines be drawn in the personal responsibility resting upon
us as Christian women, for the redemption of womanhood in these so
long cast out and bound down?

Help is needed, and it is needed now, before the millions of
children grow out of our influence and reach, to become like their
parents, and even a more dangerous element in society.

How shall the help be given? Every church is an organization
which bands together Christian workers. The nearer all can come
to the very heart of the great societies appointed to the work of
missions, the stronger and warmer are the missionary pulsations.
Here is the American Missionary Association, with its forty years’
experience in church and school planting, combined with woman’s
work. It has every facility for examining the field and selecting
central points with view to the largest results, and it invites
and urges your co-operation through its Bureau of Woman’s Work,
which is prepared to furnish information and to put you into direct
communication with the missionaries. With your own heart full of
this need, try so to lay the case before others that they, too, may
feel it, and constitute yourselves a church mission band, to raise
money to aid the American Missionary Association in carrying on its
work in the South, and for the Chinese and Indians.

Thus can the ladies of every church take part with us in overcoming
ignorance, superstition and caste prejudice in behalf of womanhood
in this our land.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK AMONG THE FREEDMEN.

BY MISS BERTHA ROBERTSON.

_Dear Friends:_—It gives me much pleasure to bring you a report,
which will not be a discouraging one, of a part of the work this
grand old American Missionary Association has undertaken. It would
be simply impossible to give you a true idea of the work done among
the colored people. Already you have heard many accounts, but to
fully realize what is being done, you must either see the people
over whom the influence of our schools extends, and compare them
with those who have not enjoyed such privileges, or enter the field
as a worker. In giving an outline of our work at McIntosh, Ga.,
perhaps a general idea may be gained of what the A. M. A. is doing
for the freedmen. The colored people where we are, and I think it
is the same throughout the South, have an idea their teachers can
do anything from housekeeping to preaching a sermon or mending
clocks, but before we should be allowed to undertake similar work
in the North, it would be necessary that we should have M.D., D.D.,
or some other initials after our names.

We teach school. This does not mean exactly what it does in the
North. You must remember, when the children come to us, they have
had no home training whatever.

You can imagine something of their condition, when you remember
that the majority come from miserable log cabins, consisting of one
room, where parents and children live huddled together, and where
the furniture is a mere apology, consisting generally of a table,
bench and two chairs.

They have no hopes and ambition such as white children have. They
never think of the possibilities the future may hold for them. When
we ask our boys and girls what they are going to do when they leave
school, they look at us in blank amazement. This is a new idea to
them; they had not looked beyond the present.

Their standard of morality is low. Did you expect anything else?
Who were the parents of these children? Slaves. Slaves who in
return for hard labor received from the white man the cruelest
wrongs and basest indignities; and yet people to-day speak as
though this first generation born in freedom should be pure and
virtuous. On every side you hear, “They lie, they cheat, they
steal, are lazy, and it is simply impossible to do anything
with them.” Many times this summer I have heard this sweeping
assertion made, and by Christian people, who had simply traveled
South, and who drew their conclusions from the servants they met
in the hotels. Had they visited some of the A. M. A. schools
their statement would not have been quite so extended as to the
impossibilities of improvement.

The Bible is the foundation of all our teaching. Religious and
moral training first. A half hour each morning is given to
devotions. Friday morning the school all meet together for prayer,
in which our pupils take part. We have been greatly blessed in
these meetings. Friday afternoon the girls all meet in one room,
and while they are taught sewing, the Principal of the school gives
the boys a talk on morality, in another room. We visit the pupils
in their homes, and they, with their parents, feel at liberty to
come to our cottage at any time. It is with much pleasure we note
the improvement in their cabins and the taste the girls display in
trying to make their homes resemble our cottage. After school every
Friday afternoon, we have a missionary meeting for the mothers.
Here, while they sew, simple religious stories are read to them,
and before they go home we have a Bible reading and prayers. Three
years ago this society sent ten dollars to the Morning Star, and
for the past two years they have sent fifteen dollars to the A. M.
A. for the Indians. They are trying to do a little for the Master’s
Kingdom.

Besides these meetings, we have Sunday-school and mission-school,
and on Saturdays we go to settlements six or eight miles distant
to hold mothers’ meetings. Many a poor soul in these meetings has
heard for the first time the blessed news of personal salvation.

I know, dear friends, that what I have already said is not new
to you; you have heard it many times and are anxious to know if
any progress is noticeable. I wish, oh, how I wish, I could tell
you of the progress they are making. How they are working under
cast-iron laws to pay for their land and get little frame houses.
People tell me, in a general way, that they are lazy and there is
no hope for them; but I know them to get up at “day clear” and work
until sundown to pay for their land under conditions that would
discourage nine white men out of every ten. I could name a dozen
families around us who have their land paid for, and nice little
homes. The children come to school, their tuition is paid regularly
and their books are provided as soon as needed.

Are they progressing? For an answer I would like to show you the
nice little two-story frame building in which two of our pupils who
were married last winter live. On the lower floor is the parlor,
dining-room and kitchen; above are the chambers. The pretty chamber
set, white spread and pillow-shams, were purchased with the money
Sarah earned off her cotton patch.

People say they are dull and stupid. Yet children ten years old
will criticise letters received by their parents, and in two and
a half years we can fit a boy for the second preparatory year in
college. He works his own way, pays for his books, and at the end
of a year has enough to pay his traveling expenses home, and when
his teacher asks him if there is anything he needs, he replies,
“Oh, no; can’t I do something for you?”

People say, “You can’t trust them.” Yet I know of one of my little
girls on sewing afternoon, when almost home, returning with a
needle that somehow got stuck in her dress; and I have never missed
a pencil or book out of my desk, on which there is no lock, during
the years I have spent in McIntosh. How often you are told they
are ungrateful, and do not appreciate what you are doing for them.
Once and forever this idea would be banished from your minds could
you be present at our meetings, and hear the fervent, heartfelt
prayers of both young and old that God will pour out his richest
blessings on this Association and the friends who uphold it. It has
also been said they do not care to be educated, they would just as
soon remain as they are. We have many pupils in our room who walk
sixteen miles every day, and who do a task before leaving home in
the morning, and another when they return at night. One of my boys,
Josiah Roberts, walked this distance every day last year with the
exception of two, making a total of 2,250 miles during the school
year, and was not tardy one morning. Can any other school show such
a record?

Among the colored people great stress is laid upon “joining
the church.” This is one of the evils against which we have to
fight. It is the only idea many of them have of what it is to be
a Christian. One day, when returning home from making a call on
Aunt Judy, the minister’s wife called me, saying the girls wished
to see me. She has a number of girls from “up country,” who board
with her and attend our school. I followed her into the room where
they were, and said, on entering, “Well, girls, what is troubling
you?” There was silence for a moment; then one bright girl looked
up saying, “Oh, Miss Robertson, won’t you tell us what to do? We
thought we were Christians, we belong to the church, but we are
beginning to find out that that isn’t enough. We are not living for
Christ. Won’t you tell us how to be such Christians as our teachers
are?” With a short prayer for help, I pointed them to the Divine
Example, and during the remaining days of school we had proof that
they were imitating Him. Those girls went out into various parts of
the country this summer to teach, carrying Jesus with them. Who can
estimate the good they will do?

Every Tuesday and Thursday evening at the cabins the people hold
neighborhood meetings. Desiring very much to see how these were
conducted, I started out one evening with one of my girls. After
walking about a mile through the woods we reached the cabin, which
was crowded with dusky faces. As I entered, room was made for me
at one side of the fire-place, in which was a crackling fire of
pine knots. They asked me to read to them, so I opened my Bible to
the CIII. Psalm. How eagerly and attentively they listened as it
was read and explained. Then each one took part, either singing or
praying. Then together they began to sing their old slave songs,
keeping time by clapping and shaking hands, bobbing their heads and
scraping their feet. Every part of the body seemed in motion. As I
watched the strange scene, I thought, “Will this form of worship
die out with the old slaves, or will it be continued by our young
people?” I turned at that moment to look at my companion. A woman
had just stepped up to her saying, “Why don’t you shake hands?”
“Because I see no sense in it,” was the reply. On our way home she
inquired of me if I did not think the last part of that meeting was
more like a frolic than praising God? How rejoiced I was to hear
that young girl express herself in such a manner. Truly, “Our labor
is not in vain in the Lord.”

Dear friends, I would not give you the impression that there are no
discouragements in our work, for there are many. It is with heavy
hearts we oftentimes watch some of our scholars returning to their
homes in the evening, for we know that there everything tends to
overthrow the religious teaching received during the day. Girls
going home to mothers who have no sense of purity and virtue, and
who cannot realize the degradation of their lives. Sometimes those
the most promising, those for whom we have entertained bright hopes
for the future, fail us, and we are almost constrained to cry out,
“This is greater than I can bear.”

But He, whose promises never fail, has shown us that the seed sown
in tears will surely bring a harvest, and the encouragements,
together with the joy of being in His service, outweigh the
discouragements.

I could tell you of young men who have come to our school addicted
to drink, using profane language and tobacco, who to-day are
earnest, faithful Christians, the hope of our school. We gladly
would keep them, yet we bid them “God speed,” as this year they go
to Atlanta University. I could tell you of young girls who, out
of the wickedness and immorality around them, have grown up pure,
consecrated Christian women, doing what they can for the Master
they have promised to serve.

Such is the work the A. M. A. is doing throughout the South. Is
there anyone who can afford not to have a part in this glorious
work? Think of the privilege of being permitted to help lift these
souls, born in ignorance and vice, into the marvellous light of the
gospel of Jesus Christ. Last year, for want of room and help, we
had to turn many away from our doors, and that means sending them
back into the wickedness and ignorance from which they desired to
rise. When I take up the AMERICAN MISSIONARY MAGAZINE and
read therein the appeals for help, the feeling that comes over me
is not unmixed with indignation, for in God’s precious word I read,
“If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the earth is mine and
the fulness thereof;” and again, “The silver is mine and the gold
is mine, saith the Lord of hosts;” and yet the stewards to whom He
has entrusted this vast fortune do not allow Him enough to carry on
His work. I heard the remark, not long ago, “When money is needed
you can’t compensate with prayer.” Faith and works must go hand in
hand. Shall not the treasury this year be full to overflowing so
that “the barnacles may be cleared off this old ship,” and there be
nothing to impede her progress?

Won’t you multiply your prayers for the work and workers, so that
this year may be the most prosperous, so that we may indeed “have
souls for our hire”!

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK AMONG THE INDIANS.

BY MISS H. B. ILSLEY.

Six years of life among the Dakotas has taught me many things. Very
plainly I recall the first glimpse of their homes, as, October 1st,
1880, I wended my way, the sole occupant of the stage, between
Yankton and Yankton Agency, Dakota—a distance of 65 miles, to the
home of Rev. Mr. Williamson.

Home warnings were still ringing in my ears—for, had I not been
told, “You are doing a foolish thing, seeking only adventure,
spending your strength for naught; _Indians can’t be educated_;
you will live in one common room with only a sheet partition, and
you will have only a penny candle for your evening luminary, and
the Indians _may scalp_ you.” I saw the tents, I saw the one-room
log houses, and I met blanket Indians face to face in paint, bells
and feathers. Home warnings came vividly before me as possible
realities. But in a moment the hearty welcome of Mr. and Mrs.
Williamson, and their children too, changed my thoughts. The
cheerful sitting room itself had a welcome, and home letters were
there to greet me, which uttered no more warnings, neither have I
thought of them since, except as fund for amusement. This was my
introduction to life on a reservation.

From among varied experiences, I would like first to take you on a
recent trip with me, to some of the homes of the Dakotas scattered
along the Missouri and its tributaries, in our Oahe field. There
are now a number of stations, varying from five to fifteen miles
apart, where native teachers are at work; they having been prepared
for this at our schools in the past. There are day-schools of
between twenty and thirty pupils each. The teachers have religious
services on the Sabbath, and also visit among the people, becoming
acquainted with each man, woman and child.

At one of these stations, Cherry Creek, the Indians have been
associated with Sitting Bull, and it is of their homes I wish to
speak as types of the field when taking the first steps toward
civilization. Log houses of one room, with the earth only for a
floor; bedsteads of planks loosely laid on wooden posts about a
foot high from the ground. These serve also for chairs in the
daytime. A cook stove is found in the center of each room and this
is all. On the log wall hangs the coffee pot, the iron kettle and
their extra coats and dresses (if they have any). They still keep
their tents and use them in summer, which adds greatly to their
comfort.

At most places the women were working industriously; some
embroidering with porcupine quills, some preparing corn for drying
by braiding the husks into a rope, leaving the various colored ears
hanging; others were pounding between stones their native fruits,
which they dry and preserve for winter use.

A few men were building their log houses and plastering the
crevices with earth; some were at work in their fields, and many
sat with their friends smoking and telling entertaining stories.

The religious influences at these homes are foreign to ours, of
course, but there is an influence. The Dakotas worship all nature.
They pray to the spirits of heaven and earth; to the winds, the
sun, the moon, the stones, and for fear something should be left
out—it is summed up in the great mystery—the Great Spirit. All
trouble and even sickness comes from evil spirits, hence the young
never want to care for the sick, and do not dare for fear they
shall be visited with disease too. Near the tipi of one of the
women we noticed a large new tent; and we asked, “Whose is this?”
“My tipi wakan,” (holy house) she replied. “May we enter?” “Oh, no,
we do not allow white people there.” “But,” says my companion, Miss
Collins, “they always allow me.” “Do they? well, come.” She led the
way inside and told us the following incident:

Her son, a boy of thirteen, had died; and during his sickness all
the relatives had promised to make a certain number of gifts, to be
finished at a set time after his death. The tent was very large,
and half way around on the inside were several rows of Indian
travelling cases, which held the gifts. The mother opened one of
these and showed us her offerings: moccasins, leggins, tobacco
pouches, pipes and many articles for which I knew no name. All of
them were beautifully embroidered, and she had handled them so
carefully that the deerskin of which they were made was spotlessly
clean. This poor sorrowing mother had worked so diligently that her
wrist was very lame, but she was being doctored by one of their
medicine men, and hoped soon to finish all she had promised. “My
son has counted every one of these gifts,” she said, “and when
the time comes we will call a feast, and our sacred men will say
prayers, and we shall give these gifts away. This will please my
son and he will pray for us.” _So_ she hoped to merit blessings
for herself and others. Do we not hope that the dear Lord may soon
grant this faithful woman a revelation of Himself?

Before leaving this view of Indian life, let me give you a glimpse
of our other station, Fort Berthold, through a recent letter from
Mrs. Hall, formerly Miss Webb, of Santee. She writes: “You have
no idea, and I cannot begin to realize, the depths of heathenism
and degradation which surround us. It is only a little walk to the
village, and strange sounds come from there all through the nights.
There is dancing and all sorts of wickedness going on. I wish our
Agent would use his power to put a stop to such things. I have
had my first women’s meeting. My plan is this: to have a circle
composed of the mothers of our boys and girls, or, if they have no
mothers, the woman nearest to them. My first meeting consisted of
five. One of them could speak Dakota so I was able to reach her a
little. She was an interesting, bright woman, but oh! so dirty! I
was wonderfully drawn to her and also to one of her little girls.
Here was an opportunity to use my Dakota Bible, which I was so glad
to improve. Now I am surrounded by Rees and Gros Ventres, I feel
the barrier of language exceedingly. The Rees are around us mostly.
The Gros Ventres have taken their farms twenty, thirty, or forty
miles away. Here will be such a field for some of our boys. Who
will be the devoted, consecrated worker? I feel all we can do now
is to pray; and I am sure God will hear and answer.”

Having tried to picture to you our people in their own homes, in
parts of the Oahe and Fort Berthold fields, turn with me now to
our Santee school, and the record of its boys and girls. Some
of these not long since came from similar homes; others are the
children of Christian parents and grandparents, and do not know of
the native beliefs and customs, except as they are told. We have
representatives from ten different tribes, five tribes (and the
larger part) belonging to the Sioux or Dakota Nation, the remaining
five belonging to the Rees, Mandans, Gros Ventres, Arapahoes and
Poncas. The whole number of different pupils last year was 210.
This shows a steady increase. They have continued in larger numbers
through the year, and those from a distance have enjoyed attending
the summer sessions of school. There has been marked progress
in their studies and deportment; especially in deportment, for
those who used to be so painfully shy, and their voices so faint
one must strain the ear to listen, can now, with their acquired
knowledge of spoken English, look you confidently in the face and
respond with distinct voices. The brightening of the eye and whole
countenance makes you sure of the bond of friendship established
between teacher and pupil, which gives always a promise of success.
In the homes, in the shops (of which there are three—blacksmith,
carpenter and shoe shop), on the farm and at school, many through
the year have given very satisfactory service. While I would not
claim for any, perfection of conduct, yet in simple justice to
their efforts I do say, they have tried faithfully to do well what
they have attempted, and have succeeded, and so have won the esteem
of their teachers in the several departments.

The studies are as yet mostly elementary. The Bible in Dakota and
in English has always had a prominent place, in order that the
young men and women may be fitted for religious work among their
people. We would never lose sight of the fact that the first and
highest aim is to form a Christian character that shall go with its
influence into their homes and be felt. It is no plan of Santee to
isolate the child from the parent, but rather through the child to
influence the parent and all home life. Where there is such strong
family affection, there is a proportionately strong hope that the
greater and larger good can be accomplished in this way. Through
the past year there has been an awakening to the claims of their
own people upon our pupils as never before. They express desires
such as these: “I want to help my people.” “I go alone on the hill
and cry to God to bless and save my people.” “Pray for my people
that they may all be Christians.” Surely God’s spirit is with them.

During our summer vacation we receive letters from those at home,
which give a little insight into their life when they return to old
surroundings. One young girl writes, “There are some new Indians
here. They have their old ways yet, and I am afraid of them and
very careful with them. No Sunday-school, no church and no prayer
to-day is just dreadful to me. Remember us in your prayers that we
may be able to resist temptation.” Quoting from a letter from one
of the young men, “The people here asked me to go to grass dance,
but I said ‘I don’t know how to dance now.’ They have dance every
Sunday. And the white man, he always took some picture on Sunday.
You think he doing right? I think they don’t know how to walk to
the church. I know what makes those white men not want to go to
church. They didn’t like to hear the truth and doing in the right
way that Jesus wants all people to do.” Do not such words as these
show that the good seed is taking deep root?

Our organized Christian work embraces three missionary societies
and a Y. M. C. A.

The Society of Native Women holds weekly meetings for prayer and
sewing. Their homes are far apart and but few can attend at once;
yet some one is always ready to welcome the Society and prepare
herself to lead the prayer-meeting. They have raised during the
year $74.25. The girls of the Dakota Home organized a separate
society, October, 1885, with an average attendance of thirty. They
raised from September to July about $12. This was done by small
weekly offerings, and by the sale of useful and fancy articles at
the close of school. The little girls of the Birds’ Nest have also
had their society of seventeen members, varying in age from six
to twelve years. By little services they have earned $1.20, and a
gift of $2 from a gentleman has enabled them to report $3.20 at the
Annual Dakota Meeting in September. The Secretary of the Y. M. C. A.
handed me his report, from which I quote as follows:

“Our year’s work was quite profitable. We had at first nineteen
members. Our work was to bring young men to our meetings, and we
appointed four for that special work, though it is the work of us
all. We appointed four others to go in different homes and have
prayer with those who are not church members; four to visit the
sick and find out needs, to help them. Our contribution was rather
small, though it is the best we can do; this year $43.16. Out
of that, $25.80 goes to help our native missionary account; the
remainder is for helping delegates to different meetings. There
were twenty-five new members this year, most all associate members,
leaving only fourteen active members, but God has blessed us in
many ways.”

In conclusion, I think I speak the minds of all the teachers at
Oahe, at Fort Berthold and at Santee, when I say we feel much
encouraged in this our work for the Dakotas and other Indians.
God does bless our efforts, and the hearts of the young are being
won to his service. We know it is your work, too. We ask you still
to strengthen our hands and hearts in the future. We need your
interest and your prayers. We need your hearts with us constantly,
that we may be able to do better and greater things. It is a
_privilege_ to try to teach those committed to our care, of the
love of God and Jesus, which has existed so long for them, even
as it has for us. It is a privilege, in place of their fear and
worship of all nature, to tell them of the tender love and care of
a Heavenly Father. It is a privilege to see the faces brighten and
show the peace of God, because their hungry, fainting, souls have
found the Master. There may be self-denial in a life among them;
but in working for the elevation of a people like this, not simply
to be our servants and forever the weaker race, but with an aim to
bring them to stand on a level, to be Christian men and women, able
to fight the battle of life with a pure faith in the one God and
Saviour of us all, is something _worthy of self-denial_.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1886.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $162.00.

    Alfred. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               $15.00
    Augusta. Sab. Sch. Class, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             2.00
    Bangor. Mrs. Walter Brown                                 10.00
    Casco. “A Lady,” by Mrs. Richard Mayberry                  1.00
    Hermon. L. J. Peabody, _for Marie Adlof Sch’p
      Fund_                                                    1.00
    Machias. “A Friend.”                                       5.00
    Portland. State St. Ch. and Soc.                         100.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             18.00
    Wells. Mission Circle of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                              10.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $423.73.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                         4.50
    Atkinson. Joseph Grover                                    8.00
    Atkinson. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               5.10
    Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.50
    East Derry. First Ch. and Soc.                             1.71
    Greenland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             24.00
    Greenville. Isaiah Wheeler, 100; Cong. Ch.,
      8.72                                                   108.72
    Harrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.50
    Hopkinton. First Cong. Ch.                                17.70
    Lebanon. C. M. Baxter, _for Woman’s Work_                 65.00
    Mason. Ladies, _for Freight_                               2.61
    Milford. First Cong. Ch., to const. MISS
      CHRISTIANA MOORE, MISS ALICE M. FARNSWORTH
      and MRS. LIZZIE R. HOWARD, L. M’s                      127.83
    Nelson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 3.50
    Peterboro. Mrs. M. A. and Miss M. D. Whitney               4.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                          3.51
    Sullivan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               7.55
                                                             ——————
                                                            $399.73
    LEGACIES.
    Concord. Estate of George B. Woodward                     14.00
    New Ipswich. Estate of Wm. D. Locke, by A.
      N. Townsend, Agt.                                       10.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $423.73


  VERMONT, $244.07.

    Barton. “A Friend,” to const. GUY ROBERT
      VARNUM, L. M.                                           30.00
    Bethel. Y. P. S. C. E. Missionary Gardens,
      _for Indian M._                                          2.70
    Brattleboro. Central Cong. Ch.                           103.40
    Brattleboro. Mrs. F. C. Rice, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       2.88
    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.75
    Coventry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.62
    East Hardwick. Ladies’ Aid Soc., Bbl. of   C.,
      _for Tougaloo U_; 1.35 _for Freight_                     1.35
    Essex Junction. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           7.25
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     4.12
    Saint Albans. H. E. Seymour                                5.00
    Saint Johnsbury. South Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                38.25
    Springfield. Ladies’ Soc., Bbl. of C., etc.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Waitsfield. Ladies, by Mrs. S. A. Bigelow,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                                      4.75
    Woodstock. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                                    14.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $4,762.81.

    Ashburnham. C. G. Noyes                                   10.00
    Boston. Mrs. E. P. Eayers, 5; “A Friend,”
      Carpet, val., 50, _for Room 21 Cong.
      House_,—Dorchester. “Friend,” _for Indian
      M._, 46.07.—Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. and Soc.
      93.50.—Roxbury. Immanuel Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_, 75                       219.57
    Boxboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
    Boxboro. Grace Dustan, _for Marie Adlof Sch’p
      Fund_                                                    0.40
    Brockton. “Friend,” _for Santee Indian M._                65.68
    Brockton. Mrs. Mary E. Perkins                             5.00
    Cambridge. Miss Mary E. Marrett’s Sab. Sch.
      Class, First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Cambridge. Mrs. J. Russell Bradford                        5.00
    Campello. South Cong. Ch.                                100.00
    Charlton. “A Friend”                                       3.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch. adl.                              10.00
    Chicopee Falls. “A Friend,” by Rev. R. P.
      Hibbard, _for Tougaloo Miss._                           10.00
    Concord. Trinitarian Cong. Ch.                            33.09
    Cummington. Mrs. H. M. Porter, 2 Pkgs
      Patchwork, _for Macon, Ga._
    Danvers. Maple St. Ch. (36 of which _for
      Charleston, S.C._)                                     115.71
    Danvers. First Cong. Ch., to const. ELBRIDGE
      A. GUILFORD, MOSES CHAPMAN   and MRS. NANCY
      MORRISON, L. M’s.                                       93.77
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         166.00
    Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  6.00
    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     56.69
    Enfield. Edward Smith.                                   500.00
    Erving. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.75
    Fitchburg. Dea. Holton, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            15.00
    Freetown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.70
    Gardner. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., by Mrs. F. H.
      Whittemore, _for Indian M._                             50.00
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch.                        111.32
    Greenwich. Daniel Parker, deceased, by Mrs.
      M. P. Estez.                                             5.00
    Hanover. Second Ch. and Soc.                              10.00
    Hatfield. Cong Ch. and Soc., to const. DAVID
      BILLINGS, JR., and MRS. ISABELLA L. DWIGHT
      L. M’s.                                                 66.16
    Haverhill. Mrs. E. G. Wood, _for Freight_.                 2.00
    Haverhill. Nettie L Webster, _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               0.30
    Holliston. “Friends,” 14.63; Class of   Young
      Men Cong. Sab. Sch., 6; “Friends,” 2;
      “Friends,” Straw Matting and Oil Cloth,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         22.63
    Hyannis Port. Dr. J. H. Wright, _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                        5.00
    Hyde Park. Ladies’ Missionary Soc., by Mrs. M.
      G. Bunton, _for Woman’s Work_.                          25.00
    Melrose. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        64.09
    Merrimac. John K. Sargent.                                 2.00
    Methuen. First Cong. Ch.                                  27.45
    Millis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.03
    Milton. “A Friend’s Mite Box”.                             2.20
    Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          50.00
    Newburyport. Prospect St. Cong. Ch.                       90.60
    Newburyport. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     31.26
    Newton. Eliot Ch., _for Santee Indian M._                 75.00
    Newton. Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc. Box of
      C., etc., _for Macon, Ga._, 1 _for Freight_.             1.00
    Newton Center. First Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      _special gift for Oahe Indian M._                       15.00
    North Billerica. Mrs. E. R. Gould, _for
      Rutland Sewing Sch._                                     3.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch., _for
      Pleasant Hill_.                                         14.50
    North Weymouth. Old South Ch., 11.25;
      Pilgrim Ch., 8.77, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            20.02
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                   57.00
    Oxford. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., by Miss L. D.
      Stockwell, Treas.                                        7.70
    Pepperell. Dea. G. Blake, 10; Miss S. J.
      Miller, 2, _for Student Aid, Dudley, N.C._              12.00
    Reading. Woman’s M. Soc., Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo U._; Eliza A. White, 1.25 _for
      Freight_.                                                1.25
    Randolph. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             142.29
    Salem. Crombie St. Ch. and Soc.                           45.00
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch., _for Santee
      Indian M._                                              45.35
    South Attleboro. Mrs. H. L. Draper, Bbl. of
      C., _for Grand View, Tenn._
    Springfield. South Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._             10.00
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, _for
      Indian M._                                              30.00
    Taunton. Broadway Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                      25.00
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         28.01
    Westboro. “A Friend”.                                      2.00
    West Medford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           3.26
    Williamstown. South Ch.                                   13.79
    Winchendon. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                         23.62
    Winchester. Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill_.               50.00
    Woburn. Daniel Richardson.                             1,000.00
    Woburn. Ladies’ Charitable Reading Soc.,
      _for Freight_.                                           1.35
    Worcester. Piedmont Ch., 276.47; Piedmont
      Sab. Sch., 25, _for Indian M._                         301.49
    Worcester. Piedmont Sab. Sch., _for Atlanta
      Students in Sch. of Theology, Hartford, Ct._            50.00
    Worcester. Plymouth Ch. (10 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                             80.00
    Worcester. Salem St. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                               9.00
    Worcester. Old South Ch. M. C. Coll.                       7.00
    By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev.
      Ass’n.
        Chester. Center                              2.00
        Chicopee. Second                            56.90
        Monson                                      40.88
        Springfield. South, _for Debt_               5.00
        West Springfield. First                     27.00
        West Springfield. Park St., Mrs. H. A.
          Southworth                                20.00    151.78
                                                    ———————————————
                                                          $4,262.81

    LEGACY.
    Cummington. Estate of Mrs. Clara K. Porter,
      by Milton Porter, Adm’r                                500.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,762.81

    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.
    Pittsfield, N.H. By Miss Susie G. French,
      Bbl. and Box, _for Marion, Ala._
    Medfield, Mass. Box, _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Newbury. Mass. First Parish, Bbl., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._
    Watertown, Mass. Mrs. E. P. Wilson, Bbl.,
      _for Louisville, Ky._


  RHODE ISLAND, $375.86.

    Barrington Centre. Cong. Ch., 81.15, and
      Sab. Sch., 25.                                         106.15
    Bristol. First Cong Sab. Sch.                             20.00
    Little Compton. Mrs. Antrace Pierce.                       5.00
    Providence. Union Meeting, Beneficent   Cong.
      Ch., _for Indian M._                                   159.50
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch.                          50.00
    Tiverton Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.00
    Westerly. Cong. Ch.                                       28.21


  CONNECTICUT, $1,614.73.

    Birmingham. J. Tomlinson.                                 15.00
    Bridgeport. Olivet Ch., 7.75; F. S.
      Buckingham,   2.                                         9.75
    Bristol. L. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
      Household Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Chester. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               8.75
    Collinsville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.80
    Collinsville. Mrs. E. J. Warren, _for
      Charleston, S.C._                                        1.00
    Darien. Ladies, by Miss Ellen M. Nash, _for
      Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                  10.00
    East Haddam. “A Friend”.                                   8.00
    Easton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    East Woodstock. Ladies and Cong. Ch., _for
      Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                  20.25
    Enfield. Henry Abbe, 5; F. A. King, 5; _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               10.00
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   35.00
    Farmington. “Friends,” _for Teacher, Santee
      Indian M._                                             150.00
    Greenwich. Cong. Sab. Sch, _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                              17.50
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                     3.25
    Hampton. “A Friend”.                                       5.00
    Hartford. First Ch., Mrs. E. C. Root, _for
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._                                 100.00
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch.                             92.62
    Hockanum. “Hockanum Friends,” _for Indian M._              2.25
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                 35.00
    Middletown. South Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                      50.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                150.00
    Millington. Mrs. Geo. L. Edwards                           5.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch., Special to
      const. a L. M.                                          50.00
    New Britain. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of South
      Ch., 10 _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._, and
      10 _for Mountain White Work_                            20.00
    New Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17.00
    New Hartford. Young Ladies’ Mission Band, by
      Mrs. F. H. Adams, _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._            8.00
    New Haven. Davenport Cong. Ch.                            71.00
    New Haven. College St. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for a
      Kreutzer Marie Adlof Sch’p._                            50.00
    New Haven. Miss Fanny C. Skinner, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    New Haven. L. M. Soc. of Davenport Ch., Bbl.
      Household Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
    New London. Mrs. Anna H. Perkins, _for
      Indian M._                                              25.00
    New London. Set Miss’y Maps, by J. N.
      Harris, _for Talladega C._
    New Preston. Mrs. S. A. Whittlesey                         1.00
    North Lyme. Grassy Hill Sab. Sch., 6.89,
      _for Rosebud Indian M._ and 1.20, _for Marie
        Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                      8.09
    Oxford. Rev. J. B. Cleaveland                              5.00
    North Madison. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          6.50
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                     21.55
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch.                                      40.20
    Rockville. Judge Dwight Loomis, 10; G. L.
      Grant, 5; H. B. Murless, 5; H. D. Reede,
      5, _for Indian M._                                      25.00
    Southport. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               1.70
    Suffield. Young Ladies’ Circle, _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                         5.00
    Talcottville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         190.45
    Terryville. “Soldier of Christ,” _for Dakota
      Indian M._                                              10.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             49.02
    Thompson. Cong. Ch.                                       11.00
    Vernon Center. Cong. Ch.                                  11.80
    Vernon Center. Ladies’ M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      Bbl. of C., _for Thomasville, Ga._ and 3
      _for Freight_                                            3.00
    Waterbury. Sunshine Circle, Second Ch., _for
      Children’s Missionary_                                  20.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                      70.00
    West Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                   6.00
    West Haven. H. E. Nettleton, _for Indian M._               2.00
    Wilton. Mrs. S. L. Adams                                   5.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                     10.25
    By Mrs. S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec. W. H. M. U. of
      Conn., _for Woman’s Work._
        Hartford. First Ch. Parsonage Circle         20.00
        Naugatuck. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                35.00    55.00
                                                   ———————
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Indian M._                            5.00


  NEW YORK, $1,551.90.

    Berkshire. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       59.05
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch., _for Dakota
      Indian M._                                             200.00
    Brooklyn. Stephen Ballard, _for New
      Building, Tougaloo Miss._                              130.09
    Brooklyn. Julius Davenport, _for a Kreutzer
      Marie Adlof Sch’p._                                     50.00
    Brooklyn. South Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Santee
      Indian M._                                              37.50
    Brooklyn. South Cong. Ch., 50; “Mrs. M.,”
      10; Mrs. Sarah A. M. Kent, 2 Bundles of C.              60.00
    Buffalo. E. Sterling Ely, 100 Books, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Churchville. Missionary Circle by Miss Anna
      Craig, _for Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                     11.48
    Darien. “A Friend”                                       500.00
    Durham. “A Friend”                                         2.50
    Evans. “Children,” _for Marie Adlof Sch’p
      Fund_                                                    0.50
    Flatbush. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                   8.00
    Greigsville. Mrs. F. A. Gray                               1.00
    Le Roy. Delia A. Phillips                                 10.00
    Lisle. R. C. Osborne                                       1.50
    Massena. “A Friend,” _for Talladega C._                    2.00
    Mexico. George G. French                                  10.00
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle, _for Indian M._           241.97
    New York. Genl. Clinton B. Fisk, to const.
      MRS. W. D. MCFARLAND L. M.                              30.00
    New York. Isaac E. Smith, _for Jones
      Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                             25.00
    New York. Mrs. J. H. Washburn, 10, _for
      Mountain White Work_; J. H. Washburn, Pkg.
      of C.                                                   10.00
    Ogdensburg. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                            5.00
    Oswego Falls. ——                                          16.50
    Rochester. Gen’l A. W. Riley, 50; Plymouth
      Cong. Ch., 30.91                                        80.91
    Sag Harbor. Chas. N. Brown, to const. MISS
      IDA R. MILES L. M.                                      30.00
    Saratoga. Carpet, by Mrs. S. A. Ricard, _for
      Talladega C._
    Warsaw. Cong. Ch.                                         14.90
    Woodville. Miss W. D. Jones, _for Freight_                 2.00
    ——. “A Friend, Central N.Y.”                              10.00


  NEW JERSEY, $39.81.

    Arlington. “Friend,” 5; Miss Mary P. Talman, 1             6.00
    East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch.                          33.31
    Newark. Primary Class First Cong. Ch. Sab.
      Sch., _for Indian M._                                    0.50


  PENNSYLVANIA, $4,413.09.

    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for furnishing a room, Straight U._                    41.70
    Pittsburg. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                             17.27
                                                           ————————
                                                             $58.97

    LEGACY.
    Washington. Estate of Major Samuel McFarland,
       by A. M. Evans, Ex.                                 4,354.12
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,413.09


  OHIO, $280.09.

    Ashtabula. Cong. Ch.                                      14.00
    Cincinnati. Central Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.55
    Claridon. First Cong. Ch. (8 of which from
      Sab. Sch.)                                              35.60
    Cleveland. Jennings Ave. Cong. Ch.                        75.00
    Cleveland Ladies’ Home M. Soc. of Euclid
      Ave. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of C. Val., 61.33,
      _for Oahe Indian M._
    Columbus. Ladies’ Soc., Pkg. Patchwork, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Coneaut. Cong. Sab. Sch., 20: H. E. Brown,
      5, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                           25.00
    Hicksville. “A Friend”                                    10.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Hudson. L. B. Soc., _for Woman’s Work_                     4.00
    Madison. Mrs. E. A. Crocker                                2.00
    Marysville. Cong. Ch.                                     13.53
    Newark. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    North Kingsville. Rev. E. J. Cornings, 10,
      B. S. Noyes, deceased, 3                                13.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Charleston, S.C._                                       20.00
    Oberlin. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                   10.00
    Oberlin. Y. W. C. A., _for Student Aid,
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                       1.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch.                                1.70
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                       2.50
    Sandusky. Home Miss. Soc., by Miss M. O. Dennis,
      Sec., _for ed. of an Indian girl, Oahe M._              15.00
    Springfield. Infant Class Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      2; Rev. and Mrs. W. H. Warren, 2, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    4.00
    West Williamsfield. Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                                  4.94
    Williamsfield Center. Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                                  3.27


  INDIANA, $2.00.

    Sparta. John Hawkswell, 1.50; Mrs. Nancy A.
      Adkins, 50c.                                             2.00


  ILLINOIS, $452.85.

    Alton. Chas. Phinney                                      25.00
    Altona. Cong. Sab. Sch. Box, S. S. Papers,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Amboy. Ladies, Box of Bibles, etc., _for
      Mobile, Ala._
    Aurora. First Cong. Ch., 25.50, New Eng.
      Cong. Ch., 22                                           47.50
    Chicago. New Eng. Cong. Ch., 37.11, E.
      Rathbun, 20; Western Ave. Chapel, 4.64                  61.75
    Chicago. Woman’s M. Soc. of Lincoln Park Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              13.50
    Galesburg. “A Friend of the Needy”                         2.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  16.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch., 32 _for Charleston, S.
      C._and 30.50 _for Austin, Texas_.                       62.50
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                       15.07
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch., _for Savannah, Ga._                     9.70
    Marshall. “Your little friend,” Geo. Kimball
      Greenough                                               .0.21
    Northampton. R. W. Gilliam                                 5.00
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch., 79.62; Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      44                                                     123.62
    Oneida. Cong. Ch.                                         27.05
    Peoria. W. A. Brubaker, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            12.50
    Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch.                                    7.35
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                      14.10
    Roseville. Mrs. L. C. Axtill and “Friends,”
      Box of C., etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Sterling. Wm. and Catharine McKinney                      10.00


  MICHIGAN, $4,553.97.

    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Ann Arbor. Cong. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._                                                  20.00
    Coloma. Cong. Ch.                                          2.40
    Detroit. J. D. McLaulin, _for Student Aid
      Tougaloo U._                                            25.00
    Detroit. Fort Wayne Cong. Ch.                             12.28
    Edwardsburg. S. C. Olmstead                                5.00
    Jackson. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    Milford. William A. Arms, to const. TOWNSEND
      O. BENNETT L. M.                                        30.00
    Traverse City. First Cong. Ch.                            26.31
    Traverse City. Bay View Sab. Sch., _for Marie
      Adlof Sch’p Fund._                                       8.50
                                                           ————————
                                                            $149.49

    LEGACY.
    Chelsea. Estate of John C. Winans                      4,404.48
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,553.97


  WISCONSIN, $347.47.

    Beloit. Rev. H. P. Higley and Friend, Box
      Reading Matter, etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Green Bay. Irving C. Smith and Friend, Box
      Reading Matter, _for Macon, Ga._
    Lake Mills. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                2.91
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                        40.00
    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch.                                   44.76
    Ripon. Proceeds Union Fair, held by Cong. Ch.
      and Ripon College, by Marian Sargent, Treas.            12.00
    Sturgeon Bay. “Friends,” Box Reading Matter,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga.; 2 for Freight._                   2.00
    ——. “A Friend,” by Mrs. Jeremiah Porter, (50
      of which _for Woman’s Work_)                           150.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union, _for Woman’s
      Work_.
        Appleton, W. H. M. U.                       12.00
        Boscobel,      “                             2.00
        Clinton,       “                             9.00
        Janesville,    “                             5.00
        Manston,       “                            13.00
        Menasha,       “                             5.00
        Monroe, Mrs. M. Blakely                      1.00
        New Lisbon, W. H. M. U.                      2.30
        Wauwatosa,     “                            10.00     59.30
                                                             ——————

                                                            $335.97

    LEGACY.
    Fort Howard. Estate of Rev. D. C. Curtiss, by
      Edward C. Curtiss, Ex.                                  11.50
                                                             ——————
                                                            $347.47


  IOWA, $187.16.

    Anamosa. Woman’s Freedman’s Soc., _for Anamosa
      Room, Straight U._                                       8.00
    Denmark. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
    Grinnell. W. H. M. U. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           13.69
    Grinnell. Mrs. J. B. Grinnell, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Hastings. “Young Workers”                                  1.00
    Iowa City. “Busy Ring”                                    10.00
    Lake City. E. P. Longhead                                  3.00
    Lyons. First Cong. Ch.                                    14.65
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch.                                       7.18
    McGregor. W. H. M. U. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           16.50
    Montour. Cong. Ch., to const. J. N. CRAIG, L. M.          37.80
    Muscatine. German Cong. Ch.                                4.00
    Osage. W. H. M. U. of Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                    3.20
    Otho. Cong. Ch.                                            6.14
    Red Oak. Mrs. Mariana Willis, Box Reading
      Matter, etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Sioux City. First Cong. Ch.                               30.00
    Waterloo. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Tougaloo U._ and 2 _for Freight_                    2.00


  MINNESOTA, $42.33.

    Hastings. D. B. Truax                                      5.00
    Minneapolis. Union Cong. Ch., 11.54; Plymouth
      Ch., 9.13                                               20.67
                                                             ——————
                                                             $25.67

    LEGACY.
    Minneapolis. Legacy, in part, of Mrs. L. H.
      Porter, by Samuel F. Porter, Ex.                        16.66
                                                             ——————
                                                             $42.33


  KANSAS, $75.50.

    Cawker City. Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
    Chapman. W. H. M. Soc., by Mrs. Grace M.
      Perry, Treas., _for Repairs, Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                           50.00
    Manhattan. Cong. Ch., Eli C. Freeman, _for
      Printing Press, Straight U._ 2; Mrs. Henry
      Strong, 50c.                                             2.50
    Topeka. Miss Randlatt                                      3.00


  NEBRASKA, $5.00.

    Santee Agency. Rev. J. H. Steer                            5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $100.00.

    San Diego. Mrs. Harriet Marston                          100.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $5.00.

    Washington. Lincoln Mission Sab. Sch., _for
      Charleston, S.C._                                        5.00


  MARYLAND, $202.86.

    Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                               202.86


  KENTUCKY, $87.92.

    Clover Bottom. Ch.                                         4.42
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                     83.50


  TENNESSEE, $812.37.

    Jonesboro. Tuition                                        54.50
    Memphis. Tuition                                         341.65
    Nashville. Tuition                                       413.72
    Pleasant Hill. Tuition                                     2.50


  NORTH CAROLINA, $203.70.

    Wilmington. Tuition                                      195.45
    Wilmington. Miss Warner, 2; Miss Peck, 75c.;
      Miss Farrington, 50c.; Mrs. M. A. Noble,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega U_, 5                        8.25


  GEORGIA, $737.00.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                            278.95
    Macon. Tuition, 204.70; Rent, 14.30                      219.00
    Savannah. Tuition                                        204.65
    Thomasville. Tuition                                      34.40


  FLORIDA, $62.62.

    Saint Augustine. Tuition, 12.62; Rent, 40;
      Miss H. D. Barton, 10                                   62.62


  ALABAMA, $284.44.

    Mobile. Tuition                                          159.00
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Shelby Iron Works. Rev. J. S. Upton                       10.00
    Talladega. Tuition                                       110.44


  LOUISIANA, $185.50.

    New Orleans. Tuition                                     185.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $150.85.

    Tougaloo. Tuition, 150.00; Cash 85c.                     150.85


  TEXAS, $80.00.

    Austin. Tuition                                           80.00


  INCOMES, $1,788.47.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               637.50
    Endowment Fund, _for Presidents’ Chair,
      Talladega C._                                           37.50
    Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                          125.00
    Hastings Scholarship Fund, _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                       377.50
    Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                      250.00
    Luke Mem. Sch’p Fund, _for Talladega C._                  10.00
    Mrs. Nancy M. and Miss Abbie Stone, Sch’p
      Fund, _for Talladega C._                                25.00
    Rev. John and Lydia Hawes Wood, Sch’p Fund,
      _for Talladega C._                                       0.97
    Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                       45.00
    Tuthill King Fund, 125 _for Atlanta U._, and
      125 _for Berea C._                                     250.00
    Yale Library Fund, _for Talladega C._                      5.00

         *       *       *       *       *


  RECEIVED FOR THE DEBT.


  MAINE, $18.00.

    Bangor. Dr. H. F. Hanson                                  $8.00
    Bridgton. Two Lady Friends, 2 each                         4.00
    South Paris. Ladies of Cong Ch. and Soc.                   1.00
    Thomaston. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                             5.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $125.90.

    Auburndale. “A Friend”                                    15.00
    Campello. “A Lady Friend”                                  5.00
    Fitchburg. Ladies of Rollstone Ch.                         5.00
    Hanover. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.               2.00
    Kingston. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Lanesville. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                            5.00
    Lowell. Collected by Little Girls in Eliot Ch.             6.20
    Littleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                             5.00
    Malden. “A Lady Friend”                                    0.50
    Middleton. Mrs. O. L. Carleton, 5; Ladies,
      ad’l, 20c.                                               5.20
    New Bedford. “A Lady Friend”                               2.00
    Newburyport. “Two Lady Friends, North Ch.,”
      2 each; “A Sab. Sch. Boy in North Ch.,”
      10c.                                                     4.10
    Randolph. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                             20.00
    Reading. Ladies of Cong. Ch., ad’l.                        0.80
    South Framingham. “The Children”                           1.00
    Swampscott. MISS LUCY A. HOPKINS, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    West Newton. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch.,
      ad’l, coll. by H. F. C.                                  2.10
    Worcester. Plymouth Ch.                                   15.00


  CONNECTICUT, $11.00.

    New Haven. Rev. S. W. Barnum and family                    5.00
    Putnam. Members of Second Cong. Ch., by Mrs.
      H. G. Shaw, ad’l.                                        2.50
    Winchester. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                            3.50


  NEW YORK, $10.00.

    Brooklyn. Puritan Ch.                                     10.00


  ILLINOIS, $38.95.

    Elgin. Miss A. Champion                                    5.00
    Waverly. Cong. Ch.                                        33.95


  IOWA, $3.00.

    Forest City. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                           3.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $0.30.

    Columbus. Salem Ch.                                        0.30


  CALIFORNIA, $1.00.

    Lugonia. Edson D. Hale                                     1.00


  CANADA, $1.00.

    Sweetsburg. Mrs. H. W. Spaulding                           1.00
                                                           ————————
          Total for Debt                                    $209.15
                                                         ==========

    Donations                                            $10,779.14
    Legacies                                               9,310.76
    Incomes                                                1,788.47
    Tuition and Rents                                      2,565.88
                                                         ——————————
          Total for November                             $24,444.25
          Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30                    36,378.53
                                                         ==========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for November                                36.47
    Previously acknowledged                                   35.70
                                                            ———————
          Total                                              $72.17
                                                           ========

                        H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                             56 Reade Street, N.Y.


  SUMMARY OF RECEIPTS FOR OCTOBER.

    Donations                                             $9,790.61
    Legacies                                               1,312.50
    Incomes                                                  175.00
    Tuition and Rents                                        656.17
                                                         ——————————
          Total for October                              $11,934.28

       *       *       *       *       *




                    BOOKS for THINKING READERS.

=Evolution and Religion.= By HENRY WARD BEECHER. _Part
I_, Bearings of the Evolutionary Philosophy on the fundamental
doctrines of Evangelical Christianity. Paper 50 cents. _Part II_,
Practical application of the Evolutionary Philosophy to religious
thought and life. Paper $1. _Parts I and II._, 1 vol., cloth, $1.50.

=Tenants of the Old Farm.= Leaves from the Note-Book of a
Naturalist. A lucid exposition of the wonders of the insect world,
and a delightful and inspiring piece of literature. By Rev. H.
C. MCCOOK, D.D. _Profusely Illustrated._ Cloth, decorated,
$2.50. (_Fourth Thousand._)

=American Version: New Testament and Psalms.= The readings and
renderings preferred by American Committee of Revision incorporated
into the text. The _New Testament_, edited by President ROSWELL
D. HITCHCOCK, Union Theol. Sem. Cloth, 80 cents. _The Book of
Psalms_, edited by Prof. JOHN H. LANSING, New Brunswick Theol. Sem.
Cloth 25 cents. The two in One Volume, cloth, red edges, $1.00.

=Heavenly Recognition.= By Rev. T. M. MCWHINNEY, D.D.
The Natural and Scriptural argument for personal identity and
immortality after this life. Comforting discourses published by
request of the preacher’s congregation. 12mo, vellum cloth, 60
cents.

=The Volcano Under the City.= A graphic History of the great New
York Riot in 1863; with analysis of its elements, which _still
underlie all our cities_. A book of importance for to-day. Cloth,
$1.00. (Illustrated with Map of New York, showing Police Precincts,
etc.)

=The Problem of the Poor.= A careful study of the conditions which
lead to crime, with thrilling personal narratives, and practical
suggestions of help, especially in regard to Employment, Diet and
Drink. By HELEN CAMPBELL, author of “The Easiest Way in
Housekeeping and Cooking,” etc. Cloth, 60 cents.

=Comforting Thoughts.= For those in bereavement, illness and
adversity. Selected from Writings of HENRY WARD BEECHER.
32mo. With Vignettes. Cloth, limp, 75 cents; cloth, gilt, $1.00.

=The Women Friends of Jesus.= By Rev. HENRY C. MCCOOK,
D.D. Crown 8vo, 450 pp., cloth, $2.00.

“Very good, clear and unambitious in style, yet full of picture,
character, vigor; unmarred by cant or narrowness; with learning
of books and acquaintance with human nature well coupled; graphic
with experiences of travel; every way commendable.”—_Springfield,
Mass., Republican._

[Illustration: 3 stars]

_May be had of all Booksellers, or will be mailed, on
receipt of price, by the Publishers._

FORDS, HOWARD & HULBERT,-27 Park Place, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             BEETHOVEN

                            SAVE MONEY

                   BUY DIRECT OF =MANUFACTURER=

[Illustration: pump organ]

                           If you wish a
                          PIANO OR ORGAN
                             WRITE US.

                         LARGEST · FACTORY
                           IN THE WORLD.

                             REMIT BY
                        Draft, Money Order,
                       Registered Letter, or
                           Express only.

                                SIX
                          NATIONAL BANKS
                          AS REFERENCES.

                 $29.75 for a  Good Organ and Stool.
                 $49.63  “  “  Better “    “    “
                 $68.75  “ the Best   “    “    “

              Catalogue and Particulars sent FREE by

                             BEETHOVEN
                          PIANO ORGAN CO.
                   WASHINGTON, WARREN CO. N.J.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S
                            STEEL PENS

                GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.

                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE
                      A.B.C. OF AGRICULTURE.

=THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST= begins 1887 with a series of papers on
this subject by well known practical writers, which will furnish
invaluable information to every professional man, merchant and
mechanic, who looks forward to being the happy possessor of an
acre or more of land—to everybody wishing to learn practical
agriculture, etc. One hundred illustrations and fifty contributors
every number.

                           $1.50 A YEAR.

Send for sample copy.

                      751 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       SCRIBNER’S MAGAZINE.


             January Number. No. 1, Vol. 1. Ready Now.


                  25 CTS. A NUMBER; $3.00 A YEAR.


                          PRESS NOTICES.

_NEW YORK MAIL AND EXPRESS._

It will be a magazine of general literature in the widest sense
of the term, and one that is intended for the general public.
Everything will be subordinated in a proper degree to the purpose
of giving good literature. It will have no special lines to which
it will confine itself.

_CHICAGO NEWS._

The friends of literature all over the country are waiting for the
new _Scribner’s Magazine_ with a great deal of interest.... We
fully expect to see this new periodical take its place immediately
at the head of American magazine literature.

_NEW YORK JOURNAL OF COMMERCE._

No recent announcement has given more pleasure to the lovers
of high and pure literature than that which promised the early
appearance of _Scribner’s Magazine_.

_PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER._

The prospectus indicates that the bright anticipations will
undoubtedly be realized.... Good reading this! _Scribner’s
Magazine_ is destined to receive a very cordial welcome, and, what
is more, it deserves it.

_CHICAGO INTER-OCEAN._

The cover for the new _Scribner’s Magazine_, designed by Mr.
STANFORD WHITE, is simplicity itself, and good judges pronounce it
precisely what a magazine cover should be.

_CINCINNATI COMMERCIAL-GAZETTE._

The type will be a handsome open-face long primer made for the
magazine, and especially adapted for people who read in the cars or
are beginning to think of using glasses.


CONTENTS.

=GAMBETTA PROCLAIMING THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE=, _Frontispiece_.
Drawn by HOWARD PYLE. Engraved by FRANK FRENCH.

=REMINISCENCES OF THE SIEGE AND COMMUNE OF PARIS.= First
Paper—The Downfall of the Empire. By E. B. WASHBURNE,
ex-Minister to France. With illustrations from portraits and
documents in Mr. Washburne’s possession, and from drawings by
THULSTRUP, MEEKER, REICH, and others.

=SETH’S BROTHER’S WIFE.=—Chapters I. to V. HAROLD FREDERIC.

=THE STORY OF A NEW YORK HOUSE.=—I.—H. C. BUNNER. Illustrated
by A. B. FROST, F. HOPKINSON SMITH and G. W. EDWARDS.

=SONNETS IN SHADOW.= ARLO BATES.

=OUR DEFENCELESS COASTS.= F. V. GREENE, Captain U.S. Engineers.
With maps, sketches, and diagrams.

=IN A COPY OF THE LYRICAL POEMS OF ROBERT HERRICK.= AUSTIN
DOBSON.

=IN MEXICO.= _A Story._ THOMAS A. JANVIER.

=THE BABYLONIAN SEALS.= WILLIAM HAYES WARD. With illustrations
from seals in the author’s collection, and after DE CLERCQ,
PINCHES, and others.

=GLIMPSES AT THE DIARIES OF GOUVERNEUR MORRIS.= Social Life and
Character in the Paris of the Revolution. First Paper. ANNIE
CARY MORRIS. With portrait engraved by G. KRUELL, from the
painting at Old Morrisania.

=SOCIALISM.= FRANCIS A. WALKER.

=THE NEW YEAR.= MAYBURY FLEMING.

=A VIOLIN OBLIGATO.= _A Story._ MARGARET CROSBY.


                 $3.00 A YEAR; 25 CENTS A NUMBER.

        REMITTANCES SHOULD BE MADE BY CHECK OR MONEY ORDER.


               CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS, Publishers,

                 _743 and 745 BROADWAY, NEW YORK._


                 *       *       *       *       *

         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


“OUR CONSTANT AIM IS TO MAKE THEM THE FINEST IN THE WORLD”


                        Ask your Grocer for

                       “OUR TRADE-MARK” HAMS

[Illustration:

  OUR
  TRADE MARK
  HAM
  F.A. FERRIS & CO.
  NEW YORK.
]

[Illustration:

  “OUR TRADE-MARK”
  BACON
  BY
  FERRIS & COMPANY.
  NEW YORK.
  BONELESS
]

                        AND BONELESS BACON.


       NONE GENUINE UNLESS SHOWING OUR PATENTED TRADEMARKS,
              A LIGHT METALLIC SEAL ATTACHED TO THE
                 STRING, AND THE STRIPED CANVAS,
                          AS IN THE CUTS.

        A little higher in price, but of unrivalled quality


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: This Ink has been known to the trade since 1835, as

  PAYSON’S
  INDELIBLE INK,
  for Marking Linen, Silk & Cotton
  WITH A COMMON PEN
  Without a Preparation.
]

                     FOR PLAIN OR DECORATIVE
                      MARKING ON ANY FABRIC.


                  ESTABLISHED OVER TWENTY YEARS,
                    AND STILL THE ONLY INK THAT

                     ALWAYS GIVES SATISFACTION

                                TO

                    Buyer, Seller and Consumer.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1850      Thirty-Seventh Year.      1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                           OF NEW YORK,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.

                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                       =_11,155,827_=
  Surplus, by New York standard,      =_2,254,000_=

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._

                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.

  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
          H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                  H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                          S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   CHOICEST FOODS IN THE WORLD.

             A. B. C. STEAM COOKED CRUSHED WHITE OATS.

            A.B.C. Wheat, A.B.C. Barley, A.B.C. Maize,

                 Hulled, Steam-cooked, Desiccated.

                      BEWARE OF IMITATIONS!!

  American
  Breakfast
  Cereals.


                   Made from the Finest Grains.
                     All Impurities Removed.
              Prepared for the table in ten minutes.

                   Ask for A. B. C. Brand only.

                     (Registered Trade Mark.)

                             PATENTED.

For sale by all Grocers. Send for circulars, etc., to THE CEREALS
M’F’G CO., 83 Murray Street, N.Y.

                       (Incorporated 1875.)


                 *       *       *       *       *


               We want additional subscribers to the

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                  What can you do to secure them?

                      FIFTY CENTS PER ANNUM.

Send to H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York City.




Transcriber’s Notes:


“Presideent” changed to “President” at the top of the page prior to
page 1.

“enthusiam” changed to “enthusiasm” on page 5. (has grown into
enthusiasm)

“pressent” changed to “present” on page 8. (the past and the
present)

“everbody” changed to “everybody” on page 32. (everybody wishing to
learn)

“magzine” changed to “magazine” in the Chicago Inter-Ocean review in
the Scribner's Magazine advertisement on the inside back cover. (what
a magazine cover should be)








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 1, JANUARY, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.