Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: MAY, 1887.

  VOL. XLI.

  NO. 5.

  THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY]

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: CONTENTS]


  EDITORIAL.

    FINANCIAL,                                   129
    PARAGRAPHS,                                  130
    LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH,                     132
    THE PRAYERS OF THOSE WHO PRAY,               133
    AN INCIDENT,                                 134


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE,                         136
    REVIVALS—STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY—FISK
      UNIVERSITY—SAVANNAH—STORKS SCHOOL,         139
    CONCERT AT FISK UNIVERSITY,                  142


  THE INDIANS.

    FAILURE OF THE SIOUX BILL,                   144
    THE GRAND RIVER MISSION,                     145


  THE CHINESE.

    A NEW HOME,                                  146


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    THE MOTHERS’ LEAGUE,                         147
    PARAGRAPH,                                   148


  FOR THE CHILDREN.

    DOLLARS FOR SELF AND CENTS FOR CHRIST,       149


  RECEIPTS,      151

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




American Missionary Association.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._
      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._
      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._
      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to The District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               VOL. XLI.      MAY, 1887.      No. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


We have reached the half-way turning point of our fiscal year. With
March the first six months of our year ended. Our mission stations
are all manned. Churches and schools, with all their multitudinous
outshoots of work, are taxing the energies, abilities and devotion
of our workers. Never in the history of this Association was the
work more manifestly blessed of God, or more imperative in its
calls for vigorous prosecution. Our schools are crowded. Multitudes
of students are turned away because there is no room to receive
them. The calls pour in upon us from every quarter for more
dormitories and recitation buildings—for more help for worthy and
needy students, for more missionaries, preachers and teachers,
to go into regions most destitute and urgent for relief. Whole
counties are reported in which there is neither a church nor a
school; whole sections of country in which there are thousands and
tens of thousands of people for whose souls no one seems to care.
Revivals are reported in connection with nearly all our churches,
and the evidence is overwhelming that great harvests are waiting
the reaping in almost every direction. What are we to do? What
would the churches have us do? We are their servants; we report
to them the outlook; we send out to them the call; we impatiently
await their authoritative response. That response must be in money.

Our financial situation is this: At the present writing we have
paid out $14,555.84 more than we have received the current year.
This, with the debt coming over from last year, makes us $20,339.55
in arrears. It is impossible either to arrest or cut down the work
at this point in the year so as to secure relief. But even if we
could, would we be justified in doing it? Our total receipts last
year were $335,704.20. Our appeal for the current year is $350,000.
Our total receipts up to March 31st were $127,605.47. Our readers
can very easily figure out for themselves whether any blame can
rightfully be charged to those who have the management of the
Association in hand, and also whether, in view of the facts, the
thought of curtailment should be cherished for a moment.

On the basis of our receipts last year, we should have received
by the end of March $167,852, and on the basis of our appeal,
$175,000. It will be seen, therefore, that in the prosecution of
the work we have not exceeded the appeal of this year, nor even
the scale of last year. Here, then, presses our problem. Summer
is not a good time for collections. The necessity for special
appeals, such as we have been obliged to make during the past few
years towards the end of our fiscal year, has been as irksome
and disagreeable to us as it has been to our friends. It is on
this account we now raise the question: Cannot an effort be made
during the next two months to so increase the contributions to
the A. M. A. that the summer will find us delivered from possible
embarrassment? It will necessitate earnest work on the part of our
friends; but with such an important field urgently calling for
the enlargement of missionary work, with so many evidences of the
Divine approval resting upon it, and with so much ability in the
possession of our friends, may we not hope that the churches will
lay hold of the problem and solve it at once?

       *       *       *       *       *


SUICIDE POSTPONED.—There is an old story with such a good moral
that we recall it to the minds of our readers. A man of large
wealth, living in Paris, became so tired of a monotonous life that
he determined to commit suicide. On his way to the spot decided
upon, it occurred to him that he might as well give away the money
that he had with him, which was quite a large amount. He found so
much pleasure in bestowing this upon the poor people whom he met,
that he concluded to postpone the suicide until he had had time
to enjoy some more of the same beneficence. It is needless to add
that, instead of disgracing himself by suicide, he became a public
benefactor.

                                                        SELECTED.

       *       *       *       *       *

RIGHTEOUS INDIGNATION.—“I have just been reading my AMERICAN
MISSIONARY for April. I am terribly stirred up by it—am under a
dreadful temptation to _covet_ money that does not belong to me. I
am poor and I have to pay for my board and my room, and cannot get
without stealing the wealth that is so foolishly spent by others.

“The treatment of the Chinese, too, is an _abomination_. I am
naturally high-spirited, and, although in my 83d year, do not feel
more meek and quiet than in my early years. It cannot be that the
blessed God whose ‘mercy endureth forever’ can look with favor upon
our nation. Alas! alas! what can be done?”

                                                       SUBSCRIBER.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our missionaries writes: “A man who has a family of ten
children, and next to no school privileges, came fifteen miles
with a daughter of sixteen years to see me about getting three
children into school. A good man, and deeply interested to educate
his family. But I had to turn him away for lack of room. Such
instances are constantly occurring. The only way the young people
on these mountains who live remote from school can be educated is
to hire rooms and board themselves.” There is a plea in these words
for the erection of dormitories to accommodate needy and worthy
students. Such dormitories would not cost much, perhaps not over
$500 each. But the current funds must be used for our current work.
Gladly would we tell our missionary to put up a few dormitories
and let these pleading ones be cared for. But we have no money to
appropriate. Can any of the readers of the MISSIONARY help us out?
Only we must raise the caution, that the help given at this point
should not be allowed to interfere with gifts to our general work.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECRETARY BEARD has taken hold of the Southern Department of our
work with a great deal of earnestness. He has just returned from a
somewhat extended apostolic visitation of our churches and schools.
Many of our readers will remember Dr. Beard’s enthusiasm and zeal
for French evangelization, but he stands ready to confess that
the necessities underlying the work of the American Missionary
Association far exceed any that he has ever felt for mission work
before. We knew it would be so. It is simply impossible to convey a
full idea of the far-reaching needs and to set forth the imperative
claims of the great work in which the A. M. A. is engaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

The friends of the Indians have watched with much solicitude the
action of the recent Congress on the numerous bills before it
relating to Indian affairs. It is a matter of great rejoicing
that the most important of these, the General Allotment Act, has
passed. This allows the Indians to take their lands individually
by allotments and patents, and makes the allottees citizens of the
United States. This bill is far-reaching, and covers in a measure
the objects aimed at by some of the others which failed. Among
these last is the Sioux bill, which proposes to divide up and
dispose of parts of the Sioux reservation in Dakota. In another
column will be found an excellent article, by Rev. A. L. Riggs,
showing the loss, and yet the incidental benefits, that may arise
from the failure of this bill. We will only add, that some of the
provisions of the Sioux bill can indirectly and after some delay be
carried out under the General Allotment Act.

The failure of the Mission Indian bill is a source of unrelieved
regret and indignation. These Indians, whose sad story is told
so pathetically in Helen Hunt Jackson’s “Ramona,” are still left
unprotected, and their lands are still exposed to the incursions
of unscrupulous white men. It is to be hoped that the nation will
demand of the next Congress that justice shall be done to these
Indians.

       *       *       *       *       *


Lincoln Memorial Church, Washington, D.C., has hitherto carried
on its work in the Lincoln Mission building. This building is
held in trust by the Lincoln Industrial Association to sustain
educational, industrial and religious work. This association was in
no way connected with the church; it had several local enterprises
under its auspices in the same building in which the work of the
church was carried on. Thus the growth and usefulness of the church
were greatly hindered, as it had no control of the building and
the various enterprises carried on in it. It was clear that a
church representing a higher type and standard of Christian life
and worship than the average church of this community was greatly
needed in this growing section of the city. It was also evident
that if the Lincoln Memorial Church should supply this demand,
steps should be taken to so adjust the property and renovate the
building as to make a permanent church home and to promote the
most hopeful growth of the work by putting all the departments
of work carried on in the building under the management of the
church. Secretary Beard and Superintendent Ryder, of the A. M. A.,
and the pastor and officers of the Lincoln Memorial Church held a
conference, October 29, with the Board of Directors of the Lincoln
Industrial Association to consider the most practical plan of
putting the control of the property and all departments of work,
educational, industrial and religious, carried on in the building,
under the auspices of the Lincoln Memorial Church.

After the subject was fully discussed the following resolution
was unanimously adopted by the Board of Directors of the Lincoln
Industrial Association: “_Resolved_, That the Lincoln Industrial
Association hereby declares itself in full sympathy with the desire
of the Lincoln Memorial Church that the entire property, together
with all the auxiliaries in Christian and industrial work, be put
under the direction of the Lincoln Memorial Church here organized,
and to that end any additional action necessary will be carried
out.”

When the action of the conference was presented to the church it
was voted that the church accept the trust and that steps be taken
immediately to repair and improve the church and parsonage and
all other parts of the building, as far as practicable, so as to
make the building more desirable as a place of worship and center
of Christian work, and a home for the pastor’s family. A building
committee was appointed and an appeal was made to the public and
friends for funds for the immediate repair and improvement of the
building.

       *       *       *       *       *


“THE PRAYERS OF THOSE WHO PRAY.”

One of the devoted workers of the A. M. A., telling in a simple
yet thrilling way of his heroic work in the South, concludes his
article (in THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY for March) with a request for
the “prayers of those who pray.” What can he mean? Does he not,
when struggling to put up a building in the wilderness, want money
more than prayers, or at least as much? Would he not be glad of
anyone’s sympathy and prayers? Very likely; but yet we see in his
request an unconscious recognition of the fact that those who make
a business of praying are the ones whose help is worth something;
whose sympathy is palpably felt.

Those who pray! Oh, what a blessed thing is habit, when rightly
guided. How much pleasanter to make effort, to do work, in familiar
channels. What added life does it give to our intercourse with the
Father to realize that he is already acquainted with us, that he
has heard us on similar subjects before, that he knows the general
trend of our desires and longings already. When we go before a
court of law with our suits we employ an experienced pleader to
present our case, and rightly; his training, his _habit_, is the
lubricating element; without it progress would be slow, difficult
and tedious. In spiritual matters we cannot do our pleading by
proxy; priests were abolished when Christ made himself accessible,
through the Comforter, to every heart, and we must now act each
for himself; therefore let us see to it that we do not make this
part of life uninteresting, unfruitful and dreary from sheer
stiffness, inexperience and unfamiliarity. James says (v. 16) “the
supplication of a righteous man availeth much in its working.” A
righteous man is one who is working in lines approved by God, and
this necessarily implies that he is in communication with God;
therefore the maker of this appeal is right in addressing himself
to those who are used to praying; there is every probability that
they will be “righteous men” and that their prayers will “avail
much.” What sort of a phenomenon is a church member who is not
in the habit of praying? Even though his subscription to the A.
M. A. this year be a liberal one, what certainty is there about
his action next year? One who prays for this worker in Tennessee,
and gives him a dollar, or a dime, may be of more real help than
a giver of ten dollars who does it merely as a duty, or to quiet
his conscience. The former has enlisted his _friendship_; and an
accessible friend is better than a brother afar off—even if he be a
millionaire, oftentimes.

The _prayers_ of those who pray! Ah, yes, that is it. Love and
sympathy are what move the world. If one loves us we need not worry
about his material gifts to us. If a child of God prays for us he
has a real interest in us and will _try_ to give us money (if we
are in need of it); and the exertions of such are multiplied a
hundredfold by God’s arithmetic. “Those who pray” find that God
doesn’t require them to assume the attitude of Abraham, “Oh, let
not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once.” If the
loving children of God were permitted to only send up one brief
prayer and then have to step back, their interest might die out.
No; the rule is “pray without ceasing,” “_whatsoever_ ye ask.” God
can raise up helpers out of the very stones of the ground; but he
is not likely to do it unless he sees that his children desire and
need the help and will faithfully use it. Let us all _pray_ for the
faithful ones who carry our burdens by going into the wilderness
to do God’s work in our stead, who relieve us of a portion of our
duty by doing more than theirs, and our material aid will certainly
be larger and of more value than it could possibly otherwise be.
As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he. Our prayers follow our
thoughts; if we think and pray as benevolent persons it is likely
that we shall be benevolent.

                                                      SUBSCRIBER.

       *       *       *       *       *


AN INCIDENT.

“Will you come with me, to-day, and visit some of my poor people?”
said a Southern lady missionary to me, on my first visit to the
sunny South.

Of course I would go. I was anxious to meet with my brethren
and sisters whose skin color differed from my own. I longed for
acquaintanceship with them, to see what they had received.

We soon reached a conglomeration of cabins that had a ridiculous
resemblance to rooks’ nests. How does it come that sticks in old
age look so much more disreputable than stones? These wooden cabins
looked far worse than the stone hovels of Achil Island. These
lately enfranchised people living here were all renters, and they
paid the utmost possible rent for the poorest possible shelter.

The cabins were built in clusters of four, so that one corner of
each rested against a clumsy chimney, built in the middle in such a
manner that each cabin had a corner fire-place.

In one of these little tenements, in an old arm-chair, cushioned
with shreds and patches, and set close into the chimney corner,
sat a very old colored woman, with her shaking hands spread out to
gather to her the warmth of the fire of fat lightwood splinters
that blazed and crackled before her. The damp, chill wind whistled
through every crevice and cranny of the rough, ill-matched boards
of the door and the slight wall. The whole cabin was almost as airy
as a corn crib. It was admirably built for ventilation, and was in
the full enjoyment of it.

The old woman, popularly supposed to be over a hundred, looked
around at us, her face one mesh of wrinkles, her wool as white as
snow, but she was wonderfully bright and cheery. She was a great
sufferer from asthma and rheumatism, could not lie down in bed at
all, but was confined to her chair night and day. She was one of
those of whom I had been told as having a near acquaintance with
her Lord as with a personal friend.

“How are you to-day, Aunt July?” said my friend.

“Howdy’, howdy’? I’se well, an’ glad to see you, honey; bress de
Lawd.”

“I’ve brought a friend with me to see you; a friend from over the
sea.”

“Bress you, honey, I’se glad to see you, too. De good Lawd sends
his chilluns to look me up. He does so, ’cause he don’t ever forget
me.”

“The box has come, Aunt July, and I’m so sorry that there’s nothing
in it at all that would fit you; nothing but children’s things.”

“Bress de good Lawd, it’s a-comin’; I feel it’s a-comin’, but it
wasn’t to come in dat ar box, sure enuff, honey.”

“I did wish and pray for a warm woolen shawl to wrap around you at
night when the fire goes down,” said the missionary lady, kindly.
“You see,” turning to me, “the nights are quite cold this time of
the year, and see how open the cabin is. If she could only lie
down in bed and cover up warm, but she cannot, and she must suffer
dreadfully when the fire goes out. I do wish so much that she had a
shawl.”

“Well, honey, you is kind to ole Aunty, an’ I’se thankful; but we
wasn’t ’greed ’bout dat ar’, honey. You ask de Lawd for a shawl,
an’ I ask for sumpin’ warm, wid sleeves in it, so’s not to slip off
in de night when I falls asleep an’ de fiah done gone out.”

“You see, I’se real glad when de sleep comes,” she said, looking
at me; “I’se glad of de rest in sleep, but de fiah done go out. My
son, he’s jest as good as he ken be to me, an’ he leaves heaps ob
wood, but when I sleeps de fiah done go out. I ask de bressed Lawd
to sen’ me sumpin’ with sleeves, so’s it would keep on when I’se
sleepin’.”

Then I suddenly remembered a long wrap of Canadian factory material
that had been with me in many a mountain ramble over the water. I
had put it in my trunk without any very definite reason for doing
so, against all the good natured ridicule showered upon me by
friends. I had not used it, seemed to have no use for it, until
this need flashed upon me. Before many minutes it was fished out
of the bottom of my trunk, brought there and fitted on the aged
sister. It was warm, it had sleeves, and when it was buttoned on,
it reached to the ground.

“It’s just like my bressed Master, dat is,” said old Aunty, her
sunken eyes shining with gladness. “I ask fer sumpin’ warm, with
sleeves, an’ he sen’ me what cover me all over down to de feet.
Bress de Lawd, it is allars above what we ask. Now you can see how
He done care fer ole Aunty. It’s allers jest so, He cares.”

I looked at her, old and poor, asthmatic and rheumatic, helpless
and dependent, and her thankfulness shamed me. In putting on the
wrap, my friend pointed out the scars of ancient floggings ridged
and furrowed in the dark skin. The ploughers had ploughed on her
back, and made long their furrows. She was one of His. Was this in
any way being in fellowship with His sufferings? She was old, very
old, ten years past the allotted period of three score and ten, she
believed, when the tramp of armies heralded freedom for her in the
sunset and twilight of her life.

“I’se sitting in my cheer, such a cumf’able cheer, an’ my heart is
singing all de time, because my bressed Lawd ’members me an’ loves
me, an’ answers all my pra’rs.”

My heart did not sing all the time. I had questionings, and even
murmurings. I looked around the cabin; there was no comfort or
possibility of comfort to be seen. Abject, helpless poverty was
the sum total of all her surroundings. She was dependent on what
could be spared from the scant wages of her son, a Southern day
laborer with a large young family. Living thus on the perilous edge
of want, and her heart singing all the time with thankfulness! To
think of it!

“What do you feel thankful for?” I asked. The words leapt out
before I was aware.

“Thankful, chile! I’se thankful for all my marcies, for all de
goodness from my bressed Master that come to me. I allers wanted to
be free ’fore I died; now I’se free. Thank God an’ Massa Linkum,
I’se free! My heart was sore for my chilluns, sole away from me
befo’ the wa’, an my bressed Master find one for me, brung him
here after the wa’; my oldest son, he is. I fin’ my two gals, or
they fin’ me; they’se married down yer’, an’ they’se all good
to me. It’s allers jest so since I got ’ligion. God has answer’
every pra’r, an’ best of all, He stays by me in the dark an’ in
the light. Oh, honey, my heart does well to be thankful an’ keep
singin’ all de time.”

The surroundings seemed to change, glorified by the secret of the
Lord. My heart went out to this old negress with her scarred form,
for was she not a dweller under the shadow of the Almighty? I
thankfully acknowledged my relationship to her, for was she not a
daughter of the King, and higher up than I?

                                               MRS. A. M’DOUGALL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER.

Le Moyne Institute, at Memphis, Tenn., like almost all of the A.
M. A. schools this year, is full to overflowing. A large number of
pupils have been turned away for the want of accommodations.

The Industrial department of Le Moyne Institute is receiving
constant additions. A printing outfit has recently been procured,
and the students are busy over “fonts” and “pi,” though no
printer’s devil has as yet appeared. The scholars have done some
good job work already and are thus turning their industrial
training into immediate practical benefit. The other departments
of the Institute are keeping step with its industrial development.
Le Moyne is broadening its influence constantly and sending its
roots deeper and deeper into the intellectual and religious
soil of Memphis. It is recognized as one of the most beneficial
institutions in the city by the citizens of all shades of political
opinion.

The Congregational Church stands immediately opposite the
Institute, and students are especially welcomed into its services
and membership. If New England Pilgrimism of early days is
reproduced anywhere it certainly is in the work of the A. M. A. The
Church and the School are the joint and inseparable agencies for
the building of character.

       *       *       *       *       *

A trip down the Mississippi Valley is a revelation to one who has
never passed over this route. This valley is the garden region of
the old South, that is, those States east of the Mississippi. It
is asserted, and truthfully, I think, that two and one-half bales
of cotton are sometimes raised for every man, woman and child of
the population of this valley. The land is a deep alluvial loam
and produces crops of great variety. Cotton, corn, potatoes (sweet
and Irish), wheat, oats, and sugar cane are some among the many
products that grow luxuriously here. This region has been avoided
by settlers in the past, because of its unhealthfulness. In the
old slave days, planters lived in the highlands, back from the
river, and worked their plantations by slave labor. The death of a
slave was only unfortunate because of just so much lost live stock.
God equalizes things in a strange way. Now, these very people who
occupied these lands and tilled them for others are acclimated and
can live here and gather the enormous wealth of this wonderful
valley. The railroad company has offered unusual inducements
to settlers of small capital to take lands here. Five thousand
colored people have poured into this great garden spot during the
past eighteen months and others are constantly coming. What an
opportunity for A. M. A. work! Pleading invitations come to me from
many places along the line of this valley, begging me to come and
see their needs. Churches and schools and missions are demanded all
through this region _immediately_. Tougaloo University was never
so well fitted as to-day to meet the needs of these people. Its
two new Ballard buildings greatly increase its accommodations and
facilities. But other schools, less advanced and comprehensive,
are needed, which shall meet the immediate wants of these new
communities, and also be feeders to Tougaloo.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one place a considerable colony has settled under the leadership
of a former student of Fisk University. He is, of course, a
Congregationalist, and desires the best educational advantages
for this new and growing colony. What could not be accomplished
here during the next few years if only the treasury warranted the
outlay? At Greenville, in the heart of this fertile valley, a small
Congregational Church, planted and nurtured by the A. M. A., is
holding up the standard of intelligent preaching and decent forms
of public worship. The Church has no meeting-house, but holds its
services in a school building, the property of a colored citizen,
who is the editor of the Greenville _Herald_, a sprightly local
paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mississippi River is making fearful havoc along its banks. At
Greenville, fifty feet of ground fell away in a single day. Brick
buildings are being torn down and frame buildings hurried back
on rollers to save them from the mad waters of the mighty river.
Where the streets of the village were, a few months ago, now the
river runs more than a hundred feet deep. This is a boom in real
estate not thoroughly enjoyed by the citizens. It is attributed to
the failure of the River and Harbor bills, and the citizens are
very indignant. I am happy to state that our pastor’s home and the
proposed site of the new Congregational Church are far back from
the river, and no one need withhold his increased contribution to
A. M. A., on account of this needy field, for fear the real estate
will wash away.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Vicksburg I found quite a number of A. M. A. graduates. One
hangs out the shingle of an attorney and is doing “tolerably well,
thank you.” Two are teachers; one of these, a graduate of Straight
University, N. O., has done splendid service for his people and
won honor for himself. He is Superintendent of the city colored
schools, having ten teachers under his direction. He has saved his
money and now owns two comfortable cottages and is out of debt; not
a bad showing for a young man only a few years out of college.

       *       *       *       *       *

Louisiana is reaping the harvest of her former seed sowing.
Arozelles Parish is agitated over the outrages recently perpetrated
against the Hebrews. Witkowsky, it will be remembered, was driven
from his home in this parish last fall. Now these outrages are
being repeated against others of that same race. I quote from a
local paper: “The anti-semitics rode up to the Kahn store and
riddled it and the surrounding fence with bullets. Next day Kahn
and Bauer were served with notices calling attention to what the
mob had done, and warning them to leave the parish at once if they
wished to save their lives.”

The Governor of Louisiana is exhorted to stop these outrages. Why?
It is only a continuance of the policy of violence and murder that
has so often brought disgrace upon this and other Southern States.
It matters little whether the victims of these brutal outrages are
Negroes or Hebrews. Anyone who chances to be obnoxious to the Lords
of the Land may meet the same cruel treatment. But better and
brighter days are slowly coming, when all classes can demand and
shall receive the impartial protection of the laws. Perhaps this
new violence to the Hebrews may arouse the public conscience.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVALS.

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY.

Those acquainted with the history of this institution affirm that
it has never before been visited by just such a work of grace as is
now gladdening many hearts.

The year, unlike some that have preceded it, has been free from
serious and protracted interruptions. Neither Expositions nor
epidemics have made great breaches in the classes or diverted
attention from matters of first importance. Though our classes
have been unusually crowded, the amount of faithful scholarly work
accomplished has been greatly above that of ordinary years. There
has been a quiet, intense determination on the part of pupils to
master the subjects in hand, that has greatly encouraged their
teachers. Many pupils have expressed a praiseworthy dissatisfaction
with their work and a longing to do it better, and have seemed glad
to devote recreation and holiday hours to gain a better mastery of
difficult subjects.

Accompanying this zeal for the acquisition of knowledge there has
been, from the week of prayer, a deep and growing tenderness on the
subject of religion.

While there have been no special revival services, the regular
weekly religious meetings of the University, both voluntary and
those in the regular order, have been attended and sustained with
the most earnest enthusiasm and by about the same numbers.

Some four weeks ago a request was made after the Sunday evening
preaching service, that those who had lately become Christians
would remain. Several who had given good evidence of a change of
heart were absent from the service, but fourteen remained and bore
glad witness to personal experience of the Lord’s saving power.
Since then the work has gone on steadily, and about _one soul a
day_ has come into the light. The Spirit is revealing His presence
in all grades of the University, and boarders and day pupils are
witnessing to His saving power. The work is very quiet, deep and
wonderful. There are over forty-five who give evidence of having
been “born from above.”

The following incident illustrates the peculiar graciousness of the
work as it was modestly related by one of the teachers last evening
in Faculty meeting: “Yesterday noon, as my scholars were passing
out of the room, a boy stepped out of the line and stood waiting to
speak with me. When all had left the room, I said: ‘Well, B., what
can I do for you?’ With a voice broken with emotion, he exclaimed:
‘Oh, Miss P., I want to be a Christian; I have wanted to be one
for a good while, and I want you to pray for me.’ I was surprised,
as he had given me considerable trouble for weeks, and I had not
thought him seriously inclined till that morning.

“‘I certainly will pray for you,’ I replied; ‘would you like to
have me do so _now_?’

“‘Yes, ma’am,’ was his earnest response.

“Turning the key in the lock, to avoid interruptions, I knelt with
him and asked the Lord to help him give up everything. He tried to
pray, but could only say, ‘Oh, Lord! Oh, Lord!!’ and broke into
sobs. I then opened the Bible and read, ‘Come unto Me,’ ‘I am the
Way,’ and other passages. He having regained his self-possession
as I opened to him the Scripture, I said: ‘Now, is there anything
you have not given up—anything you are not willing to give up for
Christ?’ ‘No,’ he answered, firmly, ‘I do not care for _anything_;
I want to be a Christian.’ I was obliged to leave him here, and did
not have a chance to speak with him again that day. This morning
he was a little late, but something in his face as he said ‘good
morning,’ told me that the struggle was ended. This noon he again
left the line, and without waiting for his mates to pass out, held
out his hand, joyfully exclaiming: ‘Miss P., I want to tell you
that I have found Jesus; I found him last night, and I am happier
than I have ever been since I was born; I mean to serve Him as long
as I live.’ I never heard a more earnest and hearty confession of
Christ.”

The frequent occurrence of incidents like this fill all our
hearts with deep awe and invest every act and word with a tender
solemnity. We feel the majestic presence in our midst of One
seeking and saving that which was lost.

Pray for us, brethren, that the will of God may be fully wrought
among us, and these youths, so eager for that education which is so
necessary for the future well-being of the South, be enriched above
all other getting with “the gift of eternal life.”

                                                     M. L. BERGER.


FISK UNIVERSITY.

The time has come in the religious history of the year in Fisk
University when an account of the work done may be given. I have
no doubt that it will interest and encourage the friends of the
Association.

During the week of prayer for the Y. M. C. A. among colleges, the
young men of the institution who belong to the Y. M. C. A. of Fisk
held meetings and did good work among the young men who do not
profess to be Christians. As a result, three or four were hopefully
converted.

The week of prayer was observed in the institution, meetings being
held immediately after supper. From the beginning to the end the
attendance was large and the interest great. The meetings continued
four weeks, and have just closed. Twenty-five of the students have
been converted, including the three or four who were converted
during the week of prayer held by the young men. The interest
culminated at the meetings during the day of prayer for colleges.

The afternoon meeting of that day was one of the most remarkable
ever held in the University. At the beginning of the meeting,
President Cravath gave the following statistics of the higher
grades: Students in college, 42, professing Christians, 37; Normal
students, 40, professing Christians, 36; College preparatory
students, 46, professing Christians, 34. Total number in higher
grades, 126; total number of professing Christians, 121, or about
86 per cent.

The key-note to the meeting was given by George McLellan, a former
graduate, who had studied theology at Hartford for a year. He said
that in a meeting at Hartford he found that Fisk had a larger
percentage of Christian students than any other college represented
in the meeting, but that the students of Fisk were not entering the
ministry in such large numbers as the students from other colleges
were.

The key-note once struck, a most interesting discussion arose
as to why the students of Fisk were not entering the ministry.
Different causes were assigned, which may be reduced to one or
two. There is not sufficient inducement offered to the young men
to become ministers; the claims of the ministry are not presented
with sufficient stress; the churches are so few and so small that
the prospect is very discouraging; if a young man offers himself
for the ministry, he must go North to study theology, where he is
in danger of being educated out of sympathy with his people. The
Southern schools have no well-equipped seminaries in which young
men may be educated.

The meeting closed with this question still uppermost, and at
night it was taken up by common consent and another hour spent
in considering it. It was felt by all that the time had come for
the establishment of a well endowed theological seminary for the
schools in the South.

                                                  H. S. BENNETT.


SAVANNAH.

The revival in Savannah and vicinity began with the church in
Woodville in November, spread to McIntosh, thence to Savannah.
Results: somewhat more than two hundred appear desirous for the
Christian life, and great renewal to activity among the members
in these churches. The presentation of the sole essential—a
crucified Saviour; Scriptures linked in argument like shields
in the Phalanx, and pressed day after day by Evangelist James
Wharton, of Barrow-in-Furnes, England, are not to be lightly
esteemed if no conversion had resulted. The man who holds that the
congregations gathered in A. M. A. churches cannot be moved by the
_Book, was not_ present during these services. March 6, at our
feast of in-gathering, the Savannah Church gave the right hand to
twenty-nine new members, in part the fruit of this revival.

Tender and thankful were the tears of joy shed by the faithful
teachers as those converted in answer to their prayers stood
forth to confess the Saviour. The harvest from seed long sown was
there in the converted mother, at whose recall a Magdalen home
is purified, and a son and daughter stand on either hand, making
the gracious picture complete. Let Shelburne, Mass., hear this
testimony, “I have never been at rest till now since I was in one
of Miss Hardy’s mother-meetings long ago.”

                                                  DANA SHERRILL.


STORRS SCHOOL.

The last has been a month of much labor and of much rejoicing
as well, for the Lord has blessed us—in school and church—we
feel. Nearly one hundred conversions in our school and in our
Sabbath school, and a great quickening among those who had grown
indifferent. I never felt so close to the Master, more that His
spirit was so in our midst; and yet there was no excitement—just
a ready willing surrender of the heart and life to Jesus. Some of
the converts are “little ones,” and some are youths and some are in
mid-life. In my own class of young men, ten have found the Saviour
and eight of them are to unite with our Church next Sunday. I think
there are forty who are proposing a public uniting with us at that
time. It is a time of great anxiety for us. The young feet will
wander if not guided by earnest Christian admonitions. I need not
say we are tired and trying to rest a little before our spring term
opens next Monday.

                                                         H. J. M.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMPLIMENTARY CONCERT TO GOVERNOR AND LEGISLATURE OF TENNESSEE BY
FISK UNIVERSITY.

The Mozart Society, under the direction of Prof. Spence, has just
given its concert complimentary to His Excellency the Governor,
and the Legislature of Tennessee. The Governor was unable to
attend on account of sickness in his family, but sent a letter to
Prof. Spence expressing his regret. This is the third time that a
complimentary concert has been given to the Legislature, at its
different sessions, but this one was probably the most successful
in every sense.

The whole chapel was reserved for our guests; no tickets being
sold, and the students not attending, that there might be room for
the entire body. A few leading citizens, both white and colored,
were invited, and the Faculty and teachers of the University
were also present. The night was warm and pleasant, and students
appointed for the purpose met our distinguished guests at the
street car, a quarter of a mile distant, escorting them up through
the unlighted street.

The Hall, however, was brilliantly lighted, and when the concert
began was well filled, still others coming in later in the evening.

The Mozart Society, consisting of fifty members, with piano, organ,
violins, flute and cornet, occupied the raised platform in front.

The Society includes all grades of students, but more especially
are they from the advanced classes, as the very difficult music
which they render requires all the mental power of which they
are capable. Prof. Spence is the soul and life of the Society,
and gives himself to it with an energy and enthusiasm that is an
inspiration to all the members. They have studied music from the
great composers for several years, and during the present school
year have devoted themselves especially to the Oratorio of Elijah.

The first half of the concert consisted of selections from this
Oratorio.

All who are acquainted with the music know that it is simply
sublime and that it must be a most unappreciative soul that can
listen to it without being deeply moved.

The opening chorus, “Help, Lord! Wilt Thou quite destroy us?” was
so full of pathos and of pleading that it seemed to subdue and
quiet the whole audience. Indeed, the _silence_ that prevailed
throughout the entire rendering testified to the interest felt.
When they sang, “Lord! bow thine ear to our prayer!” the breathless
stillness in the house made us feel that much of real prayer was
there, and we wondered if hearts that had never before felt God’s
presence might not be touched by His spirit. Then came the wild
cry of the priests of Baal, loud and long and despairing, with the
mocking of Elijah, who says, “Call him louder, for he is a God.” A
few times the audience broke into applause, but generally expressed
themselves by quiet attention.

Probably the style of music was new to many of them, and it was
interesting to watch the faces of different ones as they listened.
Some were at first perhaps disappointed, evidently not expecting
that kind of music, but a growing and deepening interest marked
their faces as they sat watching as well as listening.

When Elijah pleaded for rain, and the people cried, “Help, send thy
servant help, O God!” “Hear from heaven, and forgive their sin,”
the listening attitude of the audience seemed to express sympathy
with the sad refrain, and when, at last, the grand chorus, “Thanks
be to God,” burst forth, it was almost overwhelming. What a lifting
up of voices it was! it with a piercing sweetness that rent the air
and bowed all hearts before it.

The second part of the concert consisted of Jubilee songs, college
songs, and patriotic songs, more popular music, but to some of us
it was a letting down from the heights to which we had been lifted.
It was received, however, with demonstrations of delight, which
could not have been expressed for the first part, if it had been
felt. Almost everything was encored. The college songs were full of
rollicking fun, and the Jubilee music brought rounds of applause
again and again.

When “Good news, the chariot’s coming,” and “Silver Slippers” were
sung, the dignified legislators got to beating time with their feet
in real camp-meeting style.

“Way down upon the Suwanee River” was sung with a softness and
sweetness that reminded one of Jenny Jackson in the old Jubilee
days. It was listened to with breathless attention and followed by
prolonged applause.

The concert closed with “America,” beautiful and grand, as it
always is. The whole audience rose to their feet and joined with a
heartiness which showed that the “old time” has indeed “gone,” and
“new times” for the South, white and black, are already here.

                                                            H. M.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FAILURE OF THE SIOUX BILL.

This bill, known also as the Dawes Bill, for the opening of parts
of the great Sioux reservation and settling the tribal boundaries
of each division of the Sioux nation now occupying it, failed to
become a law by the fatal objection of one man, Representative
Holman.

The bill was warmly advocated by the best friends of the Indians as
being the best possible compromise with the tide of civilization
pressing in on these people from every side. The Black Hills were
seized by the whites first, and bought afterwards. It was hoped to
prevent the recurrence of such robberies. It was also felt that
these Indians needed to be forcibly reminded that their condition
has changed, and that they must speedily adapt themselves to the
ways of civilization or go under. The majority of them accept
this idea in theory, but are very slow to adjust themselves to it
practically. The thing they are slowest about is to select for
themselves good lands for homesteads. They are loth to separate
from each other, and few of them have any idea of what good land is.

Here may be one of the ways in which the postponement of this
measure will be a blessing. Time is something much needed in the
Indian’s re-adjustment of himself to the new conditions of life.
If he can only be encouraged now to exert himself to establish a
separate home and open a farm; if he can be guided so as to avoid
serious mistakes, he will come out the better for the delay. Let
the Christian public throw their sympathy and interest towards
securing this end. The Government is well disposed, but cannot act
alone. It will do what the public demands.

What is needed is the multiplication of such sub-agents as our Rev.
John E. Smith at the Ponca Agency, Dakota, who is both Government
teacher and our missionary. He knows every man, woman and child in
his charge, and just what they are doing.

Or take our native missionary, Mr. Francis Frazier, at Burrell
Station, Swift Bear’s colony. He is himself a practical farmer,
_and an Indian_. What Indian has done, Indian can do.

Now, if such men were planted all over the Sioux country in
charge of small colonies of farming Indians, properly backed up
by Government, the progress of this people would be rapid. As it
is, the colony from Rosebud Agency at Swift Bear’s have to choose
between the barren lands near the Agency, or spend half their time
traveling back and forth over the one hundred and forty miles to
their farms located in the best land of the whole reserve. There
is no encouragement in that for an Indian to choose land that will
bring him a living when Government rations cease.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GRAND RIVER MISSION

Miss Collins’ introduction to work in her new field has been no
tame affair, as far as the physical elements could make it. The
winter has been unusually cold and stormy. But the people have
welcomed her cordially, and she has been especially helpful to the
sick. Her administration of simple remedies has been blessed of
the Lord to work a number of cures, which, to the Indians, have
seemed miraculous and have given her a reputation as a healer, so
that they bring their sick to her from all directions. One morning
she found at her door a young woman sick with pneumonia, who had
been brought there on a hand sled by her mother and sister through
a fearful snow storm. Miss Collins expostulated with them for so
exposing the sick one. The mother answered: “We heard that unless
you see their body with your own eyes, and lay your hands upon
them, you cannot heal them.” This report, no doubt, arose from her
feeling the pulse of the sick.

A child, whose sister had died with convulsions and St. Vitus’
dance, and who was also thought to be dying in the same way, was
brought to her. The spasms were relieved at once, and in a few days
the root of the difficulty was discovered and she was cured.

Elias Gilbert, the new teacher who takes the place of Edwin
Phelps during his absence at Hampton, works in finely. He is very
enthusiastic over the progress the people have made under his
predecessor and the hearty interest they take in the school and in
church services. On the Sabbath there is a very interesting woman’s
meeting, numbering about thirty, mostly mothers.

Adams Wakanna is the new worker at Oak Lake, another point in this
field. This is newer ground, and the people are yet in careless
ignorance of the way of life. But our native helper is full of
zeal, for this very reason. He is working well.

Edwin Phelps, who has worked so long and so well in this field, is
now at Hampton, Va., taking Bible studies and serving as Indian
Chaplain there. Many of the pupils at Hampton are from his own
field at Standing Rock Agency. So he has a special interest in them
and a personal hold upon them. He cannot fail to do them good.

This Grand River field should at once have a thorough equipment
of buildings and missionary force. Four thousand dollars were
given two years ago by Mr. E. B. Monroe to build this Mission. But
everything waits for the fit man for a missionary.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW HOME.

BY THE REV. C. T. WEITZEL.

The Santa Barbara Chinese Mission has taken a long step forward.
Until the beginning of this year, its rooms were hired. Now it
lives in rooms of its own on grounds of its own.

Some time before the annual visit of our faithful Superintendent,
the Rev. W. C. Pond, the further use of its old quarters had been
denied the mission. In this emergency the teacher of the school,
Mrs. E. M. Shattuck, opened her own house for its meetings until it
should appear what was wise to do next.

The problem had already been considered by Mr. Pond. With a faith,
an energy and a wise caution all alike admirable, he set about the
solution of it. Within forty-eight hours after the steamer landed
him, a desirable lot had been purchased and the contract for a
mission-house made. In a week’s time the building was sufficiently
advanced to be used by the young men for their Chinese New-year’s
reception. On the evening of Feb. 11th, it was formally dedicated.
I had charge of the service, and fully sympathized with Mr.
Pond’s earnest wish that it should be a decidedly religious and
solemn one. His letter for the occasion, and the addresses of
the evening, which were interpreted by the helper, Foo King, all
strongly emphasized the religious purpose and character of this
mission work. The building was set apart not only as a place of
instruction, but also as a place of worship; not only as a school,
but also as a sanctuary. May it become, indeed, a sacred place
to many of these our brethren by the manifestation of the Divine
Spirit in His enlightening and converting power!

As for the spiritual results among these young men, it is even
more difficult than in ordinary evangelistic effort to speak
definitely and positively. Yet no one, it seems to me, can look
into the many eager and open countenances to be seen every evening
in those mission rooms, without the conviction that somehow the
good seed is growing in those hearts. Nor can I note the cheerful
alacrity and the large generosity with which these young men have
contributed toward the cost of the new building without a feeling
that they have, on the whole, a worthy conception of its purpose.
And I certainly cannot contrast the debasing, poisonous atmosphere
of the ordinary resorts of their countrymen in Chinatown with the
healthy, uplifting atmosphere of this mission home, without the
thankful assurance that this is a refuge from temptation as well as
an inspiration to a better life for every one of these scholars.

That the Chinese Mission of Santa Barbara is doing good, there
is not a doubt in my mind. One of their number made a public
confession of his faith in Christ the past year, making four who
are now members of the Congregational church. Two or three more are
anxious to be baptized, but dare not yet take this step for fear
of the bitter opposition and the complete ostracism which they say
they must expect from their family connections here and in China if
they do.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


_My dear friends_:

It is Monday morning, “bright and early.” I have taken my seat by
an open window, not so much to enjoy the beautiful outside view of
green fields and budding trees as the pleasure of a little talk
with you.

There are so many things that I want to tell you, I hardly know
which to select, but think I will first tell about


“The Mothers’ League.”

I had felt so deeply that more must be done in careful home
training by the mothers of these young girls I meet in Sunday-school
and sewing-school, if we would raise up true and pure maidens,
that I resolved to try to bring more of the mothers together, that
we might freely talk the matter over, hoping thus to bring them
into a fuller sympathy and helpfulness with my work and with each
other. I bought a package of twenty-five visiting cards, and wrote
upon each as follows: “The Mothers’ League will meet at Porter
Mission, E. Cedar street, at 3 o’clock, next Saturday evening. You
are cordially invited to be present.” Then I sent two of our little
Sunday-school girls to take them to the homes of those living near
each other.

Last Saturday sixteen of these mothers responded by their presence,
and we had a very impressive meeting. Mrs. H., of Tillotson
Institute, kindly went with me, and spoke pleasantly to them about
the very earliest influence of the mother upon her children. I gave
them a few incisive thoughts from God’s Word, one of which was
this: “As is the mother, so is her daughter.” The poor burdened
mothers, who do so desire to be faithful to their children, but
feel so helpless, listened earnestly and with eyes full of tears.

When the question was asked, how many of you would like to join
this Mothers’ League? every hand was raised. It seemed best then to
suggest only one point of agreement, viz., to pray daily for God’s
help in their duties as mothers, and for God’s blessing upon the
Mothers’ League.

When asked to suggest the best time when all could unite, one said:
“I shall think about it all the day long.” Another said: “I shall
pray for it every day at 12 o’clock.” The oldest mother present
said: “I think the best time is the first thing in the morning,
for we have to pray then, any way.” So it was agreed that with the
first waking moments the prayer “God bless the Mothers’ League,”
shall ascend from sixteen mothers’ hearts. Will He not bless?

I suggested that we meet again the first Saturday in April, but
they said: “That will be a long time to wait; can’t we have another
meeting in two weeks?” Consent was given. Then another said: “Can’t
we sometimes bring our girls with us?” Consent was given that on
the first Saturday in April they might bring their daughters.

I took with me from Tillotson Institute two of the “Young Daughters
of the King,” to help in singing, and in this way do something for
Jesus. The one who played the organ is the daughter of a minister,
who is now pastor of a Congregational Church in Texas, and who was
educated in the A. M. A. schools. So true it is that the circle of
influence is ever widening.

I find that I have nearly filled my paper, and must leave other
things until another time.

We have recently had a cheering visit from Rev. Dr. Beard,
Secretary of the American Missionary Association, and the one who
has the special charge of the Southern work. Texas is so far away
from the centre of things, that we are not often thus favored; so
that such visits are the more highly prized when they do come.

                                                        M. J. A.

       *       *       *       *       *


We have had a great spiritual blessing. Only three of my
thirty-three Sunday-school boys are not Christians. Sometimes the
responsibility almost overpowers me. They have so little help at
home, but find so much to hinder and discourage. One bright, smart
boy of fifteen has within a few months come into my class, and has
accepted Jesus as his Saviour. For nine years he has been smoking,
following the example of his father and older brother. Since his
conversion he feels he cannot follow this habit, and he is making
brave efforts to overcome it. Young as he is, the habit has a very
strong hold upon him, and he finds it hard work. But God is helping
him, and I know he will succeed. He comes to me each night to
report his progress, and for a week has met me every night with a
glad smile and the words: “God has helped me, and I haven’t smoked
to-day.” One day he got so far as to light the cigarette a boy had
forced upon him, but he remembered the verse he had just learned—I
Corinthians x, 13—and he threw the cigarette away. There are many
equally interesting cases, where help and encouragement are so much
needed.

       *       *       *       *       *


ONE OF OUR SCHOLARS.—He is in the Third Reader class, and is
learning the simplest questions in arithmetic. This is his first
year in school, and instead of being a little boy, as you might
suppose, he is thirty-five years old, and a “Baptist preacher.”

When he first came, he said: “I ain’t got no learning; what I
knows, I just picked up myself.”

One of the boys said: “I advised him to come, so that he can learn
to explain, and when he gets up to preach, folks won’t sniggle in
their sleeves.”

       *       *       *       *       *




FOR THE CHILDREN.

       *       *       *       *       *


DOLLARS FOR SELF, AND CENTS FOR CHRIST.

“Yes, I always give for missions and everything else,” said Phil.
“I give something every Sunday; don’t you?”

“Why, no; I give five or ten cents when I think I can spare it,
when I have a good deal of money and don’t want it for anything,”
said Tom.

“I give whatever papa or mamma gives me for it,” said James.
“Sometimes it’s more, and sometimes it’s less.”

“Oh, I always give my own money!” said Phil. “I don’t think it’s
any giving at all unless you do that.”

“Yours is the best way, I’m sure,” said Tom, soberly. “They say
it’s the regular giving that counts.”

“And then, of course, what you give is just so much out of what
you’d like to spend on yourself.”

“Yes,” said Phil, feeling very self-denying and virtuous.

“I’m going to try your way,” said Tom. “And I’m going to keep an
account and see what it will amount to.”

The three boys were on their way home from Sunday-school, where
they had heard from a missionary some very interesting accounts
of the great work which is going on in Africa. He had succeeded
in deeply stirring the sympathies of his young hearers, so that
many of them went away with the solemn feeling that they should
in some sense be held answerable if they did not strive to hold
out a helping hand to those in such sore need. For the present it
was plain that missionary interest was to be centered in the “dark
continent,” and little societies were formed among Sunday-school
children, they believing it would be pleasanter to put their gifts
together than to offer them separately.

Several boys came to Phil’s house on the next afternoon to talk it
over, and Phil brought his account-book to put down their names
as the first members of their society, with a preamble in which
occurred many high-sounding words setting forth their resolves and
intentions.

“What’s this, Phil?” asked his uncle, picking up the book on the
same evening, after tea.

“Oh, that’s my account-book, uncle; I brought it down to take names
and draw up resolutions for our missionary society.”

“May I read it, or is it a secret organization?”

“Certainly, you may. I am simply, you know, trying to work up the
idea of liberal giving among the boys.”

“A most excellent idea,” said his uncle, concealing his amusement
at Phil’s rather pompous tone. “Let me see: Bananas, twenty-five
cents; soda water, ten cents; peanuts, twenty-five cents;
bat, thirty-five cents; candy, fifteen cents; base-ball cap,
seventy-five cents; Sunday-school, six cents——”

“Oh, stop, Uncle George; that isn’t in it! That’s when I was
visiting at Cousin Tom’s, and I promised mamma that I’d put down
every cent I spent.”

But Uncle George seemed not to hear, and went on:

“Peanuts, fifteen cents; bananas, twenty-five cents; getting shoe
mended, forty cents; soda water, ten cents; missionaries, five
cents; getting bat mended, fifteen cents; lemonade for the boys,
fifty cents; bananas, twenty-five cents; collection in church, two
cents.”

“_Please_ give me the book, uncle.”

“I’m glad you don’t forget your charitable duties, Phil,” said his
uncle, giving up the book with rather a mischievous smile.

Phil took it in some confusion. He had heretofore thought but
little more of his spendings than to remember his mother’s wish
that he should keep an account of the money with which she had kept
him so liberally supplied. Now, in looking over his hasty entries,
he was astonished.

“Well, well!” he exclaimed, as he added up one page: “two dollars
and ninety cents for eating and play, and seventeen cents for
giving, and I bragging to the boys what a good thing it is to give
regularly!”

He was a conscientious boy, and his heart smote him as he ran over
the long list, and thought with his newly-awakened feelings, of
the bread of life which that money might have carried to starving
souls. If his mother had aimed to teach him a lesson through his
account-book, she had not failed.

He got up at last and stood before the glass.

“Now, my young man,” said he, shaking his head very threateningly
at the boyish face he saw there, “you know very well that
a quarter for peanuts doesn’t look any larger to you than a
pin’s head, and that a quarter for giving looks as big as a
cart-wheel—but that’s got to stop, sir! This book isn’t going
to hold any more accounts of dollars for trash and cents for
Sunday-school.”—_The Christian Giver._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1887.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $168.30.

    Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch                                $25.00
    Augusta. Sab. Sch. Class, Cong. Ch.; by Alice
      Means, Treas., 3, Miss K. Carpenter’s Class,
      3, _for Talladega C._                                    6.00
    Bangor. “A Friend,” _for Debt_                             5.00
    Bath. Winter St. Cong. Ch., 2 bbls. of C.,
      _for Selma, Ala._, 2.70 _for freight_                    2.70
    Bethel. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.56
    Blue Hill. Miss Caroline Joy, _for Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._                                             2.50
    Castine. Class No. 9, Trinity Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                1.05
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch., ad’l to const.
      C. C. NICHOLS L. M.                                     24.00
    Hallowell. By Sylvina L. Smith, _for freight_              3.00
    Machias. Cong. Ch.                                         6.42
    Portland. Saint Lawrence St. Ch., 20; J. J.
      Gerrish, 10                                             30.00
    Scarboro. Cong. Ch.                                        5.50
    South Waterford. Miss M. E. Shurtleff                      1.00
    Turner. Cong. Ch.                                          4.28
    Wells. B. Maxwell, _for Debt_                             10.00
    Westbrook. Second Cong. Ch.                               15.79
    West Brooksville. Miss Lucy J. Henry, _for
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                    2.50
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $534.27.

    Alstead East. Cong. Ch.                                   $9.54
    Alstead Center. Cong. Ch.                                  7.94
    Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.00
    Concord. Miss Folger, _for Talledega C._                   2.00
    Exeter. Cong. Ch., 4.97; Miss Alcina Grover, 1
      _for Atlanta U._                                         5.97
    Fitzwilliam. Horace Cooledge, 5; C. D.
      Bigelow, 1.                                              6.00
    Francestown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           17.05
    Great Falls. Mrs. H. F. Dixon, _for Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._                                            10.00
    Greenfield. Cong. Ch.                                     13.00
    Hanover. “A Friend”                                       20.00
    Lancaster. Mrs. A. M. Amsden                               5.00
    Littleton. Mrs. B. W. Kilburn, _for the Debt_              3.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  14.91
    Milford. “Willing Workers,” _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            50.00
    Pembroke. Prof. I. Walker’s Bible Class, _for
      Student Aid, Wilmington, N.C._                           3.00
    Penacook. Cong. Ch., 18.11; Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., 10                                                 28.11
    Tilton. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $255.52

    LEGACIES.

    Goffstown. Heirs Estate of Miss Frances
      Meriam, by Samuel Upson, Admr.                         $78.75
    Hollis. Estate of John C. Jewett, by E. J.
      Colburn, Ex.                                           200.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $534.27


  VERMONT, $702.64.

    Bennington Center. Bbl. of C. and 5, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          $5.00
    Berlin. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.48
    Berlin. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              29.21
    Brandon. Mrs. L. G. Case, _for Indian M._                  5.00
    Burlington. Eldridge Sab. Sch.                             3.00
    Charlotte. “M. L. H.”                                      2.00
    Chelsea. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._                      10.00
    Fairlee. Cong. Ch.                                        13.12
    Greensboro. Cong. Ch.                                      5.50
    Jericho Center. Mrs. Julia Graves                          5.00
    Lowell. Cong. Ch.                                          5.41
    Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.51
    Montgomery Center. Heman Hopkins                           2.00
    New Haven. Mrs. Cephas H. Kent, _for Jones
      Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                              5.00
    Newport. M. B. Hall                                        2.00
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                               13.14
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            11.75
    North Thetford. Cong. Ch.                                  6.62
    North Troy. Bbl. of C. and 2, _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                     2.00
    Orwell. Ladies’ of Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                    17.50
    Post Mills. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Sheldon. S. M. Hulbert.                                    5.00
    Springfield. ——                                          200.00
    Springfield. A. Woolson, _for Atlanta U._                 20.00
    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                               13.01
    West Fairlee. Mrs. C. M. Holbrook                          1.50
    West Fairlee Center. Mrs. E. May                           5.00
    Westfield. Cong. Ch.                                       6.62
    West Randolph. Girls’ Mission Circle, 10;
      Ladies’ Mission Soc., 10, by Mrs. V. M.
      Hardy, _for McIntosh, Ga._                              20.00
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 36.05, to const.
      EMORY H. JONES L. M., Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., 15.22                                              51.27
                                                           ————————
                                                            $481.64
    LEGACIES.

    Jamaica. Estate of Mrs. Hepsibah H. Stowell,
      by Mrs. Ella J. Robinson, to const. JOHN C.
      ROBINSON, MRS. ELLA J. ROBINSON, MRS. LUCY
      KELLOGG, MRS. MARY MUZZY, MRS. NORA MUZZY
      and MISS JENNIE BARNES L. M.’s.                       $200.00
    Jericho. Estate of Hosea Spaulding, C. M.
      Spaulding, 10; A. C. Spaulding, 5; Nellie M.
      Percival, 3; E. J. Spaulding, 3                         21.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $702.64


  MASSACHUSETTS, $6,261.64.

    Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                                $16.00
    Amherst. Rev. W. H. Beaman, _for Atlanta U._               2.00
    Amherst. Miss Sabra Snell, Bbl. of C., _for
      Oaks, N.C._, 1.97 _for Freight_                          1.97
    Andover. South Cong. Ch., 55; West Parish Ch.
      and Soc., 50; C. E. Goodell, 25                        130.00
    Auburn. Christian Endeavor Soc., _for Debt_               10.00
    Auburndale. James Bird’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 5.00
    Boston. Sam. D. Warren, 100; Rev. Phillips
      Brooks, 50; Wm. P. Kuhn, 50; Geo. W. Coburn,
      50; Frank J. Garrison, 10; F. L. Ames, 100;
      D. P. Kimball, 100; John P. Almy, 50, _for
      Atlanta U._; Old South Ch., 50; Mrs. Harriet
      S. Strong, 50, _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._; “A Friend,” 60; Benj. Cutler, _for
      Indian M._ 1.—Charlestown: Sab. Sch. of
      Winthrop Cong. Ch., _for Oaks, N.C._,
      15.—Dorchester: Village Ch. “Band of Faith,”
      _for McIntosh, Ga._, 15.—South Boston: Sab.
      Sch. of Phillips Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._, 50                                        751.00
    Boxford. Rev. W. S. Coggin, _for Macon, Ga._               1.00
    Bridgewater. “A Friend”                                    5.00
    Brookline. “An Aged Friend”                                1.00
    Cambridge. Rev. W. A. Mundell and Wife, _for
      Debt_                                                    5.00
    Chesterfield. Cong. Ch., ad’l.                             5.00
    Chicopee. Earnest Workers of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Chicopee. Eleanor M. Woodworth, _for Indian M._            5.00
    Clinton. First. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  89.01
    Clinton. Ladies’ Miss’y Ass’n, _for Clinton
      Chapel, Talladega C._                                    4.00
    Cummington. Mrs. H. M. Porter                              2.00
    Dunstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             37.00
    East Cambridge. Natural Science Collection, by
      Miss Jennie S. Arms, _for Talladega C._
    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._            114.32
    East Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           25.00
    East Weymouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   55.00
    Fitchburg. “A. C. H.,” _for the Debt_                     10.00
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 40.62;
      Mrs. Richmond Dole, 4.50                                45.12
    Granby. “A Friend,” to const. MRS. L. W. HUNT
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              50.50
    Groveland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Santee Indian M._                          10.00
    Hanover. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                     6.00
    Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for
      Tillotson, C. & N. Inst._                              100.00
    Hinsdale. Kate C. Plemkett                                 7.00
    Holbrook. Winthrop Cong. Ch., _for Talladega
      C._                                                     25.00
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4.”             30.00
    Holliston. “Friends,” “Lippincott’s
      Pronouncing Biographical Dictionary,” _for
      Talladega C._
    Kingston. Mayflower Ch. and Soc.                          12.00
    Lancaster. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 2
      bbls. of C., _for Atlanta U._
    Leicester. “Thank Offering”                                5.00
    Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                           3.89
    Leominster. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      2 bbls. of C., _for Atlanta. U._, 3.75 _for
      Freight_                                                 3.75
    Leverett. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                     9.50
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           12.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          60.00
    Mansfield. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      15.61
    Melrose Highlands. Ladies of Cong. Ch., ad’l
      _for Debt_                                               1.00
    Milford. “Friends,” “Chambers’ Cyclopedia,” 10
      vols. _for Talladega C._
    Mittineague. Southworth Paper Co., 573 lbs.
      paper, _for Talladega C._
    Mittineague. Southworth & Co., writing paper,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Natick. “Cash”                                            25.00
    Newbury. First Ch.                                        20.44
    Newburyport. Harriet O. Haskell                            1.00
    Newton. “Thank Offering”                                   1.00
    Newton Center. By Miss H. S. Cousens, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                40.00
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   18.36
    Newton Center. Bbl. of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
    Northampton. The Mary A. Burnham School, _for
      Fort Berthold Indian M._                               292.00
    Northampton. “A Friend,” by Miss S. M. Burt,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           25.00
    Northampton. A. L. Williston, _for Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._                                            21.00
    Northampton. “Friends,” _for Santee Indian M._            20.00
    Northboro. Martha D. Wells                                 1.50
    North Leominster. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta U._, 2 _for
      Freight_                                                 2.00
    Norwood. A. W. Stetson, 25; Geo. S. Winslow,
      10; Francis O. Winslow, 10; “Friends,” 5;
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           50.00
    Orange. Central Evan. Cong. Ch.                            6.00
    Randolph. Miss Abby W. Turner, 50; Miss Alice
      M. Turner, 25; Mrs. John J. Crawford, 25;
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                          100.00
    Randolph. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                   30.00
    Randolph. Geo. B. Belcher                                 10.00
    Reading. Mrs. Susan Bancroft                               7.00
    Rockland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Rockport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           12.00
    Salem. Dr. J. A. Emmerton, _for Atlanta U._               10.00
    Saxonville. Edwards Ch. and Soc.                          17.50
    Somerville. Young Ladies’ Missionary Circle of
      Franklin St. Ch., _for Santee Indian M._                70.00
    Somerville. Broadway Ch. and Soc., 15.31; Day
      St. Ch. and Soc., 5.05                                  20.36
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           54.96
    Southbridge. “Friends,” Christmas Box, by Miss
      Ellen Vinton, _for Oaks, N.C._
    South Framingham. F. J. Stevens, _for Fort
      Berthold, Indian M._, 40; “Friends” 12                  52.00
    South Framingham. “Friends,” _for Indian M._              31.00
    South Framingham. Sab. Sch. of South Cong.
      Ch., _for Mountain White Work_                          20.60
    South Hadley. First Cong. Ch.                             26.00
    South Hadley. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First
      Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s Work_                           20.00
    South Hadley Falls. Mary F. Mathews                        0.50
    Springfield. Sab. Sch., of Hope Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Burrill Sch., Rosebud Indian M._           64.10
    Springfield. Miss Carrie E. Bowdoin                       10.00
    Taunton. Sab. Sch. of Broadway Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         29.66
    Templeton. Trin. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Savannah, Ga._                                          10.00
    Waltham. By Miss Ella J. Lawrence, Sec.
      Missions Class, _for Student Aid, Storrs
      Sch._                                                    3.00
    Ware. First Cong. Ch.                                     52.72
    Wellesley. “A Member of Cong. Ch.” to const.
      MRS. WILLIAM L. RUSSELL L. M.                           30.00
    Wellesley Hills. “A”                                     430.00
    Westfield. Mrs. Wm. Warren, 1; Mrs. H. O.
      Case, 1; Miss Mary Rood, 1, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._; Mrs. Isabella Coleman,
      Bbl. of C. _for Atlanta U._                              3.00
    Westfield. Mrs. C. W. Fowler, Patchwork, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Westminster. First Cong. Ch., 50.67;
      “Friends,” 11                                           61.67
    West Warren. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            12.50
    Williamsburg. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          63.40
    Williamstown. Rev. Mark Hopkins, D.D.                     25.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Woburn. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Woburn. Ladies’ Charitable Reading Soc., _for
      freight_                                                 2.40
    Worcester. David Whitcomb, 500; Union Ch. and
      Soc., 197.38; “W. J. W.” 2                             699.35
    Worcester. G. Henry Whitcomb, _for Santee
      Indian M._ and to const. HARRY E. WHITCOMB
      L. M.                                                   75.00
    Worcester. Sab. Sch. of Piedmont Cong. Ch.
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           50.00
    Worcester. Old South Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Hampton N. and A. Inst._                           20.00
    Worcester. Sab. Sch. of Piedmont Cong. Ch.,
      _for Rosebud Indian M._                                 14.82
    Worcester. Plym. Mite Band, adl. by L. M.
      Crawford, Treas., _for Tougaloo U._                      0.50
    Yarmouth. Bbl. of C., by Mrs. E. C. Howes,
      _for Oaks, N.C._
    By Chas. Marsh, Treas., Hampden Benev. Ass’n:
        Chester. Second                             5.09
        East Long Meadow                           23.00
        Springfield. Memorial                      41.00
        Westfield. First (3 of which _for Rosebud
          Indian M._ and 70 _for Hampton N. & A.
          Inst._)                                 240.00
        Westfield. Second, _for Indian M._        145.08
        West Springfield. First                    23.00
          “         “     Park St.                  5.00
          “         “     Mittineague              14.80     496.97
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,060.01
    LEGACIES.

    Hopkinton. Estate of Eliza W. Jenks                        1.63
    Uxbridge. Estate of Mrs. A. H. Tucker, by
      Jacob Taft, Ex.                                       1200.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $6,261.64
    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

    Hallowell, Me. By Sylvina L. Smith, Bbl., _for
      Birmingham, Ala._
    Portland, Me. By D. P. Lord, Half Bbl., _for
      Louisville, Ky._
    Andover, Mass. Mrs. Wm. Abbot, Bbl., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Chelsea, Mass. Mrs. C. A. Richardson, Box.
    Dalton, Mass. Ladies’ Sew. Circle of Cong.
      Ch., two and half Bbls., Val. 31.76, _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._
    North Andover, Mass. By Mrs. E. A. Stillings,
      Sec., Bbl., Val. 56.
    South Sudbury, Mass. Mrs. J. D. Goodenough,
      Bdl.
    Watertown, Mass. Phillips Ch. Sewing Circle, 2
      Bbls., val., 124.50, _for Williamsburg and
      Louisville, Ky._
    Woburn, Mass. Ladies’ Charitable Reading Soc.,
      Bbl. _for Oahe, Indian M._


  RHODE ISLAND, $85.00.

    Providence. “A Friend,” (5 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                             10.00
    LEGACY.
    Providence. Estate of Mrs. Mary Ann Angell, by
      Wm. P. Goodwin, Sec.                                    75.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             $85.00


  CONNECTICUT, $4,790.73.

    Berlin. John Thomson                                       0.50
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C., _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Bloomfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
      Indl. Sch. Ga._                                         14.00
    Bolton. Ella J. Barber                                     1.00
    Bolton. Mrs. T. L. Brown, _for the Debt_                   1.00
    Branford. Cong. Ch. (10 of which from Rev. H.
      P. Bake and 10 from H. G. Harrison)                     40.20
    Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch.                              84.28
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., (55 of which _for Conn.
      Indl. Sch., Ga._)                                       80.00
    Bristol. Mrs. Lucy A. Camp and Miss Julia E.
      Camp, _for Indian M._                                   10.00
    Bristol. F. C. Covell, _for Debt_                         10.00
    Buckingham. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Bethlehem. “The Willing Helpers,” by Mrs. S.
      P. Hayes, _for Conn. Ind’l Sch., Ga._                    3.00
    Center Brook. Ladies’ of Cong. Ch. _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        18.25
    Clintonville. “Thank-offering”                            60.00
    Colchester. Mary E. Gillette                               0.50
    Danbury. Mrs. E. M. Hotchkiss, (1 of which
      _for Hampton N. & A. Inst._)                             2.00
    East Berlin. “A Friend”                                   16.00
    East Hampton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                               6.50
    East Hartford. “Friends,” _for Indian M._                 86.73
    East Hartford. First Church                               20.00
    East Morris. Richard Turkington                            5.00
    East River. Mrs. C. M. Washburn                          100.00
    East Windsor. Mrs. Sarah L. Wells                          5.00
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                 125.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                       65.00
    Fair Haven. First Cong. Ch., (50 of which to
      const. WALTER S. BISHOP L. M.)                          79.50
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch.                             264.55
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch.                               35.00
    Hartford. Charles T. Hillyer                            1000.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., _for Santee
      Indian M._                                              50.00
    Hartford. Sab. Sch. of First Ch.                          24.00
    Hartland. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        14.45
    Kensington. “A Friend”                                     4.50
    Kent. First Cong. Soc.                                    33.55
    Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            50.00
    Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                              25.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for
      Santee Indian M._                                      107.19
    Mansfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.
      _for Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
    Meriden. J. W. Yale                                       10.00
    Middlebury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                              10.00
    Milford. Ladies Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._
    New Haven. Church of the Redeemer, 205; Howard
      Av. Cong. Ch., 24; “A Friend,” 5                       234.00
    New Haven. Miss. M. D. Swifts’ Sab. Sch.
      Class. College St. Ch., _for Rosebud Indian
      M._                                                      5.67
    New Haven. Rev. and Mrs. A. P. Miller, in
      Memory of Maud, _for Fisk U._                            3.00
    New London. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Santee Indian M._                                       42.00
    New London. Mrs. A. E. Lewis, 1.50; Miss Sarah
      Rogers, 50c., _for Dakota Indian M._                     2.00
    New Preston. Rev. Henry Upson                              5.00
    Norfolk. Young Ladies Miss’y Band, _for
      Talladega C., freight_                                   5.00
    Norwich Town. “The Other Girl’s Soc.”, Bbl. of
      Goods, _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                   19.45
    Plainville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. Box of
      Christmas Gifts, _for Oaks, N.C._
    Plantsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Santee Indian M._                                       65.00
    Plantsville. Collected by Miss Fanny W.
      Cummings, _for Rosebud Indian M._                        1.30
    Ridgefield. Cong. Ch.                                     12.01
    Sherman. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch., Box
      of C. _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      68.63
    Thomaston. Mission Circle, _for Student Aid.
      Straight U._                                            45.00
    Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.52
    Waterbury. Primary Sab. Sch. Class, Second
      Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._, 10; “Sunshine
      Circle,” _for Rosebud Indian M._, 10: Sab.
      Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._, 7                                           27.00
    Waterbury. Mrs. G. C. Hill’s Sab. Sch. _Class,
      for Student Aid, Thomasville, Ga._                      10.00
    Wauregan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              25.00
    West Hartford. Mrs. Mary A. Butler                        10.00
    Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Winsted. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Hope Station, Indian M._             75.00
    ——. “A Friend in Conn.,” _for Beach Inst.
      Savannah, Ga._, and to const. REV. ALLEN
      HAZEN, D.D., and MRS. REV. THEODORE C.
      PEASE, L. M’s.                                          60.00
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union, of Conn., by Mrs.
      S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec., _for Conn. Ind’l
      Sch., Ga._:
        Bridgeport. Ladies H. M. Soc., of
          North Cong. Ch.                      50.00
        Huntington. Ladies H. M. Soc.          16.00          66.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $3,297.28

    LEGACIES.

    Hartford. Estate of Dr. J. R. Lee                      1,243.45
    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven,
      _for Atlanta U._                                       250.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           4,790.73


  NEW YORK, $6,144.48.

    Adams Basin. Mrs. H. Clark                                 5.00
    Binghamton. “A Friend”                                     5.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend”                                   2,000.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend”                                       2.00
    Cambridge Centre. Ladies Miss’y Soc., Half
      Bbl. of C., _for Tougaloo U._
    Chenango Forks. Cong. Ch.                                 15.89
    Ellington. Harriet B. Rice, 8; Mrs. Eliza
      Rice, deceased, 2                                       10.00
    Fort Covington. “A. B.”                                    1.00
    Fredonia. Miss C. H. Gilbert. Patchwork, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Gilbertsville. Rev. A. Wood                               10.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch. (100 of which from
      Mrs. U. M. Place.)                                     218.00
    Goshen. Fannie E. Crane, _for Marie Adlof
      Sch’p Fund_                                              1.60
    Groton. Mrs. Kezia Bostwick                                8.00
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch.                                        28.00
    Jamestown. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                   25.00
    Jefferson. Mrs. Susannah Ruliffson                         2.50
    Lawrenceville. Lucius Hulburd                              5.00
    Lebanon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Athens,
      Ala._                                                    2.00
    Lincoln. J. D. Dewey                                       5.00
    Livonia. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Ludlowville. Sidney S. Todd                              250.00
    Martinsburg. Mrs. A. H. Arthur                             1.00
    Massena. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      13.47
    Millers Place. Bbl. of C., for _Bird’s Nest
      Santee Indian M._
    New York. J. A. Bostwick, 1,000; Cornelius N.
      Bliss, 100, _for Atlanta U._                          1100.00
    New York. Wager Swayne, _for Talladega C._               120.00
    New York. Mrs. H. B. Spelman, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    New York. “A Friend,” 100; B. B. Adams, Jr., 5           105.00
    Orient. Cong. Ch.                                         14.80
    Ovid. D. W. Kinne                                          1.50
    Pekin. Abigail Peck                                       25.00
    Prattsburg. G. W. Dodd                                     5.00
    Syracuse. Ladies of Danforth Cong. Ch., bbl.
      of C., etc., _for Macon. Ga._
    Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan                            15.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                19.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of N. Y., by
      Mrs. L. H. Cobb, Treas. _for Woman’s Work_,
        Brooklyn. L. W. A. Soc. of Puritan Ch. to
          const. MRS. EDWARD P. INGERSOLL, L. M.    30.00
        Riverhead. W. H. M. S.                      25.00
                                                    —————     55.00
                                                             ——————
                                                          $4,098.76

    LEGACY.

    Perry. Estate of Martha B. Sheldon, by Milton
      A. Barber, Ex.                                       2,045.72
                                                           ————————
                                                          $6,144.48


  NEW JERSEY, $273.37

    Bound Brook. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch.
      _for Chinese M._                                        20.00
    Montclair. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., bbl. of
      C., _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Newark. C. S. Haines, 30; Mrs. Maria Snyder, 8            38.00
    Newfield. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         23.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 100.37
    Park Ridge. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                   7.00
    Plainfield. “A Friend of Home Missions,” by
      Woman’s Miss’y Union                                     5.00
    Roselle. “A Friend,” _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._           50.00
    Trenton. S. T. Sherman                                    30.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $30.00.

    Philadelphia. Frederick S. Kimball, _for
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Philadelphia. Susan Longstreth, Patchwork,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Ridgway. Class, by Minnie Cline, _for Oaks,
      N.C._                                                    5.00


  OHIO $766.97.

    Cleveland. Miss B. A. Dutton, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           10.00
    Dover. Miss C. Griffin, _for Student Aid,
      Athens, Ala._                                            8.00
    Geneva. “H”                                                1.50
    Geneva. Wm. Jaquays                                        1.10
    Lenox. Nelson French                                       4.50
    Madison. Mrs. H. B. Fraser, 100 for _Indian
      M._, and 100 _for Chinese M. in Cal._                  200.00
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch.                                33.65
    Mansfield. First Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for
      Mechanical Building, Tillotson Inst._, and
      10 _for Marie Adlof Schp. Fund_), 151.95;
      Sab Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for Santee
      Indian M._, 75                                         226.95
    Mount Vernon. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                10.00
    Oberlin. Mrs. C. R. Commons                               25.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. and Friends, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              10.00
    Oberlin. E. J. Goodrich, 5, _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                            5.00
    Pittsfield. F. E. Young                                    2.00
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.                                 26.01
    Salem. David A. Allen                                     25.00
    Wakeman. Sab Sch. of Cong. Ch.                             8.45
    West Andover. Cong. Ch.                                   15.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Ohio, by Mrs.
      Ella J. Mahoney, Treas. _for Woman’s Work_:
        Conneaut. Mission Band                      5.00
        Madison. Elias Strong, 5; J. Dayton, 5     10.00
        Mansfield. W. B. S. of First Ch.           25.96
        Oberlin. W. B. S. of First Ch.             77.85
        Pittsfield. W. B. S.                        5.00
        Salem. Mrs. D. A. Allen                     5.00
        Springfield. W. M. S. of First Cong.
          Ch.                                      20.00
        Springfield. Boy’s S. S. Class, First
          Cong. Ch.                                 1.00
        Wellington. L. B. S.                        5.00
                                                  ——————     154.81


  INDIANA, $3.50.

    Fort Wayne. Y. P. A. of Plym Ch. _for Debt_                3.50


  ILLINOIS, $2,659.16.

    Batavia. Y. P. M. S. of Cong. Ch.                          5.00
    Blue Island. Cong. Ch.                                     6.78
    Bunker Hill. Cong. Ch.                                    15.50
    Canton. Cong. Ch.                                         44.90
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 100; “Hapland,” 100;
      Millard Av. Cong. Ch., 14.50; Mary L.
      Smallwood, 5                                           219.50
    Chicago. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Plym. Cong. Ch.,
      _for Emerson Inst._                                     50.00
    Chicago. Mrs. J. Porter, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Chicago. Cong. Sab. Sch., Evanston Av., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                11.66
    Creston. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         20.09
    Dundee. Mrs C. H. Rover, _for Santee Indian M._            6.00
    Elgin. “Two Ladies,” Patchwork, _for Macon,
      Ga._
    Elmwood. Y. P. Soc, _for Student Aid, Mobile,
      Ala._                                                   10.00
    Fairbury. Miss Mary A. Hyde, _for Jones
      Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                              5.00
    Farmington. J. W. Newell, to const. REV
      CHARLES E. MARSH L. M.                                  50.00
    Freeport. L. A. Warner                                     5.00
    Freeport. Mr. Farley, Bbl. of C., _for
      Talladega C._
    Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ                            34.90
    Hinsdale. J. W. Bushnell                                   5.00
    Jacksonville. Mrs. Jane Retter                             1.00
    Lisbon. Dr. Gilman Kendall                                 3.00
    Lombard. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C., _for
      Mobile, Ala._
    Lyndon. Cong. Ch. 5, and Sab. Sch. 5                      10.00
    Mendon. Mrs. Jeanette Fowler, to const. MRS.
      C. M. SHUMACKE, and MISS LIZZIE LINGHAM, L. M’s.       100.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. A. Aldrich                             5.00
    Naperville. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Odell. Mrs. H. E. Dana                                    20.00
    Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               25.00
    Quincy. Joshua Perry                                      10.00
    Rockford. Lewis S. Swezey, deceased                    1,815.33
    Sterling. MRS. MARY E. MCKINNEY, 30 to const.
      herself L. M., “Cheerful Workers,” Cong. Ch.
      5                                                       35.00
    Wheaton. Ladies of First Ch. of Christ, Bbl.
      of C., _for Athens, Ga._
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union of Ill., Mrs. B. F.
      Leavitt, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Ashkum. Senior Soc.                          0.15
        Chicago. W. M. S. of N. E. Ch.              30.93
        Rockford. W. H. M. U. of Second Ch.          6.00
        Oak Park. Ladies Benev. Circle               5.00
        Onarga. W. H. M. U. of Second Ch.            3.42
        Moline. Mission Circle, ad’l to const.
          MRS. M. C. EELLS, L. M.                   20.00
        Providence. W. H. M. U.                      7.00
                                                   ——————     72.50


  MICHIGAN, $234.51.

    Alpena. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     25.00
    Benzonia. Dea. Amasa Waters, 10; Asa Waters,
      3; H. B. Balch, 1                                       14.00
    Clinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Savannah, Ga._                                          20.00
    Farwell. Cong. Ch.                                         8.28
    Galesburg. “A Friend,”                                   100.00
    Laingsburg. First Cong. Ch.                                5.50
    Lake Linden. Rev. J. W. Savage, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00
    New Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                            17.01
    Olivet. Bbl. of Books, etc., by H. Williams,
      _for Talladega C._
    Romeo. Cong. Ch.                                          24.00
    Summit. L. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                            5.72
    Woman’s Home Missionary Soc., by Mrs. E. F.
      Grabill, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Allendale. W. M. Soc.                                  5.00


  WISCONSIN, $235.72.

    Beloit. Mrs. Sarah M. Clay, Patchwork, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Bloomer. First Cong. Ch.                                   4.75
    Elkhorn. “Soc. of Christian Endeavor,” _for
      Woman’s Work_                                            3.00
    Green Bay. Mrs. J. M. Smith, 24 Testaments,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Janesville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                         8.62
    Kenosha. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                     15.00
    Lake Geneva. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., Box of
      C., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
    Mazamanie. Cong. Ch.                                      10.50
    Menasha. E. D. Smith                                     100.00
    Menomonee. Sab Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for Marie
      Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                       24.00
    Monroe. Frances H. Cook, _for Macon, Ga._                  1.00
    River Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 5; Miss
      Calista Andrews, 5                                      10.00
    Sheboygan. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               2.50
    Union Grove. Cong. Ch., 22.50 and Sab. Sch., 1            23.50
    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                                  5.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wis., _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Arena. W. H. M. S.                            1.55
        Beloit. W. H. M. S. of Second Ch.             5.00
        Eau Claire. W. H. M. S. of First Ch.         10.00
        Menomonee. “A Friend”                        10.00
        New Lisbon. W. H. M. S.                       1.30
                                                    ——————    27.85


  IOWA, $234.22.

    Alta. J. C. Heywood                                        1.00
    Davenport. Edwards Cong. Ch.                              11.00
    Denmark. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            3.00
    DeWitt. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    Dubuque. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                            0.60
    East Des Moines. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                         5.33
    Garwin. Talmon Dewey                                       3.20
    Green Mountain. Cong Ch.                                  15.50
    Keokuk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            11.34
    Muscatine. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Oskaloosa. S. R. Pettit                                    2.50
    Red Oak. Mrs. M. A. Willis, _for Student Aid,
      Athens, Ala._                                            5.00
    Winterset. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore                            10.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Iowa, _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Anamosa. Freedmen’s Aid Soc.             10.00
        Cherokee. Y. L. H. M. Circle              5.00
        Des Moines. W. M. S. of Plym. Ch.        30.00
        Dubuque. L. M. S. of Cong. Ch.           10.00
        Durant. Y. L. M. S.                       5.00
        Durant. “Cheerful Workers”                6.00
        Edgewood. Miss Sarah Platt                5.00
        Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                     3.79
        Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                    12.41
        Hawthorne. L. M. S.                       2.89
        Marion. L. M. S.                         16.68
        Marion. “Busy Gleaners”                  10.00
        Mount Pleasant. L. M. S.                  3.70
        Polk City. “Young Girls,”                 0.28
        Red Oak. L. M. S.                        10.00
        Salem. L. M. S.                           5.00
        Traer. Miss Wilder’s S. S. Class          7.00
                                                ——————       142.75


  MINNESOTA, $536.48.

    Etter. Miss’y Soc., Patchwork, _for Jonesboro,
      Tenn._
    Fish Lake. Sab. Sch., by A. E. Oakes                       2.50
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                       15.24
    Little Falls. Cong. Ch., 1.93, and Sab. Sch.,
      1.49                                                     3.42
    Minneapolis. Judge E. S. Jones, _for Jones
      Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._, 50; Richard
      Chute, _for Atlanta U._, 20; Sab. Sch. of
      Scandinavian Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._, 5.25; Lyndale Ch. Box _for Jonesboro,
      Tenn._                                                  75.25
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 21; Vine
      Cong. Ch., 2                                            23.00
    Northfield. Geo. M. Phillips, _for Atlanta U._            50.00
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                      28.57
    Rochester. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.50
    Saint Paul. Plym. Cong. Ch.                               29.50
    Saint Paul. Mrs. C. G. Higbee, 10; Ladies’
      Miss’y Soc., Box of C., _for Student Aid,
      Jonesboro, Tenn._                                       10.00
    Sleepy Eye. Rev. S. M. MacNeill                            2.50
    Winona. First Cong. Ch.                                   80.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $336.48

    LEGACY.

    Minneapolis. Estate of Mrs. L. H. Porter, by
      Rev. Sam’l F. Porter, Ex.                              200.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $536.48


  MISSOURI, $119.00.

    Holden. Mrs. S. E. Hawes, _for Indian M._                  4.00
    Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                           115.00


  KANSAS, $21.00.

    Carbondale. Cong. Ch.                                      1.00
    Hiawatha. Ladies Soc., of Cong. Ch., _for
      Santa Fe, N.M._                                          5.00
    Wabaunsee. First Ch. of Christ                            15.00


  DAKOTA, $23.50.

    Columbia. Cong Ch.                                         4.25
    Egan. Rev. C. W. Matthews and Wife                         5.00
    Redfield. Sab. Sch., 5.25; A. E. Carpenter, 5;
      _for Student Aid, Mobile, Ala._                         10.25
    Sioux Falls. Cong. Ch., ad’l                               4.00


  COLORADO, $5.00.

    Boulder. Geo. S. Gibson, ad’l to const. FRED.
      L. CHASE, L. M.                                          5.00


  NEBRASKA, $41.87.

    Blair. Cong. Ch.                                           4.08
    David City. Y. P. S. C. E.                                 5.36
    Exeter. First Cong. Ch.                                    7.50
    Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
    Friend. Cong. Ch.                                          3.93
    Lakeside. Cong. Ch.                                        1.00
    Oxford. F. A. Wood                                         5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $148.40.

    Grass Valley. Edward Coleman, 100; Cong. Ch.,
      19.40                                                  119.40
    Los Angeles. L. D. Chapin and Wife                        25.00
    Oakland. Miss Sarah W. Horton, 3; Ladies of
      First Cong. Ch., ad’l, 1, _for Debt_                     4.00
    Riverside. Mrs. W. F. Montague, Patchwork,
      _for Macon, Ga._


  WASHINGTON TER., $18.50.

    Skokomish. Rev. M. Eells                                  18.50


  OREGON, $38,00.

    Forest Grove. Prof. Jos. W. Marsh                         20.00
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                          18.00


  VIRGINIA, $6.20.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         6.20


  KENTUCKY, $143.15.

    Berea. Sab. Sch. of “Ch. at Berea,” _for Marie
      Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                       12.65
    Williamsburg. Tuition                                    130.50


  TENNESSEE, $1,114,21.

    Jellico. Tuition                                          27.00
    Jonesboro. Tuition 26.60; Rent, 1.00                      27.60
    Memphis. Tuition                                         430.30
    Nashville. Tuition                                       510.33
    Nashville. Prof F. A. Chase, _for Scientific
      Dept. Fisk U._                                          37.18
    Nashville. Union Ch. of Fisk U.                           25.00
    Sherwood. Tuition                                         56.80


  NORTH CAROLINA, $200.30.

    Dudley. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Hillsboro. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Marie Adlof
      Sch’p, Atlanta U._                                       1.50
    Melville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Melville, N.C._                                          1.15
    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            0.50
    Wilmington. Tuition                                      179.40
    Wilmington. Miss Fitts, 4.50; Miss Farrington,
      3.75; Miss Peck, 2.50; Miss Warner, 2                   12.75


  GEORGIA, $752.50.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch. Tuition                             262.85
    Atlanta. Hon. J. Norcross, _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    Atlanta. Rent                                              6.00
    Macon. Tuition                                           177.70
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         43.00
    Savannah. Tuition                                        167.20
    Thomasville. Tuition                                      70.75


  FLORIDA, $2.00.

    Georgiana. Mr. and Mrs. F. W. Munson                       2.00


  ALABAMA, $419.08.

    Athens. Tuition                                           89.85
    Citronelle. Rev. M. M. Schwarzauer                         1.33
    Mobile. Tuition                                          236.75
    Talladega. Tuition                                        91.15


  LOUISIANA, $305.00.

    New Orleans. Tuition                                     305.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $143.75.

    Tougaloo. Tuition, 135.50; Rent, 8.25                    143.75


  TEXAS, $249.05.

    Austin. Tuition                                          224.00
    Austin. Miss Rose McKinney, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Dodd City. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                               2.05
    Paris. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                       3.00


  INCOMES, $485.00.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               355.00
    Belden Sch’p Fund, _for Talladega C._                     30.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Montreal. “A”                                              5.00


  JAPAN, $400.00.

    Okayama. Miss E. Talcott, _for Indian M._                400.00
                                                         ==========

    Donations                                             19,177.82
    Legacies                                               5,515.55
    Incomes                                                  485.00
    Tuition and Rents                                      3,123.13
                                                         ——————————
          Total for March                                $28,301.50
          Total from Oct. 1 to March 31                  127,605.47
                                                         ==========

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for March                                 $116.03
    Previously acknowledged                                  561.73
                                                           ————————
          Total                                             $677.76

                                   H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                      A. S. BARNES & COMPANY,

                      SCHOOL BOOK PUBLISHERS,

                       NEW YORK AND CHICAGO,

=The List.=—The New National Series of School and College Text
Books comprises nearly 400 different volumes.

=The Aim.=—Practical utility and the best results.

When you want a spade you buy a spade, not a parlor ornament with
ivory handle and Damascus steel. Experience tells you that for
utility the best is the cheapest! So in the selection of school
books, the best books are made to be used. They are the outcome of
faithful work of practical teachers in the school-room.

The following authors of the National Series will be recognized the
world over for their well-known services in the _school-room_.

  James Monteith,
  Charles Davies,
  Joseph Ficklin,
  J. Dorman Steele,
  Samuel W. Clark,
  Andrew Peabody,
  J. M. B. Sill,
  Alphonso Wood,
  J. Madison Watson.

These men have produced the best Readers, Spellers, Geographies,
Arithmetics, Histories, Grammars, Science and Modern Language Text
Books. Each one of them has served a long apprenticeship in the
school-room. In selecting, therefore, be sure to ask for

                   BARNES’ NEW NATIONAL READERS.

In five numbers. Perfectly graded. The educational gems of the
decade. Universally approved by teachers and school officers for
typographical beauty and practical utility. Prices, 20c., 35c.,
50c., 70c. and 90c.

                    BARNES’ SCHOOL GEOGRAPHIES.

In two books. Prof. Monteith devotes his entire time to this work,
and has produced two working manuals which contains more valuable
features in the same space than any other author. Separate editions
for different States. Monteith’s Boys’ and Girls’ Atlas (for oral
instruction), 50c.

                MONTEITH’S NEW PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY.

This subject is too apt to be neglected, but the fault has been
with the text books. Here is a book which gives the latest view of
the whole subject adequate treatment in the briefest space and most
entertaining manner. Price, $1.00.

                     BARNES’ NEW ARITHMETICS.

In two books. This series is the work of Prof. Joseph Ficklin and
others, and may be said to represent the outgrowth of our previous
mathematical publications by Charles Davies, William G. Peck, etc.
They present the clearest possible course of instruction, giving a
minimum of theory with a maximum of practice. They are very widely
approved. Prices, elementary, 35c.; national, 75c.

                   BARNES’ BRIEF HISTORY SERIES.

The United States, France, Greece, ancient peoples, mediæval
and modern peoples, and the General History of the world, are
treated in separate volumes, all of moderate size, profusely
but judiciously illustrated, and skillfully arranged with the
necessities of the class room constantly in view. They have been
the models upon which other subsequent publications have been made,
but are still unrivaled and alone. They are more widely introduced
in some sections than all other series combined.

                      STEELE’S SCIENCE TEXTS.

Seven volumes. Each volume on a separate subject, viz.: Philosophy,
Chemistry, Astronomy, Geology, Zoology, Botany and Physiology.
No one has ever succeeded in awakening a love for science in
young minds equal to Steele. His plan is scientific and treatment
popular. In each branch he has had the co-operation of specialists.

                      HYGIENE AND PHYSIOLOGY.

A law requiring the study of Physiology (with special reference
to the effects of alcohol and narcotics on the human body), in
all schools and all grades, has been lately passed in very many
States and Territories. To meet the requirements of this law, we
have issued, with the indorsement of a host of Educators and the
Superintendent of Scientific Instruction of the W. C. T. U., the
following text books:

  I. Child’s Health Primer. For the youngest children. Cloth,
  12mo. Illustrated. 40c.

  II. Hygiene for Young People. For intermediate grades. Cloth,
  12mo. Illustrated. 60c.

  III. Steele’s Hygienic Physiology. For high schools, academies
  and colleges. 12mo, Cloth. Illustrated. $1. (_The same_,
  abridged, 50c.)

This series has already been adopted by State boards of education
(Vermont, Michigan, Kentucky, Delaware, North Carolina, Oregon,
etc.), and is rapidly being taken by counties, cities and towns
throughout the United States. Begin with the rising generation.

                    WORMAN’S MODERN LANGUAGES.

French, German and Spanish are here taught by the _natural method_.
The primary books of this series furnish the best possible
introduction to the study of these languages. Price, 50c. each.

                          OTHER SUBJECTS

include Barnes’ Drawing Books, Sill’s Grammar, Bardeen’s Rhetoric,
Searing’s Virgil, Watson’s Spellers, Davies’ Mathematics, Jenkins’
Dictionary, Wood’s Botanies, Cleveland’s Literature, Boyd’s Poets,
Jepson’s Music Reader, Martin’s Civil Government, Janet’s Morals,
etc., etc.

Text Books covering nearly every subject taught in school or
college will be found fully described in our new Descriptive
Catalogue. Mailed _free_ on application. Correspondence cordially
invited. Sample pages free. Address

                  A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,

  263 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.     111 & 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          THE TUXEDO SUIT

                      FOR LADIES AND MISSES.

This complete costume of original design—novel, elegant and
graceful—consisting of Cap, Blouse, Skirt and Sash, is knitted of
the finest worsted materials in patterns to match throughout. It is
made in a varied assortment of colors, and in sizes for 12 years
and upwards.

[Illustration:

     T
     U
     X
  TUX*EDO
     E
     D
     O
]

From its texture it is especially adapted for Lawn Tennis,
Yachting, Rowing, Gymnasium.

From its texture it is especially adapted for Mountain and Seashore
Wear, and all Athletic and Outdoor Sports.


             DESCRIPTIVE CIRCULAR SENT ON APPLICATION.

                         For Sale Only by

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.,

                   _Broadway & Eleventh Street_,

                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

_Pastors or Committees_ about to _build_, _remodel_, or _decorate_
Churches, may obtain valuable information by reading D’Orsay’s New
Handbook on plans, ventilation, stained glass, and

  SECCO PAINTING
    OR STEREO-CHROME.

This new method of Church decoration is far superior to Fresco.
The colors are rich, imperishable, and _warranted proof against
leaky roofs_. Plans for NEW or the remodelling or decoration of old
Churches furnished reasonably. Handbooks sent free _as above_ in
_Middle States_. Address J. S. D’ORSAY & CO., Church Architects and
Decorators, 67 BIBLE HOUSE, N.Y.

                                                  Established 1847.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Reliable Carpenter Organs

                                FOR

                       CHURCH _and_ CHAPEL.

[Illustration]

The Carpenter Organs contain the celebrated CARPENTER ORGAN ACTION.
They are pure in tone, perfect in construction, in exact accord
with the voice, and full of patented improvements. More than 50
different styles, ranging in price from $20 up. “Mr. Carpenter
builds most emphatically AN HONEST ORGAN.”—_Youth’s Companion._
All organs of our manufacture warranted for 8 years. Special
inducements to ministers and churches. Catalogue free. E. P.
CARPENTER CO., Brattleboro, Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing! Clear Record of half a Century.

[Illustration: PAYSON’S INDELIBLE INK, for Marking Linen, Silk &
Cotton WITH A COMMON PEN Without a Preparation.]

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.” Use a
common pen.

  Sold by all Druggists, Stationers,
  News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           _6%, 7%, 8%._

                       _THE AMERICAN
                              INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

  7⅔%

  CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING

  4 Per Ct. Government Bonds

  Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

         Write for full information and reference to the
                            Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          Valuable Works

                                FOR

                     Missionaries and Pastors.


  JOSEPH PARKER'S PEOPLE'S BIBLE.

  (1) Genesis. (2) Exodus. (3) Leviticus—Numbers
  XXVII. (4) Numbers—Deuteronomy.
  (5) Joshua—Judges V. Now ready.
  To be complete in 25 vols. Each vol. complete
  in itself.

  "A stupendous work."—_Spurgeon._


  MEYER'S GREAT COMMENTARIES on the
    New Testament. American Edition. 10
    vols. ready. Each, $3. See catalogue.

    "Meyer's Commentaries are of immense
    value."—_Dr. Thos. Armitage._

  THIRTY THOUSAND THOUGHTS.

  An encyclopedia of choicest thoughts from
  all sources on all topics. In 7 vols. 4 vols.
  now ready. Vol. 5 ready May 10. Each, $3.50.

  "It is the cream of wisdom: the very gems
  of thought."—_Inter-Ocean._ Chicago.

  YOUNG'S GREAT BIBLE CONCORDANCE.

                $5.

  "Cruden's is child's play compared with
  it."—_Spurgeon._

  SCHAFF-HERZOG ENCYCLOPEDIA.

            3 vols. $18.

  “The ideal religious encyclopedia.”—_Hitchcock._

  SCHAFF’S DICTIONARY OF LIVING DIVINES.

  Supplement to the Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia.
  Just ready. $3.

  “A very valuable book of reference.”

  LITTLE’S BIBLICAL LIGHTS AND SIDE-LIGHTS. $4.

  Furnishes illustrations from the Bible for every purpose.

  OUR ANALYTICAL CATALOGUE is especially
  arranged for pastors and missionaries on
  a new plan. Price 10 cents.


                         FUNK & WAGNALLS,

                            PUBLISHERS,

                  _18 & 20 Astor Place, New York._


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

“25 Years in the Poultry Yard”

33d Edition. 108 pages. How to prevent HOG and POULTRY CHOLERA,
GAPES and ROUPE. I wrote it as a system of practical HOG and
POULTRY keeping. Symptoms and remedies for all diseases. How to
feed for Eggs. 25c. in stamps. A copy of “The Cove Dale Poultry
Yard,” containing illus. Catalogue and Price List of 30 varieties
FREE.

A. M. LANG, Box 846, Cincinnati, O.


                 *       *       *       *       *


EUROPE

TENTH SEASON. The most enjoyable and economical excursions ever
planned. =More furnished for the money= than in =Any Tour yet
offered=. =All Travel and Hotels first-class.= COMPANY SELECT.
By the Palatial, Fast, New Steamship, =CITY OF ROME=. Send for
circular free.

                                           E. TOURJEE, Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  WARNER BRO’S
  CELEBRATED
  CORALINE
  CORSETS]

                             9 MILLION

worn during the past six years.

This marvelous success is due—

1st.—To the superiority of Coraline over all other materials, as a
stiffener for Corsets.

2d.—To the superior quality, shape and workmanship of our Corsets,
combined with their low prices.

Avoid cheap imitations made of various kinds of cord. None are
genuine unless

                      “DR. WARNER’S CORALINE”

               is printed on inside of steel cover.

                FOR SALE BY ALL LEADING MERCHANTS.

                         WARNER BROTHERS,

  359 Broadway,                                    New York City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                     Hamilton Vocalion Organs

of 2 manuals and 2 sets of pedals, $750; equalling in beauty,
variety and volume a pipe organ of 600 pipes by the best maker.
Circulars, with testimonials of leading musicians and organists of
the world.

                            WAREROOMS,

                    28 E. 23d STREET, NEW YORK.

“I have only words of praise in its favor.”—_Henry Eyre Brown,
Organist, Brooklyn Tabernacle._

“Especially valuable for Churches and Concert Rooms.”—_A. H.
Messiter, Organist, Trinity Ch., N.Y._

“A tone so rich and musical must be recognized as valuable for
special and new orchestral effects.”—_Henry Carter, Organist, N.Y._

“Your Vocalion has a magnificent future.”—_Sir Arthur Sullivan._

“A rare combination of power and sweetness.”—_Adelina Patti._

                                              Catalogue sent free.

            WAREROOMS, 28 EAST 23d ST., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S

                            STEEL PENS

                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.

                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   Missionaries of the A. M. A.

May now have a first-class Sewing Machine without paying the usual
prices charged by manufacturers and their agents.

                            READ THIS.

Any missionary in the service of the A. M. A. can, by sending an
order on the Association for the amount, receive a Sewing Machine
as shown below at 60 per cent. discount off the prices stated, and
can let the payments be made at the rate of $2.00 per month, if
they so desire. Or 10 per cent. further discount will be allowed if
the full amount is paid in cash on delivery of machine. Read the
following “ad.” and send for an illustrated catalogue, which will
give full particulars.

Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Prices, $45, $50, $55, $60, $57.50, $65.

[Illustration:

  AVERY
  SEWING MACHINE

  SWIFT
  SURE
  SIMPLE
  SILENT
  STRONG]

                      NEW IMPROVED HIGH ARM,
                     NEW MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES

and Rotary Movements, Automatic Direct and Perfect Action, Cylinder
Shuttle, Self-setting Needle, Positive Feed, No Springs, Few Parts,
Minimum Weight, No Friction, No Noise, No Wear, No Fatigue, No
“Tantrums,” Capacity Unlimited, Always in Order, Richly Ornamented,
Nickel-plated and Gives Perfect Satisfaction.

                        Send for Circulars.

                 The Avery Sewing Machine Agency,

                  _77 Chambers Street, New York_,

                          P.O. BOX 2002.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Clinton H. Meneely

                           BELL COMPANY

                            Troy, N.Y.,

                       MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR

                        Church, Chime, and

                            Peal Bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


       1850            Thirty-Seventh Year.            1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                           OF NEW YORK,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                   =_11,155,000_=
  Surplus, by New York standard,  =_2,254,000_=

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._

JAMES M. McLEAN, President.

  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
  H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          MASON & HAMLIN

                             IMPROVED

                          UPRIGHT PIANOS

             With their Improved Method of Stringing.

                      PATENTED JULY 24, 1883.

                         CHARACTERIZED BY

          BRIGHTEST, PUREST TONES, GREATEST DURABILITY,
                   IMPROVED METHOD OF STRINGING.

The Strings being directly secured to the iron frame by metal
fastenings will not require tuning one-quarter as often as Pianos
on the old system.

This new mode of piano construction, invented by Mason & Hamlin in
1882, has been fully proved, many excellent experts pronouncing it
the “greatest improvement made in pianos of the century.”

WARRANT.—_Each piano will be accompanied by the fullest warrant.
Determined to achieve the very highest reputation for their
pianofortes, should defect develop itself in any one, the Company
will be more eager to correct it than the purchaser can be to have
them._

Pianos can be rented, if preferred, at moderate cost, with
privilege of purchase.

                          MASON & HAMLIN

                              ORGANS

[Illustration]

                       THE WHOLE WORLD SAYS:

  At every Great World’s Exhibition since 1867, these organs have
  been awarded the Highest Honors.

  Supplied to Her Majesty Queen Victoria.

  Used in Westminster Abbey.

  Used in St. James’s Hall.

  Always used by Ira D. Sankey.

After having used a Mason & Hamlin Organ eight years at Corisco
Island, off the western coast of Equatorial Africa, the Rev. C. De
Heer, Missionary, writes:

“This is the only organ, American or European, that has not gone to
pieces within six months after its arrival.”

  100 Styles, $22 to $900.      Catalogues free.

                 MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN & PIANO CO.,

                     BOSTON, 154 Tremont St.;
                   NEW YORK, 46 East 14th St.;
                     CHICAGO, 148 Wabash Ave.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            STATEMENT.


                     PHENIX INSURANCE COMPANY

                         OF BROOKLYN, N.Y.


                        JANUARY 1st, 1887.


  CASH CAPITAL               $1,000,000.00
  GROSS SURPLUS               4,383,171.68
                             —————————————
             Gross Assets    $5,383,171 68
                             =============


ASSETS.

  United States Bonds, market value      $1,104,250.00
  Other Stocks and Bonds                  1,502,858.90
  Loans on Bond and Mortgage                294,900.00
  Loans on Call                              80,758.76
  Cash in Bank and Office                   495,135.83
  Real Estate                             1,082,787.53
  Premiums in Course of Collection          667,231.88
  Interest Accrued                           11,716.42
  Bills Receivable for Marine Premiums      140,284.55
  Rents Due and Accrued                       3,247.81
                                         —————————————
                                         $5,383,171.68
                                         =============


LIABILITIES.

  CASH CAPITAL                              $1,000,000.00
  Reserve for Unearned Premiums              3,466,886.97
  Reserve for Unpaid Losses                    353,759.88
  All Other Liabilities                          5,438.10
  NET SURPLUS                                  557,086.78
                                            —————————————
                                            $5,383,171.68
                                            =============

  STEPHEN CROWELL, President,
  WM. R. CROWELL, Vice-President.
  PHILANDER SHAW, Secretary.
  GEO. H. FISKE,    }
  CHAS. C. LITTLE,  } Ass’t Sec’s.
  JOHN H. DOUGHERTY,}


       *       *       *       *       *


               OLD SOUTH CHURCH, BOSTON, Feb., 1887.

We have used _Laudes Domini_ at our weekly services, Friday
evenings, for nearly a year. Our people regard it as a great
success.

  S. CARR, JR., Organist.               REV. GEO. A. GORDON.


“Dr Robinson has been, of all our hymn and tune book makers, the
most successful.”

                                    —REV. LYMAN ABBOTT, D.D.


“_Laudes Domini_ is one of the latest, and one of the very best of
the many good hymn-books produced in the present generation, a book
as nearly perfect as that most eminent of all hymn book makers, Dr.
Charles S. Robinson, can make one.”—_The Congregationalist._

[Illustration]

“If we were conducting a ‘gospel service’ of many days’ continuance
in any church having this hymnal, we would not care to introduce
special hymn-books”.—REV. DR. GEO. F. PENTECOST, in ‘_Words and
Weapons_’.

Responsive Reading Services are bound with _Laudes Domini_ when
desired.

Dr. Robinson’s Hymn and Tune Books are not experiments. Churches
adopting them are never disappointed.


“SPIRITUAL SONGS FOR SOCIAL WORSHIP” never fails to give
satisfaction in the Prayer Meeting.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”]


         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors correct. Inconsistent
hyphenation retained due the multiplicity of authors.

Changed “misionaries” to “missionaries” in the Funk & Wagnalls
advertisement on the third page of advertisements.

Changed “LeMoyne” to “Le Moyne” on page 137.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 5, MAY, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.