Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections.)









[Illustration: JULY, 1887.

  VOL. XLI.

  NO. 7.

  The American Missionary]

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: CONTENTS]


  EDITORIAL.

    FOURTH OF JULY,—DEATH OF MRS. PARR,                 187
    PARAGRAPHS,                                         188
    THE JOHN BROWN SONG,                                189
    AT THE MONUMENT OF LINCOLN,                         191
    THINGS TO BE REMEMBERED—NO. 2,                      192
    THE IMPRESSIONS OF TEN YEARS,                       193


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE,                                195
    ATLANTA UNIVERSITY,                                 197
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY,                                198
    TWO EXAMPLES OF PERSEVERANCE,                       199


  THE INDIANS.

    CHARGE AT THE ORDINATION OF REV. GEO. W. REED,      201


  THE CHINESE.

    EVANGELISTIC WORK,                                  204
    MISSIONS IN CHINA,                                  206


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    TEMPERANCE WORK IN OUR SCHOOLS,                     206
    ENGLISH AS SHE IS _Not_ TAUGHT,                     208


  FOR THE CHILDREN.

    CHILDREN’S TEMPERANCE WORK,                         209


  RECEIPTS,                                             209

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._
      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._
      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._
      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ———— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ———— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.




                               THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XLI.         JULY, 1887.          NO. 7.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


This year the Fourth of July is on Monday. Last year, being on
Sunday, Dr. Dana’s suggestion to take up a contribution to help
the A. M. A. out of debt was acted upon by many of the churches.
The result was a large increase to our receipts. Why not repeat
the effort this year? It is certainly in order that patriotic
sermons should be preached July 3d. It is just as certain that a
contribution taken in connection with such a service in behalf
of the A. M. A. would be neither burdensome nor inappropriate.
It would be an easy matter certainly for that $5,000 deficiency
that we carry from last year to be provided for. We throw out the
suggestion.

One other thought. Vacation days are now upon us. We make the
request that our friends will bear our work in mind as they visit
the country churches. A little effort to circulate the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY and to make the people acquainted with our work, would
go a great way to help us.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the June MISSIONARY we mentioned a watch sent us by a widow.
It was a cherished memento. Not being able to make an offering of
money, she gave us that which represented to her more than money.
A reader of the MISSIONARY, noticing the gift, has kindly sent us
more than double its market value in redemption.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are pained to record the death of Mrs. J. H. Parr, which
occurred in Chicago, April 3d. Mrs. Parr first went South under
appointment of the A. M. A., in November, 1884, to take charge
of the musical department at Tillotson Institute, Austin, Texas.
At the close of that school year, with her husband she went
to Quitman, Ga. The trying experiences in connection with the
persecution of our missionaries, and especially the incendiary
burning of our school-house at Quitman, gave her nerves such a
shock that she never fully recovered from it. The last six months
of her life she seemed to be improving. They were months marked by
special Christian activity, aiding her husband in his work as a
pastor. But death came suddenly, and it was clearly manifest that
her nervous forces, so fearfully overtaxed and shattered by the
experience of that terrible night in Quitman, were very far from
being restored. We commend the bereaved husband to the benediction
of the loving Father who sympathizes with all his children in the
day of their affliction.

       *       *       *       *       *


The _Herald_, of Greenville, Miss., is responsible for the
statement that a Negro who was serving out a small fine on the
chain-gang at Vicksburg, for refusing to work had $100 added to
his fine. The same paper also states that George Young (white),
convicted of forgery and confined in Kemper Co. jail, was taken
from prison and set at liberty by a party of masked men. This may
be taken as a sample of the difference between the way justice is
meted out to white and black criminals in Mississippi. The color
line is certainly drawn. A good thing for Justice that her eyes are
blinded. The hand in which she holds her sword would certainly move
to smite the discriminators, could she have a sight at the outrage.

       *       *       *       *       *

A committee of the U.S. Senate, consisting of Senators Platt,
Blackburn and Cullom, have been investigating Indian matters. A
long telegram, every point of which tells against the Indians,
professing to be based on the investigations of this committee, has
been sent out all over the country. Depend upon it, when so lengthy
a telegram is sent over the wires of the Associated Press, there
is an agency behind it that has an axe to grind. The dispatch was
so one-sided that any careful reader could not help seeing that
in so far as it stated facts, they were but partially stated. It
said the committee had witnessed a dance among the Osages, and that
“it was especially sad to learn that two of the sprightliest of
the dancers, covered almost all over with little looking-glasses,
sleigh-bells, rings, feathers and ribbons, were graduates of the
Carlisle Indian School, who have relapsed into shameless savagery.”
If this language, taken in connection with its setting, means
anything, it means a slur at Indian education. But suppose the
telegram had said that there had been connected with the Carlisle
School, in all, eighty-four Osages; that none of them stayed in the
school over _three_ years; that more than a half of them remained
_less than a year_, and that there have been no Osages at the
school since August, 1885; had the telegram made that statement,
there would be nothing “particularly sad” in the discovery that two
out of the eighty-four had yielded to the tremendous temptation to
fall back into ways out of which they had never been lifted. It is
_sad_, of course, that these people are savages, but the spirit
that lurks behind this telegram is far sadder. It is absurd to talk
of these youth as _lapsing_. Indian education is not to be judged
by the conduct of those who have been in school from less than one
year up to three years at most; nor, even had they been in school
for ten or fifteen years, is it to be condemned should it be proved
that two out of eighty-four, yielding to temptation, had fallen.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will interest the readers of the MISSIONARY to learn that the
Act of Congress for the allotment of lands in severalty to Indians
provides that every head of an Indian family shall be settled on
160 acres; every unmarried person over eighteen years of age,
and every orphan, shall have 80 acres; and every single person
under eighteen born before the President issues the order making
allotments, 40 acres. The allotments so made are to be inalienable
for 25 years, and the lands remaining over are to be bought of the
Indians by the Government and opened to homestead settlement only;
such homesteads in tracts of 160 acres to be inalienable also for
five years. When the allotments have been made, all the Indians are
declared to be citizens of the United States, entitled to all the
rights, privileges and immunities of such citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE JOHN BROWN SONG.

The claim has been made that the melody of the John Brown song was
the product of the colored people. Our readers will see from the
following article, which we take great pleasure in publishing, that
Mr. Frank E. Jerome, of Russell, Kansas, is the author of this
famous war song. He has written the article, at our request, for
the MISSIONARY, and in a private letter he says that at the time he
composed the song he was only thirteen years of age.

                                                        ED.

On the first day of February, 1861, I arrived in Leavenworth,
Kansas, from St. Louis, Mo., and took an engagement in a theatre
there. Leavenworth at that time was under the greatest excitement.
All sorts of rumors of war were coming in, and the soldiers seemed
to be concentrating from all sides. Bonfires and stump speeches
were the nightly occurrences, and stirred up the patriotism of
the people to fever heat. As a boy, I naturally fell into the
excitement, and every chance I had I would attend these public
meetings. At one of them I heard an impassioned orator thunder out:

  “For Freedom and Right will surely win the day!”

This sentence remained with me. I pondered over it, and finally got
to singing it in different ways in several songs. Some time after,
I heard a prominent citizen say that “John Brown was dead, but the
rebels would find that his soul would roll on and crush them!”
Before either of these occurrences, I heard a number of soldiers
on a South-bound steamer singing, as they swept by:

    “Go tell Aunt Susey! Go tell Aunt Susey!
    Go tell Aunt Susey old John Brown is dead!” (_Etc._)

This tune I had picked up and learned thoroughly. One gift of
nature to me has been the art of combining two tunes of different
kinds and thereby producing a new one. I had combined this tune of
“Go tell Aunt Susey” with the old Sunday-school hymn, “I love to go
to Sunday-school,” and the union of these two tunes produced the
air of “John Brown’s Body,” as sung everywhere since that time. I
sang this tune long before I put any words to it. But when I heard
“Freedom and Right will surely win the day,” and that John Brown’s
soul “would roll on and crush them,” I found with delight that I
could fit them neatly into my tune.

The play in which I gave “John Brown’s Body” was designated as
“Jeff. Davis in the Camp.” It represented a number of Northern
Negroes going down to capture Jeff. Davis, and during the march
southward they build a camp fire, and while the bean soup is
boiling the sentinel sings a song, and the rest of the “soldiers”
on the stage join in the chorus. I was the sentinel, and gave
the song at this time. A company of soldiers was present in the
audience, and I was quite startled at the reception my song
received. They hurrahed, yelled, laughed, stamped, and called me
out time and again, until the proprietor of the theatre interposed
and quieted the excitement. But that night, every time I appeared
on the stage another storm of applause would greet me.

After the show was over, the soldiers cheered and went out singing
“John Brown’s Body” in all sorts of ways, and for several days
after I heard it on the street in many different ways. The tune has
always remained as I first composed it, but the soldiers changed
the words to suit their own convenience and ideas. The song as I
sang it was as follows:

    John Brown’s body lies slumbering in the grave;
    John Brown was noble, loyal and brave;
    His mission on earth was to rescue and to save,
                And his soul goes rolling on!

                    CHORUS: Glory, glory, Hallelujah! (_Etc._)

    The Rebels in the South can never make it pay
    While John Brown’s mission speeds on its way,
    For Freedom and Right will surely win the day,
                As his soul goes rolling on!

This was all the song—but two verses. A short time after this a
little newsboy stopped me and told me that he had made up a new
verse for my song; and upon asking him to sing it, he sang:

    “We’ll hang Jeff. Davis on a sour apple-tree!”

repeating the same line three times. I laughed, and told him I
would think it over.

In the theatre when I gave the song was a Frenchman named C.
Francois, well known to the early settlers of Leavenworth, who
was the leader of a glee club, composed of the actors, who sang
nicely many national airs and ballads. Mr. Francois, about the
time I sang the song, went to New York, and, I learn, returned by
way of Massachusetts, and I am led to believe that it was through
his means that the song reached the Eastern States as quickly as
it did; and I also have good reason for believing that the Seventh
Kansas and Fiftieth Illinois regiments carried the song South a
little later.

These are the facts as they occurred; and I may say, in closing,
that I am pleased to note that the little acorn has developed into
the mighty oak, and John Brown’s name is one of the imperishable
monuments that now adorn a free and united country; and the colored
people of the South and North can unite under the glorious banner
of Liberty in preserving the name and love for him who freely gave
his life for their liberty and freedom.

I have heard severe criticism on the part of Southerners regarding
the illustrious dead, but I often remember the olden story, in the
Holy Book, of similar criticism made by the enemies of Christ, and
I also read that “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man
lay down his life for his friends.”

So, in our homes, in our workshops, in the fields, in the churches
and schools, through the pages of history, and within our own
hearts, we will never forget the boys in blue who saved the Union,
and the glorious hero who laid down his life willingly and freely,
that the curse of slavery should be forever extinguished from
the bright, fair pages of our history. And while we strew bright
flowers over the graves of the departed heroes, we shall always
remember, with swelling heart and deep affection, the great work
accomplished by old John Brown of Ossawatomie.

  Russell, Kansas.                             FRANK E. JEROME.

       *       *       *       *       *


AT THE MONUMENT OF LINCOLN.

The General Association of Illinois, at its recent meeting in
Springfield, as it had done once before, went in a body to that
shrine of patriotism, the monument to Abraham Lincoln. That
patriotic song, now turned to a Christian psalm, “My country, ’tis
of thee,” was sung by the people, and a prayer of thanksgiving was
offered by Dr. G. S. F. Savage, who has now come to be one of the
veteran ministers of the State.

Words of welcome were offered by the Attorney-General of Illinois,
Mr. Geo. H. Hunt, and these were gracefully responded to by the
Moderator, Rev. W. F. Day. Addresses were also made by Rev. E. K.
Alden, D.D., Hon. Wm. H. Collins, and Rev. Jos. E. Roy.

At the former visit of this body, the Jubilee Singers were present
to voice the gratitude of the emancipated race.

The colored troops, after their muster-out, gave for the monument
more than $50,000, one-fourth of the whole.

The scroll held in the left hand of the bronze statue of Mr.
Lincoln bears on it, in large letters, the word “Emancipation,” and
the pen in his right hand indicates the signing of that talismanic
instrument, while the coat-of-arms, set into the pedestal,
represents the eagle as holding in his beak the broken chain of
slaves.

Of the 178,000 colored soldiers, 80,000 had, with their great
Liberator, laid down their lives for the life of the nation. And
so it seemed well that one who was identified with the work of
supplementing that edict of freedom should stand there to recount
their deeds of valor and to relate with what enthusiasm they
celebrate all over the South not only Emancipation Day and the
Fourth of July, but Decoration Day itself. Who in that Southland
shall be found to offer psalms and prayers, and scatter flowers
over the graves of the 321,369 soldiers buried in the eighty-two
national cemeteries there? As God would have it, the people are
found there, numbered by millions, who delight to render this
service of gratitude and of love—a people whose patriotism has
never been tarnished with a breath of disloyalty.

What shall be done for a people who have been so true to the
nation? Let them be confirmed in all the rights and emoluments of
our Christian citizenship.

       *       *       *       *       *


THINGS TO BE REMEMBERED—NO. 2.

_The Want_: Nothing so nearly concerns the welfare of this land,
and of all lands, as the thorough merging and assimilating of all
the races here into one Christian commonwealth. This is needed
for the unity and strength of our own nation, and for an example
and influence upon the nations abroad. The despised races, in
particular, need to be thus fused and absorbed, in order that they
may be inoculated and empowered with the spirit of the Republic
to carry its freedom, its learning and light, to the lands in
darkness. They are part and parcel of our people, _fused or not_,
and the character of the nation will be affected by their presence
and influence. The measure with which we mete to them shall be
measured to us again. We are in a partnership which involves common
gains and common losses. What we put into them of intelligence,
piety and moral power, we put into the nation not only, but we put
into the mightiest of the unbaptized races of men. We have little
conception, indeed, of the immense inertia of the heathen races;
or how much sympathy, money and labor, will be needed to move them
into new lines of thought, or of moral action. But it is a work
to which we are specially called, and for which we have special
facilities. It may tax all our patience and charity, and then we
shall barely touch the necessities of the case. The churches, the
school-houses, the intelligence and the character that will be
needed for the uplift of these races, we have only begun to supply.
Indeed it is a question as to whether we have yet formed any
adequate idea of a work, _as for races_, in distinction from a work
which deals merely with individuals. But if we could bear in mind,
in dealing with the Chinaman, the Indian and the Negro, that it is
the races we are after, the turning of single souls to God would
not seem the small thing that it does. We should then comprehend,
perhaps, how much more favorable was a Christian land for the
conversion of men, and for the raising up of broad, intelligent,
and thoroughly equipped teachers and preachers for the benighted
and perishing, than were heathen lands. The activities of our daily
life, the forces of our liberty, learning, piety, government,
_must_ do immensely more for a man in America than the feeble
pulses of gospel life and light can do for him in China and Africa.
How much easier, then, the conversion of heathen under the blaze of
our Christian sky, and how much stronger and better men can we make
of them to undertake the salvation of their own lands!

The great want is the means—both men and money—to throw upon
the Pacific slopes, upon the Indian reservations, the Southern
savannas, a Christian force large enough to put these races under
thorough Christian culture. Anything less than this will fail of
the end. It is an opportunity to lay hold of the unsaved races,
such as is likely never to come again; which it would not only be
unwise to neglect, but deeply criminal not to improve. God sets
before us this open door, and not to enter in is to peril _their_
future as well as our own. A responsibility greater than this could
hardly be given to men, and an eye to see it and a soul to feel it
are what, beyond all things, our people need.

                                                 C. L. WOODWORTH

       *       *       *       *       *


THE IMPRESSIONS OF TEN YEARS.

BY PRESIDENT PATTON OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

The present educational year completes the tenth of my connection
with Howard University, and thus with the work of educating the
Negro race. An “Abolitionist” since the spring of the year 1837,
I have ever felt a deep interest in the welfare of this oppressed
people, and the fact of their present freedom has only changed the
direction of my anxiety and effort. For I know that the brightness
of their future depends upon industry, education, morality and
religion. And to this end they must have Christian schools and
churches, and an industrial training in shop and store as well as
in garden and farm. My experience as president of an institution
which in its seven departments—industrial, normal, preparatory,
collegiate, legal, medical and theological—covers well the entire
range of instruction, except the primary branches, has given
opportunity to observe the capacity and the actual progress of the
Negro, and to study the wants of the race in this country.

The result is encouragement not uncoupled with anxiety. A great
work has been accomplished, beyond question—great in immediate
effect, though more so in its prospective bearing. It is rather a
great seed sowing than a great harvest. Thousands have been taught
the rudiments of knowledge, and a select few have received a higher
training. Some ambition has been roused in the masses, and a little
progress has been made in supplying them with more intelligent
leaders in church and in state. No doubt remains that the Negro
may be rendered capable of filling all the stations in life which
are occupied by white men. Ordinary acquirements are made with
creditable ease. The higher education can also be acquired by the
proper proportion of students, but this effort is only partially
successful as yet. Poor material is too commonly offered, not only
as to native talent, but especially as regards thorough drill in
primary studies and the commencement of genuine mental discipline.
With an imperfect drill in the lower schools, we can do no perfect
work in the higher branches, and we find it difficult to develop
and sustain in the mind the idea of a true scholarship, and of the
lofty aims of a liberal education. It is but slowly that such an
intellectual atmosphere can be made to pervade the colored colleges
of the South as is found in the white colleges of the New England
States. But the work must be pushed till such a result shall be
secured.

Progress always entails added labor and expense. What has been
already accomplished by the A. M. A. must not be lost, and the
vantage ground must be used to gain new results. When students
graduate, their places are more than occupied by others, who have
been moved by their example to seek for knowledge. As the spirit of
caste is overcome, and places of honor and profit begin to open to
colored men, fully qualified persons must be ready to embrace the
new opportunities. Every educated and earnest Christian minister
sent forth from our institutions will not only supply his immediate
church, but will probably organize in the outlying neighborhood one
or two others, requiring similar pastors in a short time. And he
will also inspire the uneducated preachers of that region to aim
at higher work, and to seek school privileges. It is a frequent
remark, that the theological department of Howard University has,
by direct and indirect influence, revolutionized the preaching in
the colored churches of all denominations in Washington, which
number about eighty, it is said. Thus the A. M. A. is a leaven
hidden in the Southern meal, and destined, with similar influences,
to leaven the entire mass.

And this ought to be appreciated by the intelligent
Congregationalists of the North, who will rejoice in two obvious
results of the operations of the A. M. A. One is, the gradual
increase of their own churches and educational institutions, which
are becoming respectable in number and great in influence; the
other is, the modifying effect upon other denominations, which are
thus inspired and toned up to our standard of education, morals and
religion. This is secured not only by our example and competition,
but also by the enlightening and liberalizing influence exerted
upon their own men, who, as teachers and preachers, have been
trained in our schools. These are not false to their own sects;
they labor faithfully and successfully in their respective charges,
but they have gained enlargement of view and a wider charity, and
they will be found always on the side of progress in thought and in
action, and ready for Christian co-operation.

The movement in progress in both political parties, to obliterate
the race-line at the polls, is significant in many respects. It
points to a decrease of prejudice, but it also renders imperative
increased efforts to furnish the Negroes with intelligent,
well-principled leaders, of their own race, to save them from being
made tools of by wily politicians among the whites, and by corrupt
vote-mongers among themselves. In a section so rapidly developing
as is the South, great changes may soon be expected. It is our
American Japan. Let us not be backward in supplying the formative
influences. The work of the American Missionary Association was
never more needed, or more certain to be successful, than at this
very moment.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER

A colored preacher of the old style stumblingly read for his
text, the following:—“Wine is a moccasin and strong drink is a
rattlesnake.” The sermon which followed was in keeping with the
text which he read. This is sound temperance sentiment even if
it is a little faulty as a rendering of Scripture. The question
is often asked:—What is the A. M. A. doing toward the grand
temperance upheaval of the South? This question has been put
to me recently:—“Is the A. M. A. keeping step to the march of
present reform, as it did in the great anti-slavery agitation?” An
unhesitating _yes_ can be given to this question. In the “Notes in
the Saddle,” for June, a few hints were given concerning the part
the representatives of the A. M. A. were taking in the temperance
movement in Texas. This was only a hint. It was intended as
such. Much more could have been said, and truthfully said; for
instance:—one pastor of an A. M. A. church is devoting a large
part of the summer to stumping the State in favor of the proposed
Temperance Amendment to the State Constitution. He goes out under
the commission of a committee of temperance workers appointed for
the special purpose of stirring up correct sentiments among the
people. The colored people are a large factor in the settlement
of this question in Texas. This pastor will do his utmost to lead
them to vote right. Other pastors and teachers are giving portions
of their time this summer to the same good work. In the South at
large every A. M. A. school is the center of pronounced temperance
agitation. “Bands of Hope” among the younger pupils and temperance
societies of various names among the older pupils are the universal
rule. The “Three Pledge” cards, including abstinence from tobacco,
intoxicants, and profane language, are signed by almost every
pupil in the A. M. A. schools. These pupils, when they go out as
teachers in the public schools, take these pledges with them, and
secure signatures from their pupils, and in this way carry the
work far beyond the limits of the enrollment of our own schools,
in this aggressive temperance agitation. Not a single pastor of an
A. M. A. church uses intoxicants or tobacco so far as my knowledge
goes. The example of these pastors, as well as their preaching,
is right and safe. In one community, the rigid rules adopted by
the Congregational Church concerning these indulgences, brought
the other colored churches into line first, and, finally, the
white church of the same community found it necessary to take this
radical position in order to maintain its hold upon the people.
Their wise method of reaching the people and securing a correct
public sentiment concerning this question, is made use of both by
pastors and by schools. Instruction in Coleman’s and Richardson’s
Manuals is provided for in the course of study. Honest, earnest,
and persistent Christian effort is put forth by the representatives
of the A. M. A. all along the line.

       *       *       *       *       *

While walking down the streets of Florence, Ala., a few weeks ago,
a little white boy came trotting along at my side. We easily fell
into conversation. “How old are you?” I said. “Nine years old,” he
replied. “What Reader do you read in?” “I never read in no Reader.”
“Do you go to school?” “No, sir.” “Can’t you read?” “I can pick out
some words right smart.” This is the exact testimony of a Southern
white boy of the middle class of society to-day! A few rods farther
down the street of the same village, a little colored boy overtook
me. I invited conversation with him, with the following result:
“How old are you?” “Nine years old, Boss.” “Go to school?” “Oh,
yes, sir; been going to school for a long time.” “What Reader
are you in?” “The Second, sir.” “Can you read right along in the
Bible without any trouble?” “Yes, sir; I don’t have any trouble
in reading ’most anything.” This incident is true to the letter.
It is not very exceptional. The colored children are improving
faster than the white children in the South. If this state of
things continues very long, the Southern people will be obliged
to hire colored young men and women to teach their white schools.
Think of it! “In New York State 55 white men in a thousand, and in
Massachusetts 62 in each thousand, make their mark when they sign a
document,” says the New York _Post_, “while in Kansas only 31 in a
thousand, and in Nebraska only 30 in a thousand are so illiterate.
But in Kentucky 173 white men in a thousand cannot write their own
names!” The A. M. A. schools in the South are seeking to correct
this appalling state of things. They not only educate, but they
inspire also a desire for education in those reached by their
influences. It is unfortunate that these influences are mostly
confined to the colored people, but that is not because the whites
are excluded from our school privileges. “None are so blind as
those who will not see.” None are so hopelessly ignorant as those
who do not desire to learn.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

The eighteenth anniversary of this institution has just passed. No
year in the history of the school, perhaps, has witnessed a broader
and better work than that of the year now closed.

The exercises incident to Commencement week were inaugurated with
the baccalaureate sermon, preached by Sec. Woodworth, of Boston,
Sabbath morning, May 22d, in the chapel of the University, packed
to the full with the students and their friends.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday were occupied with the usual
examinations of the Normal and College departments, in the presence
of the State Board of Examiners appointed by the Governor for that
purpose. Every opportunity was given and taken to test the students
in their thorough knowledge and mastery of the subjects reviewed;
and it is but simple justice to them and to their teachers to say
that they bore the test superbly. In addition to the ordinary
school work, there were exhibitions in handicraft of various
kinds. First came an exhibit in the principles and practice of
wood-working, including carpentry and turning, which would have
gratified the advocates of manual labor connected with our public
schools.

Next came an object lesson, by the Senior and Normal classes,
in nursing. They brought in, upon a stretcher, one of their own
number, and illustrated how different kinds of bandages should be
made and applied; how plasters and poultices should be mixed and
spread, and also how deftly and easily the clothing of the sick bed
could be changed and renewed without removing or disturbing the
patient.

Then came an exhibit in artistic and scientific cooking, by
the Senior Normal class. If the quality of the cooking were to
be judged by the rapidity with which the different articles
disappeared after reaching the hands of the committee, it must be
pronounced a great success.

And last, but not least, came a look at the farm, and an inspection
of the barn, the crops, and the stock. The conclusion was that the
whole establishment was a credit to the State, and worthy of the
study of all the farmers thereof.

At the close of the examination on Wednesday, P. M., the school
assembled in the chapel to listen to the report of the examiners on
what they had seen and heard. They had nothing but praise to bestow
on the literary work of the University; the evidences of hard and
accurate study; of clear, inspiring teaching, and of the scholarly
bearing and quiet, orderly spirit in all departments of the school.
They were specially gratified with the manual training given in
so many directions, and its promise of future value to the State.
One of them, who seemed to voice the feelings of the others, said:
“I believe that, take it all in all, Atlanta University is the
best-equipped school in the State of Georgia.”

Wednesday evening, Rev. A. D. Mayo, of Boston, delivered a very
able and quickening address, taking for his theme: “American brains
in American hands.”

Thursday was the great day of the feast, when five young men and
six young women delivered their orations or read their essays
from the Commencement stage. The services were held in the Second
Baptist Church, before an audience of twenty-five hundred people.
One of the examiners remarked at the close that he never before
witnessed, on such an occasion, such perfect order and decorum. And
of the orations and essays it is praise enough to say that not one
of them contained a weak or foolish thing.

It will interest the friends of Atlanta to learn that the
presidency, made vacant by the death of the lamented Ware, two
years since, was filled by the election of the Rev. Erastus
Blakeslee, of New Haven, Conn. Mr. Blakeslee was a classmate at
Yale College of Mr. Ware and of Prof. Bumstead, who has been acting
president during the past year; and it is believed he will enter
heartily into the spirit of the institution, and will bring to it
new enterprise and enthusiasm and power.

                                                      C. L. W.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLOSING EXERCISES AT STRAIGHT.

A Young Men’s Christian Association has been organized during the
year, and the first of our closing exercises was a public meeting
of this association, conducted by its officers at Central Church.

Addresses were made by Prof. Olds and Rev. Dr. Berger, and a fair
audience was present. This was on the morning of Sunday, May 25,
and on the evening of the same day the Baccalaureate sermon was
preached by Dr. Berger. It was a grand sermon, and was listened to
with profound attention by a large audience.

On Monday evening the societies, the old “Sumner Literary
Association,” which is almost as old as the school itself; the
“Philomathian,” of later birth, but great usefulness; the “Band of
Mercy” and “Band of Hope,” united in a public anniversary meeting.
A programme, consisting of recitations, orations, reading of
essays, and debate, was presented, and a large audience testified
to its entire success.

The annual concert and exhibition came on Wednesday evening. The
young people were greeted by a full house, and money enough was
realized to nearly pay off the indebtedness on the printing outfit.
The music was conceded to be excellent, and all the exercises were
applauded.

Friday was Commencement. The exercises are held in the evening, as
most of those interested in the school being working people, many
who would desire to attend could not do so in the daytime. In New
Orleans, especially in summer time, audiences are not noted for
assembling early, but people have come to know that when Straight
University says 7 o’clock, that is the hour when exercises will
commence; and as soon as the doors were open, the crowd was ready
to go in. No such an audience ever before occupied that church. At
the opening of the doors nearly enough were there to fill the main
audience room, and soon galleries, aisles and doorways were packed.
It is estimated that a thousand people were present, and a great
number were unable to get in.

Formerly, on all gatherings of this kind, it was found necessary to
have a force of policemen present; but when getting my permit from
the Mayor, I was asked what policemen would be required, I ventured
to say “none,” and I am rejoiced to be able to say that during the
entire series of meetings no disturbance of any kind occurred. It
must be remembered, in order to give force to this, that Central
Church is situated in the very heart of the most densely populated
portion of the city.

It was a long programme, but so quiet and attentive was that dense
audience, that every word could be heard in any part of the room.
The exercises from the platform were such as we were proud of, and
the audience was not less a subject of pride.

Ten students were graduated, the largest number ever completing
the course in any year, and all their exercises were marked by
a simplicity and force quite in contrast to the floridity and
fluffiness often attributed, and sometimes with justice, to the
colored people. Some fine music by the choral and glee clubs, and
by individuals, gave variety to the exercises.

The diplomas were presented by Hon. Thomas J. Woodward,
vice-president of the board of trustees. A few remarks were made
by President Hitchcock and Secretary Chas. Shute, followed by
a neat and forcible impromptu address by Rev. A. E. P. Albert,
D.D., an alumnus of Straight; closing by singing “The Heavens are
Telling,” by the choral club, and benediction by Dr. Berger. Of
the graduating class, all but one will for the present engage in
teaching; several hope to return and take post-graduate courses.
All are working Christians.

                                                       R.C.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWO EXAMPLES OF PERSEVERANCE.

The current talk concerning the Negro makes the entire race to
consist of improvident ne’er-do-wells, with no care for the
future and with no power of denying present gratification for
future good. Whatever of truth or falsehood this assertion may
contain, and probably it has much of both, very many instances of
perseverance come under our observation among our students in the
schools of the A. M. A.

A. H. is an orphan girl of about eighteen years, whose desire for
education brought her into our school a few months last year. By
hard work and careful saving through the summer, she earned enough
money to keep herself in school a year. At the close, however,
of the first month she brought her books to my desk, saying she
must leave school at once; and the poor girl broke down, and
began to cry. Little by little I learned the story: Her aunt had
been sick, and A. had given to her the earnings hoarded for the
year’s tuition. It was now impossible to get the money back, or
even enough to meet one month’s demands, and A. had resolved to go
out into the country, where she could earn a little by picking up
potatoes. By hard work she hoped to save enough to return again
at Christmas time. The next day it was my pleasure to send her
word that for the present she might remain in the school with
free tuition. On Monday she was again in her place, grateful and
studious, and kindly offering to give up her desk when the room
became full, and herself take a stool or a chair.

In one of our advanced classes there is a young man of nearly
thirty years, whose story is equally interesting. In the spring he
thought he should not be able to return to school this fall, for
lack of money. He went out, however, resolved never to spend an
idle day; he would work, even if wages were low. Whenever he failed
to secure better work, he went to the woods, splitting rails.
Days and days he worked there, through the heat, and found that,
by arduous labor, he could clear exactly thirty-five cents a day!
“I should have kept on,” said he, “had it been but twenty-five!”
The result of his summer’s work was that he found himself, at
school time, with more money saved than at any previous fall; and
now he is again at his place, studious and faithful, volunteering
even to work extra hours each day and Saturday, in the Industrial
department, for the sake of the practice with tools.

Instances might be multiplied, but these two are sufficient to show
the industry and the sacrifice of many of the scholars, and the
need in our schools for a fund to help such to secure the education
they desire.

                                                       A TEACHER.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


Mr. George W. Reed, of the last class of the Hartford Theological
Seminary, has been appointed by the American Missionary Association
a missionary to the Dakota Indians. He was ordained a minister of
the gospel of Christ, on Tuesday, May 17th, by a council called
by the Olivet Congregational Church of Springfield, Mass., at
Springfield. Mr. Reed is a member of the Olivet Church. The sermon
was preached by Prof. Llewellyn Pratt, of the Hartford Seminary.
Ordaining prayer by Rev. Wm. Thompson, D.D., also of the Hartford
Seminary. Right hand of fellowship by Rev. Michael Burnham, of
Springfield. Charge to the candidate by Secretary Powell.

By request, we publish a portion of the charge to the candidate:

I charge you to remember that the interest which this Council
expresses in Indian missions is in the line of our historic
development. Away back in the year 1644, the General Court of
Massachusetts ordained “that the County Courts in this jurisdiction
shall take care that the Indians in the several shires be
civilized, and the courts shall have power to take order from time
to time to have the Indians instructed in the knowledge of God.”
In 1646 John Elliot, a Congregational minister, was at work as
a missionary among the Indians. He translated his famous Indian
Bible, the first and for many years the only Bible printed in
America, gathered the Indians into communities by themselves,
and in 1647 had 14 Indian villages, with 1,400 praying Indians,
organized into 24 regular congregations, in charge of 24 native
pastors, and the discipline of the churches and the qualifications
of the ministers were fully up to the Puritan standard then
required. In 1743 Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, of Lebanon, Conn.,
another Congregational minister, took up the work where Elliot
had laid it down, and out of his missionary labors grew Dartmouth
College, an institution that stands to-day a proud monument of New
England Congregationalism’s early interest in the education and
evangelization of the Indian.

In 1810 the American Board came into existence, and in 1815
we find it adopting measures for carrying the gospel to the
Indians. So rapid did its work grow in that direction, that in
1830 three-fourths of all the church members in its missions were
Indians. In 1846 the American Missionary Association was formed,
and of the 30 missionaries who held its commission the first year,
11 were missionaries to the Indians. In 1883 the American Board,
deciding to prosecute its work exclusively in foreign lands, turned
over its Indian missions to the American Missionary Association. So
that you see what this Council has done to-night is in the line of
our historical development, and connects your life and work in an
unbroken line with the early history of Congregationalism in its
efforts to reach the Indians.

I charge you to remember that in your special mission, justice,
as a Christian principle to be observed in all our dealings with
our fellow men, must find in you a champion. This because of the
fearful wrongs that, in the name of religion, have been committed
against the people to whom you go.

In the person of the poor Indian, entitled to all his rights as a
man, Christ has been standing in the presence of the white man’s
civilization on this continent for upwards of three hundred
years, asking for justice, and it has not yet been accorded him.
A most shameful record is the history of the white man’s dealings
with the Indians, whether read in the conduct of individuals or
in the conduct of the Government. The white man, by reason of his
intelligence, his resources and his numerical superiority, had the
ability to cheat, rob, and overpower the Indian, and putting his
sense of justice out of sight, he has proceeded to cheat and rob
and overpower him. Between the years 1778 and 1871, the people of
the United States have made with the Indians 649 treaties, and the
majority of them they have violated. By these treaties nearly all
of the territory of the United States has been acquired—a territory
that by reason of its vastness is at present the home of 50,000,000
white men, prospectively to become the home of at least 150,000,000
more—a territory that by reason of its marvellous resources of
climate, soil and minerals, has produced a wealth already rivaling
that of the oldest nations, and promising in the not far distant
future to surpass them all. This territory has nearly all of it
been deeded by the Indians to the people of the United States, _on
condition_ that the Government should compensate them by money
annuities in cash payment, or their equivalent in food, clothing,
agricultural implements, and instruction in farming and trades;
by establishing and maintaining schools for the education of
their children, and rigidly excluding white intruders from their
reservations.

Well, we have got the territory, but what about the conditions?
The money agreed upon has not been paid; the rations stipulated
for have not been issued; the schools promised have not been
maintained, and white intruders upon the reservations have not
been excluded. From pillar to post these children of the forest
have been driven. As fast as the white man has wanted the Indian’s
land, a reason has been speedily found for violating the treaty
and consummating the robbery. The savage has been goaded to go
on the war path by white men’s villainy, and then the Government
has been obliged to go out and whip him into submission; and, as
a punishment for crime he never would have perpetrated had he not
been driven to it, move him elsewhere, and divide up his land among
his despoilers.

My brother, remember as you stand to preach the gospel among the
Indians it will be your precious privilege to show that the wrongs
and injustice they have suffered at the hands of the white man have
been inflicted in opposition to the teachings of Christianity and
in defiance of its commands.

I charge you to remember that your mission gives repeated emphasis
to the faith of the Christian church in the _redeemability_ of the
Indian. Lack of faith in this truth has been the cause of much
of the cruel indifference on the part of many good people—even
Christian people—to the wrongs that Indians have suffered, and
has occasioned lack of enthusiasm in the prosecution of Indian
missions. It has paralyzed endeavor, and prepared the way for the
indulgence of enmity. But notice this: No body of Christians have
ever put themselves on record as not believing in the Indian’s
redeemability. Stories of massacre and one-sided testimony, when
the Indian could not have a hearing, have led many Christians
by their opposition to Indian missions, unwittingly to array
themselves against the gospel. They did not think, in taking
up the cry, “There is no good Indian but a dead Indian,” “The
Indian cannot be civilized,” “The Indian should be exterminated,”
and other such falsehoods, that they were denying the Christian
faith and practically proclaiming that there was no salvation for
themselves nor for anyone else; yet that was precisely what they
were doing, for if the Indian cannot be redeemed, then no one can
be redeemed. If the gospel cannot save the lowest, then there is
no salvation for the highest. The Indian is a man, and Christ
tasted death for every man, and he is able to save to the uttermost
every man. That lowest savage, wretched and vile as he is, can be
redeemed, and in this redemption can be raised to highest manhood.
All culture and excellence of mind and heart are attainable to him
whose soul has felt the redeeming power of Christ’s salvation.

Why, then, after 300 years of the presence of Christianity on
this continent, have not the Indians been civilized? does any one
ask. Rather, when we think of the way that the Indians have been
treated, our surprise shall be that any of them have accepted
the gospel. And yet despite all of the difficulties, Dr. Jas. E.
Rhoades affirmed that there is no field of mission enterprise
which has yielded larger returns than that of our native tribes.
Indians have been reached by the gospel, and that, too, in a very
remarkable degree. The “five civilized tribes,” as they are called,
of the Indian Territory, are practically a Christian people; 81,621
Indians wear citizens’ dress wholly, and 59,695 wear citizens’
dress in part; 43,423 Indians labor in civilized pursuits, and of
this number 9,612 are farmers; 21,232 houses are occupied by 40,000
Indians as dwellings; and the significant thing about all this is
that this most promising state of things has chiefly come about
since the inauguration of the Government’s Peace Policy during the
Presidency of General Grant, when Christian missions and Christian
schools were multiplied, and the Government, in co-operation, made
an honest effort to keep faith with the Indian, and to give him,
at least, a show of justice. When the Indian was given the chance,
he was found ready to accept it. The facts are most encouraging.
Wonderful has been the progress the gospel has made among these
people during the last fifteen years. But the field is vast, and,
in comparison with the needs, only a beginning has been made. There
are 40,000 wild Indian children in the country. Of this number, all
told, there are but 12,000 gathered in the Government and mission
schools, leaving 28,000 children to whom no school opens its door,
and to whom no Christian missionary comes. There are at least sixty
whole tribes upon whose darkness no ray of gospel light has ever
fallen, as pagan and as savage as were their ancestors when the
first white man landed upon these shores!

You have given yourself to this work, my brother, at an auspicious
time—at a time luminously prophetic of grand results. God’s bell
strikes the hour. Providential lines converge. The machinations of
wicked men are growing less. Our government is shaping itself to do
right. Our legislators are becoming more humane in their attitude.
The voice of the people is rising louder and louder, and becoming
more united in its demand for justice. The Christian church is
awaking to a sense of its responsibility. The seed planted by
Elliot, and Mayhew, and Wheelock, is fruiting in the reviving
interest in Indian missions that to-day is seen spreading among
the churches. The Indian turns his face towards the sunlight. He
stretches out his hands for help. Confidingly he places his destiny
in our keeping. To help him into the light and the manhood of the
gospel is a work that an angel might covet. To that work you have
given yourself, to that work this Council has consecrated you,
and into that work we will all follow you with our God-speed and
benediction.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


EVANGELISTIC WORK.

All that I can report on this point is that we are feeling our
way towards something effective—praying continually, and watching
diligently for an answer to our prayer, that God will raise up some
Chinese believer and endue him with such power that he may not only
disciple those already gathered in our schools, but may make his
voice to be heard among the perishing _crowds_ that now refuse to
enter our opened doors, and love darkness rather than light.

For three months past we have had Loo Quong in the field—a faithful
and beloved missionary helper, previously serving in our Central
school in San Francisco. He spent one month in Oroville, one in
Marysville, and is about completing a third in Stockton. At each of
these points he was joyfully welcomed, and his abundant labors were
rewarded by some measure of success. But that for which we pray we
have not yet secured, though it waits for us, I am sure, in the
gracious purpose of our Lord.

In March, I visited these three missions, and the one in Sacramento
also, to which our brother will go as soon as his labors in
Stockton are closed. As usual, my observations both lifted me up
and cast me down. Most of what is discouraging might have been
averted if we had fit Chinese helpers in sufficient numbers, and
the means to sustain them. The American teachers at these points
are specially faithful, skillful and devoted, but nothing can
make up for the loss entailed by the absence of effective Chinese
helpers.

Oroville is a rendezvous for the Chinese scattered over a very
wide territory. Its resident Chinese population is also large;
not less than six hundred. Loo Quong had done a good work here,
and I found the school in better condition than ever before. It
was on a week-day evening that we gathered round the table of our
Lord. The room was well filled with Chinese, and we had several
Americans with us also. I think that more than twenty communed.
One was baptized and received to our little Chinese church. One
other would have been baptized—a brother very well reported of—but
he had been obliged to go away to his summer’s work, about eighty
miles distant. One brother walked about fifteen miles to be with
us at this service, and trudged back again early the next morning,
gladly sacrificing for it most of his night’s rest. Very generous
subscriptions (considering their deep poverty) were made in aid of
our work. Three on that evening expressed their new purpose to live
for Christ, by joining the Association of Christian Chinese—an act
which involves a confession of Christ quite as explicit as, among
us, attends reception to the church.

Lack of space forbids that I speak particularly of the other points
visited, except to say that we had in Stockton, after the school
session was ended—that is from 9 to 10:30 P. M.—a meeting with the
pupils at which the presence of the Spirit was manifest to us all,
and _seventeen_ rose to express their full purpose to leave all and
follow Christ.

I conclude with a single extract from a letter from Hong Sing, our
helper at Santa Cruz, in which he speaks of several attempts of his
heathen countrymen to catch him in his words. I ask our friends to
read it, remembering that Hong Sing is a house-servant, working in
the kitchen all day and teaching and preaching at night:

“I write a few words to tell you how we won the seven souls last
month. Since they found the way of light, and so they came with
us, with the same mind to worship the true God. Their cousins and
acquaintances are full of hatred, and try many ways to make fun of
them, to entice them to give up the worship of the Lord God. So was
fulfilled the word our Lord has said: ‘When men shall revile you
and speak evil of you for my sake.’ Sometimes one or two come to
argue with me after the school has closed, and pick out the hardest
questions to ask me—as this one: ‘Who made that God in Heaven? for
you said, only one God; where that one made from?’ I answer them:
‘Suppose you count anything, do not you say, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so
on? Now, 1,000 come that way from 100; 100 come from 10, and 10
come up from 1; 1 is the beginning. If we add one more, that would
be two. If that _one_ God made from another God. So we go on—no
end; but we all worship that only _One_ that is at the beginning,
who made all things.’ Then their tongues silent.”

Was it not “given him what he should say?”

                                                   WM C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSIONS IN CHINA.

The Chinese Government has issued instructions to the local
Governors, in pursuance of which these officials have put forth
proclamations warning the people against the persecution of
missionaries and Christians.

“Know all men,” says the Governor of Che-Kiang, “that the sole
object of establishing chapels is to exhort men to do right; those
who embrace Christianity do not cease to be Chinese, and both sides
should therefore continue to live in peace, and not let mutual
jealousies be the cause of strife between them.”

Likewise Kung, the Governor of the province in which Shanghai is
situated, after explaining that, under the treaties, missionaries
have the right to hold land and houses, on lease, and to travel
about and preach, “their sole aim being the inculcation of the
practice of virtue, and having no design of interfering with the
business of the people,” goes on to say: “Such of the subjects
of China as wish to become converts may lawfully do so, and as
long as they abstain from evil doings there is no law prescribing
inquisition into, or prohibition of, their actions.” For the
destruction of chapels and houses, in disturbances increased “by
local vagabonds and bad characters,” summary vengeance will be
taken. “Bear in mind,” adds the Governor, “that when missionaries
live in the midst of your villages you and they are mutually in
the relationship of host and guest. Under ordinary circumstances
it is your foremost duty to act toward them with courtesy and
forbearance. Should any misunderstanding arise, let each submit
his side to the local authorities, and on no account give rein to
ill-considered resentment, and fall, owing to the impulse of a
moment, in the net of the law.”

When we think of the sentiments that even some Christians in this
country hold regarding the Chinese, and when we think of the
treatment the Chinese have received at the hands of our nation, the
reading of the above is enough to make our faces crimson with shame
not unmingled with indignation.

                                                       SELECTED.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

Our work is to preach the gospel and all that this implies. The
gospel of Jesus Christ reaches head, heart and hand. Anything
that is injurious to a human being, in any part of life, the
gospel condemns. Temperance is a gospel doctrine. It is one of
the great multitude of truths our missionaries proclaim. When in
this magazine we report progress in our work, we are reporting
progress in temperance, for that is a part of our work. If the word
“temperance” doesn’t always appear, it is simply for the same
reason that the words honesty, chastity and truth, are not always
appearing as words. They are always there in significance. It is
the work of the gospel to advance these virtues. We make a few
extracts showing the temperance interest as represented at some of
our mission stations:

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunday was a busy day. Our Sunday-school Temperance Workers held
a meeting at a little Methodist Church, called Providence Chapel.
The church was filled, and we had a very good programme. Several
little girls spoke temperance pieces, and some of them spoke very
beautifully and made a deep impression. Music and short, stirring
addresses, and printed selections, filled up the time, and some new
names were obtained for the pledge. The hardest task, almost, is to
induce the older men to give up tobacco, but some of them came to
that decision in the meeting. Providence Chapel is surrounded by
saloons. The noble and energetic pastor spoke to the children of
the Sunday-school in such words as these, “If your mother tells you
to go and get a glass of beer, you tell her ‘No.’ If she whips you,
come and tell me. I want to know who she is. Be brave enough to
tell her ‘No.’” Such words would sound very strange in some places,
but here they are needed, for some of those very mothers are
members of that church, but they are getting aroused. That meeting
Sunday did a great deal for them. It also did our young people
good, by giving them an opportunity to do something and feel that
they were doing something. The meeting was carried on entirely by
the colored people, except that one of the teachers helped make out
the programme, another played the organ and another made a short
address.

       *       *       *       *       *

Temperance is, just now, a subject of great interest in this
State. The Legislature have just voted to submit the question of
Prohibition to the people next fall. What a grand thing it would
be if Tennessee could become a Prohibition State. Our little
Sunday-school Temperance Workers are doing well. Our last meeting
was held at a large colored Methodist Church. The house was nearly
full, and we had a very enthusiastic meeting. Many of the children
spoke recitations very beautifully. We had music, essays, and some
words of counsel from the ministers of the two churches. Every one
seemed to be very much interested. Mr. J. C. Johnson, a prominent
white philanthropist of this city, was there, and seemed very much
pleased. He said he wished we would go to some church every Sunday
and thought we would do a great deal of good. The white temperance
leaders feel the importance of securing the negro vote on their
side, and such questions as these, which divide the white vote,
will go a long way toward securing the political rights of the
black man.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our regular studies in school is “Alcohol and Hygiene,”
and our class have become very much interested in it. One of the
class said to me a few days since, “I just thought people didn’t
drink because they did not want to become drunkards. I didn’t know
there was so much harm in it, but I am convinced now.” I think
this expression is the sentiment of the class. One of its members
who could not sign the pledge four months ago, did so at our last
meeting. She was influenced to the step by learning of the evil
wrought by alcohol.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Woman’s Christian Temperance Union was formed at Shelby, with
twelve members, and there will doubtless be four or five more
organized in other places, when the delegates can have proper
instructions, and in no better way can the influence of our
churches and work be felt, than in this direction. Nothing has
brought about such a desirable harmony as the temperance work in
churches of all denominations, and the mothers, wives and daughters
see more and more the necessity of uniting their influence against
intemperance.

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGLISH AS SHE IS “NOT” TAUGHT IN OUR SCHOOLS.

NOTES BY A MISSIONARY TEACHER.

“I would like to have you checktise him.”

“It is the most instructivest book I ever read.”

“May we walk circumspeckle!”

“She has come thousands of miles across the briny ocean to lift us
from our ignorancy and degradation.”

“I have outed [erased] my lesson from the blackboard.”

“I obedience my parents.”

“The avalanche [ambulance] has come.”

“She has come for her gosling.” [Gossamer].

“The preserved seats.”

“I don’t like a sit-up religion.” [In prayer].

“It was as neat a funeral as I ever went to.”

“Our much well-beloved classmate.”

“She is right smart better.”

“The sea air is very embracing.”

“Blessed are they that are prosecuted.”

“I have had to delay the correspondence on account of the
inclemency of my health.”

“Will you rest your hat?”

“I have the misery in my head.”

“I return you a board of thanks.”

“She is the mattress.” [Matron].

“I went to the exception.” [Reception].

“I don’t lean against [toward] the Episcopalians.”

“He had twenty compulsions.” [Convulsions].

“He is deceasted.”




FOR THE CHILDREN.


I am quite confident that some of our Northern little folks will
be glad to know how some of our little ones down here stand on the
temperance question. We commenced having Band of Hope meetings over
four years ago, but did not ask the children to sign the pledge for
many months, for these little ones don’t have temperance papas and
mammas to help them keep their pledges, so we did not wish them
to sign till they knew well what was expected of them. Over fifty
signed the first opportunity, and I came home with a very heavy
heart lest many signed because others did, and did not realize the
sacredness of their pledge. I felt especially worried about Johnny,
a little six-year-old, whose father kept a hotel and had many men
around him who drank. It wasn’t long before one of these men urged
Johnny to take a drink from his bottle. He took some in his mouth,
and then he thought of his pledge, and ran and spit it out; then
took some water and washed and washed his mouth.

Little bright-eyed Willie loved the taste of whisky, and his father
always gave him a sip of his drink. After he signed the pledge, he
so stoutly refused his father when he urged him to drink, that it
affected him so that he, too, has signed the pledge for one year.

Some little ones in another family, who had always had their
“toddies,” as they call it in this country, have been so true to
their pledges, refusing their grandfather, who urged them to drink
with him, that it has influenced their mother to think she can do
without whisky as a medicine, and to become an enthusiastic member
of our N. C. T. U. And so we see “a little child shall lead them.”

                                              MRS. A. A. MYERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MAY. 1887.


  MAINE, $380.20.

    Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         $20.00
    Bath. Winter St. Cong. Ch., 31.65; Central
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 30.00                               61.65
    Bridgton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        18.40
    Center Lebanon. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    Cornish. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Danville Junction. Mrs. Lucy W. Cobb                       0.50
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                 15.00
    Gorham. Sab. Sch., by Rev. S. H. Huntington,
      for _Selma, Ala._                                       10.00
    Gorham. Miss E. B. Emery, _for Macon, Ga._                 5.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. H. K. Baker                                5.00
    Harpswell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             14.00
    Monson. Rev. R. W. Emerson                                10.00
    New Gloucester. Cong. Ch.                                 74.00
    North Bridgton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        3.18
    Portland. Fourth Cong. Ch.                                 2.00
    Portland. Infant Class St. Lawrence St. Sab.
      Sch., _for Wilmington, N.C._                             1.50
    Rockland. Woman’s Home Miss’y Soc., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           20.00
    South Berwick. Miss Oaks’ S. S. Class, 2.57;
      Mrs. Lewis’ S. S. Class, 2; Miss McLellan’s
      S. S. Class, 75c., _for Wilmington, N.C._                5.32
    South Bridgton. Ladies’ M. Soc., by Mrs. Noah
      Sawyer, Treas.                                           5.00
    South Gardiner. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
    South Paris. Cong. Ch.                                     6.50
    Union. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  7.00
    Yarmouth. First Parish Ch.                                56.00
    York. Second Ch. and Soc.                                  5.15


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $584.60.

    Acworth. Cong. Soc.                                        9.81
    Derry. Nutfield Mission Circle, 50, _for
      Sch’p._, 3.75, _for New Dining Hall, Santee
      Indian M_.                                              53.75
    East Derry. MRS. MARY G. PIGEON, to const.
      herself L. M.                                           30.00
    East Derry. Miss Goldsmith and School _for
      Bird’s Nest Indian M_.                                   1.00
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch.                                          9.63
    Hampstead. Miss J. S. Eastman.                            10.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.00
    Keene. Second Cong. Ch.                                   15.40
    Lebanon. C. M. Baxter, _for Woman’s Work_                 75.00
    Littleton. First Cong. Ch.                                10.33
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Nashua. Pilgrim Ch.                                       88.59
    North Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      JOHN LEAVITT L. M.                                      30.00
    Northwood. Cong. Ch.                                      11.00
    Pembroke. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           7.39
    Pennacook. Rev. A. W. Fiske                                5.00
    Plaistow, N.H. and North Haverhill, Mass.
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., 126.80, and Mrs. Gyles
      Merrill, 50                                            176.80
    Rindge. Cong. Ch.                                         14.24
    West Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          22.66


  VERMONT, $553.62.

    Ascutneyville. Newton Gage and wife                       10.00
    Bradford. Mrs. C. D. Redington, _for McIntosh,
      Ga._, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                            5.00
    Cambridge. Madison Safford                                 5.00
    Charlotte. Ladies, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          22.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Coventry. Ladies of Cong. Ch., adl.                        2.00
    Dorset. Mrs. Wm. D. Marsh                                  5.00
    Enosburg. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs.
      Ellen D. Wild                                            6.30
    Fairlee. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs.
      Henry Fairbanks                                          5.00
    Georgia. Cong. Ch.                                        18.17
    Greensboro. Ladies, by Mrs. S. Knowlton, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          13.11
    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        10.77
    Jericho Center. Sab. Sch., for _McIntosh, Ga._             3.50
    Johnson. C. C. Stoddard                                    2.00
    Middlebury. Ladies, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                                     35.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.58
    Montpelier. Bethany Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    50.00
    New Haven. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                                     5.25
    North Cambridge. John Kinsley, 8; Sevign
      Kinsley 1                                                9.00
    Northfield. Mrs. Mary D. Smith                             4.50
    Putney. Bbl. of C., and 2 _for McIntosh, Ga._              2.00
    Quechee. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const.
      JOHN J. DEWEY L. M.                                     27.76
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch., by Mrs. M. A.
      Stranahan, _for McIntosh, Ga._                          20.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Ladies, by Mrs. Henry
      Fairbanks, _for McIntosh, Ga._                         165.50
    Salisbury. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                    15.00
    Waitsfield. Cong. Ch.                                     15.52
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch.                                       8.66
    Wells River. C. W. Eastman                                 5.00
    Weston. Cong. Ch.                                          6.00
    Weston. L. P. Bartlett, 2; Mrs. S. A. Sprague,
      2; C. W. Sprague, 1, “In memory of J.
      Bartlett”                                                5.00
    West Woodstock. Rev. Wm. S. Lewis and Mrs. E.
      W. Lewis, to const. H. T. FLETCHER L. M.                30.00
    Woodstock. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                                     6.00
    Worcester. “Friends,” _for McIntosh, Ga._                  6.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $11,244.35.

    Amesbury. Main St. Cong. Ch.                              17.33
    Amherst. William M. Graves, 20; “A Friend,”
      10; Rev. G. S. Dickerman, 10                            40.00
    Andover. Free Christian Ch., to const. LEVI C.
      YOUNG L. M.                                             54.00
    Andover. Phillips Academy, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Andover. Mrs. Wm. Abbott, Box of C., etc.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Barre. Y. P. C. E. S. _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             15.00
    Bernardston. Cong. Ch.                                     3.82
    Boston. Miss Ida Mason and Miss E. F. Mason,
      1700.; Joshua W. Davis, 150.; Alpheus Hardy,
      50; Saml. Johnson. 50; J. N. Denison, 50; H.
      D. Hyde, 50; E. P. Bond, 20; Frank Wood, 50;
      _for Hospital among the Sioux Indians_               2,120.00
    Boston. Central Ch., 998.01; Samuel B. Capen,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._, 50; Mrs. E.
      P. Eayrs, 5; J. L. Stone, _for Student Aid,
      Thomasville, Ga._ 1; ———— Dorchester, Mrs.
      E. J. W. Baker, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._,
      60; Mrs. Nathan Carruth, 50; Collected by M.
      A. Tuttle, _for Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_, 3;
      ———— Roxbury. Walter S. Tower, 10                    1,177.01
    Cambridge. Prof. J. Henry Thayer, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                     20.00
    Chelsea. Central Ch. and Soc.                             23.31
    Cummington. Mrs. H. M. Porter, _for Macon, Ga._            1.00
    Dalton. Cong. Ch.                                         93.14
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         176.06
    Dedham. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00
    East Cambridge. Mary F. Aiken, _for Expressage_            0.25
    East Charlemont. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.13
    Florence. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                   12.70
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                         79.23
    Framingham. Primary Class, Plymouth Ch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       3.00
    Franklin. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MISS JENNIE P. BAKER L. M., 30; Soc. of
      Christian Endeavor, 7                                   37.00
    Greenfield. Infant Class, Miss S. Sparhawk,
      Teacher, _for Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._            7.00
    Greenfield. E. B. Billings                                 3.00
    Hardwick. Cal. Ch.                                        10.00
    Hatchville. Mrs. Vinal N. Hatch                            1.00
    Hatfield. Rev. R. W. Woods, _for Selma, Ala._              3.00
    Haverhill. Dr. John Crowell’s S. S. Class,
      Center Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                  30.00
    Holliston. Class of Boys, Cong. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          2.00
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4.”             30.00
    Hyde Park. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       32.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                 50.00
    Lee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                               75.00
    Lee. Young Girls’ Prayer Meeting, First Cong.
      Ch., ad’l, _for Indian M._                               6.00
    Lowell. Eliot Ch.                                         35.33
    Mansfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        5.75
    Maplewood. Infant Class, Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Wilmington, N.C._                              1.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                       64.00
    Medfield. M. C. Colt. Cong. Ch.                            7.00
    Medford. Mystic Ch. and Soc., to const. MISS
      LUCILLE LEGERWOOD, CHAS. A. DOW, WM. M.
      SAWIN and CHAS. N. GOODRICH, L. M’s.                   156.48
    Melrose. Sarah J. Elder, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Middleton. Ladies’ H. M. Soc., by C. A. Berry,
      Sec., _for Tougaloo U._                                  5.00
    Millbury. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                25.00
    Mill River. Melissa R. Wilcox                             10.00
    Montague. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    New Bedford (Acushnet). First Cong. Ch.                   81.75
    Newbury. M. C. Coll. First Ch.                            22.69
    Newburyport. Belleville Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      65.19; North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 50                    115.19
    Newton. Freedmen’s Aid Soc. Circle, _for
      Freight_                                                 2.00
    Newton Center. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                           50.00
    Newton Center. Maria B. Furber Miss’y Soc.,
      _for Oahe Indian Sch._                                  20.00
    Northampton. A. L. Williston, 525; Edwards Ch.
      Benev. Soc., 202.50                                    727.50
    North Brookfield. Sab. Sch. of First Cong.
      Ch., _for Indian M._                                    50.00
    North Brookfield. “Friends,” by Miss A. W.
      Johnson, _for Indian M._                                20.80
    Plymouth. Ch. of the Pilgrimage and Soc.                  77.21
    Plymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for the
      Debt_                                                   10.00
    Reading. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.50
    Royalston. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Salem. Young Ladies Miss’y Soc. of South Ch.,
      _for Woman’s Work_                                      40.00
    Scituate. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  6.85
    Somerville. “M”                                           25.00
    Somerville. “Lower Lights,” of Prospect St.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Straight U._                     10.00
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch., (30 of
      which _for Indian M_)                                  244.81
    South Weymouth. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  53.30
    Spencer. S. S. Class, by Mrs Geo. H. Marsh,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          9.00
    Springfield. MISS CARRIE E. BOWDOIN bal. to
      const. herself L. M.                                    10.00
    Stoneham. Miss P. Stevens                                  2.00
    Sutton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                24.00
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         23.24
    Ware. East Cong Ch. to const. J. H. APPERSON,
      CLARENCE L. ROBERTS, FREDERICK E. FAIRBANKS,
      HATTIE OWEN and HELEN A. CUMMINGS L. M’s.              414.29
    Wareham. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 47.20; “A
      Friend,” 20                                             67.20
    Warren. Mrs. Joseph Ramsdell. _for Chinese M._             5.00
    Warren. “A Friend,” _for Debt_                             1.00
    Watertown. Sab. Sch. of Phillips Ch., _for
      Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 50.00
    Watertown. Sew. Cir. of Phillips Ch., _for
      Freight_                                                 2.67
    Wellesley. Cong. Ch., adl.                                 1.00
    West Acton. Rev. J. W. Brown                               5.00
    West Boxford. Miss Sarah P. Foster’s S. S.
      Class, _for Student Aid, Thomasville, Ga._               2.00
    West Boylston. Chas. T. White.                             3.00
    West Bridgewater. C. T. Williams                           2.00
    Westfield. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   59.00
    Westfield. Mrs. C. W. Fowler                               7.00
    West Gloucester. Mrs. Abby F. Keyes                        5.00
    West Medway. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    14.27
    West Springfield. Mrs. Lucy M. Bagg, Bbl. of
      C., _for Tougaloo U._
    West Stockbridge Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.              23.50
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            25.00
    Woburn. Social Benev. Soc., _for Freight_                  0.72
    Worcester. “A. N. X”.                                     50.00
    By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass’n:
        Monson                                      20.00
        Springfield. First                          25.00
        Springfield. North                          30.56
        Springfield. Olivet                         42.69
        West Springfield. Park St., _for Marie
          Adlof Sch’p Fund_                         50.00
                                                   ——————    168.25
    ————. “A Friend,” to const., MRS. SARAH
      MOULTON L. M.                                           30.00
    ————. “A Friend”                                           1.00
                                                            ———————
                                                          $7,141.28

    LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of George Punchard, by Ezra L.
      Woodbury, Trustee                                      763.50
    Groton. Estate of George Farnsworth, by Ezra
      Farnsworth, Ex.                                      3,000.00
    Malden. Estate of Wm. H. Aiken, M.D., “In
      Memoriam” by his sister MARY F. AIKEN, (30
      of which to const. herself L. M.) _for
      Boarding Hall, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                   339.57
                                                          —————————
                                                         $11,244.35

    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

    Willard, Me. 1 Bbl., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
    Swanton, Vt. 1 Bundle.
    Boston, Mass. C. A. Richardson, Miscellaneous
      Vol’s.
    Cambridgeport, Mass. Miss Lucena Palmer, Box
      Patchwork, _for Louisville, Ky._
    Reading, Mass. Bbl. and Box, _for Macon, Ga._
    Sandwich, Mass. “Friends,” 1 Case.
    Woburn, Mass. Ladies Social Benev. Soc. 1 Bbl.
      _for Louisville, Ky._


  RHODE ISLAND.

    Arnold Mills. H. A. Bishop, Raspberry plants,
      _for Talladega C._


  CONNECTICUT, $1,615.27.

    Abington. Pkg. of Cards, by Miss D. E. Marcy,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Ansonia. First Cong. Ch., 28; Mrs. Luke Downs,
      2                                                       30.00
    Bridgeport. South Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.26
    Clintonville. “Thank Offering”                            35.00
    Colchester. Ladies Soc. of Cong Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          23.40
    East Haddam. First. Cong. Ch.                             85.85
    East Hampton. Dea. S. Skinner, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Enfield. Daniel H. Abbe                                    5.00
    Essex. Girls Soc., “Whatsoevers,” Bbl. of C.,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                50.00
    Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                         16.50
    Hartford. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Fourth Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Hebron. Mrs. Edwin T. Smith                                1.50
    Killingworth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                       9.00
    Lakeville. L. M. S., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._            2.00
    Long Ridge. Cong. Ch.                                      1.00
    Mansfield Centre. First Cong. Ch.                         12.00
    Meriden. “M. C.”                                           1.00
    New Haven. Mrs. J. A. Dickerman, 100; Prof. J.
      L. Ensign, 10; “True Blue” Card, by Fannie
      Treat, Collector, 5; Taylor Ch., 3.75                  118.75
    Newington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                61.08
    New Preston. Ch. in New Preston, by Miss Julia
      Averill, Collector                                      54.00
    Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 20, _for
      Santee Indian Sch., aid of a boy,_ and 42
      _for Rosebud Indian M._                                 62.00
    North Guilford. Cong. Ch.                                 35.00
    Norwich. James Dana Coit, _for Rosebud Indian
      M._                                                      1.00
    Norwich. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Thomasville,
      Ga._
    Norwichtown. “First Ch.*”                                 28.50
    Plainville. Cong. Ch., 59.53, to const. MISS
      JENNIE HAMLIN and MISS BERTHA HAMLIN L. M’s.
      A memorial gift, by Mrs. T. M. Darrow                   59.53
    Roxbury. “A Thankful Daughter’s offering on
      her Mother’s 100th birthday”                             5.00
    Sherman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.00
    South Canaan. “Friends,” _for Rosebud Indian
      M._                                                      1.00
    Southington. Mrs. James P. Dickerman, _for
      Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                             20.00
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    South Norwalk. Cong. Ch., to const. HUBERT H.
      BOOTH and MRS. EMMA QUINTARD L. M’s.                   105.06
    Southport. “Friend”                                        5.00
    Stafford Springs. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Student Aid. Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Stratford. Mrs. Peter P. Curtiss _for Debt_                5.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch.                                     92.00
    Terryville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. adl., _for
      Sch’p Santee Indian Sch._                               17.50
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Thompson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              17.28
    Wallingford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                              50.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch.                                         18.00
    Washington. “A Friend”                                    10.00
    Westchester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       3.50
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        6.56
    West Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                 50.00
    ————. “A Friend in Conn.”                                200.00
    Woman’s Home Mission’y Union of Conn., by Mrs.
      S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec., _for Conn. Ind’l Sch.
      Ga._:
    Fairfield. Ladies Soc.                                    25.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,415.27

    LEGACY.

    New Britain. Estate of Mrs. Emma C. Judd, by
      Levi S. Wells, Ex.                                     200.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,615.27


  NEW YORK, $3,453.16.

    Brooklyn. Russell Sturgis, Jr., 25; H. M.
      Wiggins, 1                                              26.00
    Cambria Center. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                     7.00
    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                        6.00
    Cortland. H. M. Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Freight_                                                 2.85
    Deer River. Cong. Ch.                                      4.50
    Dexterville. Mrs. O. King                                  5.00
    Flushing. Sab Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           40.00
    Granby Center. J. C. Harrington                           10.00
    Ithaca. First Cong. Ch.                                   75.83
    Maine Village. Cong. Ch.                                  23.00
    New York. Broadway Tab. Ch., add’l (30 of
      which to const. J. T. LEAVITT L. M.)                   725.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon. 100; F. De Clare, 1              101.00
    New York. Rev. W. R. Huntington. D.D., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                40.00
    New York. Mrs. H. B. Spelman, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    New York. Mrs. F. B. Austin, 1; Mrs. V. M.
      Hackley, 1, _for Student Aid, Thomasville,
      Ga._                                                     2.00
    North Granville. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    North Walton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                      12.60
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.21
    Otto. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Pekin. Miss Oliva Root, 4; Louisa Coleman,
      _for Bibles_, 1                                          5.00
    Perry Center. Cong. Ch. (30 of which from Mrs.
      Catharine W. Butler, to const. MISS ELMA C.
      BUTLER L. M.)                                           50.00
    Rochester. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                36.75
    Rochester. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Plym. Ch., Bbl.
      of C., Table Linen, etc., and 12 Silver Tea
      Spoons, _for Macon, Ga._
    Sherburn. Cong. Ch., 15; “A Friend,” 10                   25.00
    South Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                 13.00
    Thiells. J. H. Cassedy, _for Cassedy School
      Building, Talladega, Ala._                           2,000.00
    Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Ch.                            5.00
    Wellsville. First Cong. Ch.                               27.32
    West Bloomfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
      Birthday offerings, _for Macon, Ga._                    16.75
    Westmoreland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                 2.25
    Yorkshire. R. W. Lyman                                     1.10
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of N.Y., by Mrs.
      L. H. Cobb, Treas., _for Woman’s Work:_
    Woodville. Ladies’ Aux.                                   20.00


  NEW JERSEY, $725.75.

    Arlington. Mrs. G. Overarce, _for Debt_                    5.00
    East Orange. Sab. Sch. of Grove St. Ch., _for
      Ind’l Sch., Williamsburg, Ky._                          50.00
    East Orange. “Willing Workers,” Grove St. Ch.,
      Box of C., etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Montclair. First Cong. Ch., 540; First Cong.
      Ch. Sab. Sch., 100                                     640.00
    Paterson. Auburn St. Cong. Ch.                            15.75
    Perth Amboy. “K’s Thank-offering for 95th
      Birthday, 10, and for 95th Christmas, 5”                15.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $64.00.

    East Springfield. Mrs. C. J. Cowles                        4.00
    Philadelphia. Bethany Mission Band, by Mrs. W.
      S. How                                                  15.00
    Philadelphia. Elizabeth Morris, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        10.00
    Scranton. F. E. Nettleton, to const. MRS.
      MARION F. NETTLETON L. M.                               35.00


  OHIO, $798.87.

    Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. GEORGE
      W. WELDY L. M.                                          33.34
    Berea. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., Box
      Reading Matter, _for Macon, Ga._
    Cincinnati. Ladies of Walnut Hills Cong. Ch.,
      by Mrs. M. L. Simpson, _for Ind’l Sch.
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                     100.00
    Cincinnati. Storrs Cong. Ch.                               1.00
    Cleveland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch. 20.24;
      L. H. Severance, 1                                      21.24
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch.                                212.70
    Fredericksburg. First Cong. Ch.                            6.00
    Geneva. First Cong. 25, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._, 12, _for Grand View Normal Inst.
      Tenn._, and to const. DEA. GEO. F. SADD L. M.           37.00
    Kent. Sab. Sch, of Cong. Ch., _for Oahe,
      Indian M._                                              10.00
    Kinsman. Presb. and Cong. Ch’s., _for Student
      Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                                 16.15
    Lindenville. James McGranahan, Organ, val.
      125., _for Chapel, South Williamsburg, Ky._
    Litchfield. MRS. MARY S. CLAPP, bal. to const.
      herself L. M.                                           15.00
    Lorain. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.00
    Madison. Mrs. H. B. Frazer, _for Talladega C._           100.00
    Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                                  3.70
    Medina. L. Nettleton, 10; Gaylord Thomson, 15;
      Mrs. Gaylord Thomson, 5; to const. WARREN
      ANDERSON L. M., “Boys Mission Band” John A.
      Sipher, Sec., 5                                         35.00
    Medina. “Friends,” 2 Bbls. of C., _for Macon,
      Ga._
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.60
    Norwalk. “Friends” in Cong. Ch., Testaments
      val. 8, _for Little Rock, Ark._
    Ravenna. Cong. Ch.                                        24.08
    Ridgeville. “Friend,” 10, _for Williamsburg,
      Ky._, Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 3, _for
      Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                         13.00
    Steubenville. First. Cong. Ch.                             4.56
    Strongsville. Cong. Soc., _for Freight_                    1.50
    Tallmadge. First Cong. Ch.                               100.00
    Wellington. Edward West                                   20.00
    Williamsfield. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                          4.00
    Willoughby. Mary P. Hastings                              25.00


  ILLINOIS, $734.34.

    Amboy. J. P. Thorne, papers and pamphlets,
      _for Talladega C._
    Aurora. S. B. Dykeman                                      2.00
    Chicago. South Cong. Ch.                                 145.31
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, _for Atlanta U._              300.00
    Chicago. W. H. M. U. of South Cong. Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           55.00
    Chicago. Miss Hannah Brown, _for Kindergarten,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            5.00
    Forrest. Cong. Ch.                                        20.32
    Galena. Mrs. Ann Bean                                      2.00
    Joliet. Rev. S. Penfield                                   5.00
    La Grange. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                  5.21
    Lombard. First Ch.                                         6.25
    Maywood. W. C. Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Woman’s Work_                                            5.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. W. Jackson                             5.00
    Newark. Mrs. Fielding Haverhill                            1.00
    New Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                     5.40
    Nora. L. S. Bishop                                         3.00
    Oak Park. “A Friend,” _for Debt_                           5.00
    Ottawa. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                30.22
    Princeton. Mrs. S. C. Clapp, 25: “An old
      friend of the oppressed,” 5                             30.00
    Rio. Cong. Ch.                                             7.30
    Shirland. Cong. Ch.                                        8.00
    Springfield. “A Friend,” _for McIntosh, Ga._              20.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Ill. by Mrs.
      B. F. Leavitt, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Chicago. Leavitt St. Ch.                     1.43
        Lombard. W. M. S.                           12.00
        Millburn. L. M. Soc.                        25.00
        Rockford. L. M. Soc., First Ch.             20.15
        Thawville. L. H. and F. M. Soc.              3.75
                                                   ——————     62.33


  MICHIGAN, $353.48.

    Alma. Mrs. L. A. Van Antwerp                               1.00
    Ann Arbor. “A Friend,” by W. W. Wines, 30;
      Mrs. C. S. Cady, 1                                      31.00
    Cheboygan. Cong. Ch.                                       4.93
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
    Covert. Sinclair Sab. Sch. and Cong. Ch.                   9.00
    Greenville. Mrs. R. L. Ellsworth                          10.00
    Hancock. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              50.00
    Lake Linden. Cong. Ch., Sab. Sch. 20; Easter
      Coll., 12; “King’s Daughters,” 10, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              42.00
    Leslie. Cong. Ch.                                          6.97
    Litchfield. L. M. S., _for Athens, Ala._                  14.00
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                      23.08
    Middleville. Cong. Ch.                                     1.75
    New Baltimore. “A Disciple”                               10.00
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                       2.25
    South Haven. Clark Pierce                                 12.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Soc. of Mich. by Mrs.
      E. F. Grabill, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Cheboygan. W. H. M. S.                       3.00
        West Adrian. Women                          12.50
                                                   ——————     15.50
                                                             ——————
                                                             253.48
    LEGACY.

    Birch Run. Estate of Lavonius Gray, through
      Mrs. Dr. W. C. Palmer, Trustee                         100.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $353.48


  WISCONSIN, $257.58.

    Beloit. Lyman Meacham                                      5.00
    Bristol and Paris. Cong. Ch.                              22.25
    Hammond. Rev. J. F. Malcolm                                5.00
    Koshkonong. Cong. Ch.                                      3.42
    La Crosse. First Cong. Ch.                                49.27
    Lake Geneva. Milo Barnard and wife                        25.00
    Lake Geneva. Y. P. M. S., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Menomonie. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Marie
      Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                        9.60
    Racine. First Presb. Ch.                                  30.13
    Ripon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., box and bbl. of
      C., _for Macon, Ga._
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch., 16.57, and Sab. Sch. 5.09           21.66
    Viroqua. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., half bbl. of C.,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wis. _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Broadhead. Mrs. S. T. Sherman                5.00
        Elkhorn. W. H. M. S., Thank-offering Box     3.50
        Platteville. W. H. M. S                      5.75
        Ripon. W. H. M. S.                          20.00
        Stoughton. Cong. S. S. Birthday Box          2.00
        Waukesha. Y. P. S. C. E                     20.00
        Windsor. W. M. S.                            5.00
                                                   ——————     61.25


  IOWA, $288.25.

    Cherokee. R. H. Scribner, to const. JOHN KIRBY
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 17.65
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                        15.01
    Grinnell. Rev. S. G. Brainerd                             10.00
    Humboldt. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Iowa City. Cong. Ch.                                      20.75
    Lake City. E. P. Longhead                                  1.00
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch., by Miss Mary C. Shaw,
      Sec.                                                    29.38
    Nashua. Cong. Ch.                                         11.05
    Oldfield. Sab. Sch of Highland Cong. Ch.                   5.33
    Sheldon. Cong. Ch.                                         7.00
    Tipton. “Little Light-burners,” _for Macon,
      Ga._                                                     5.00
    Tipton. Rev. A. G. Brande, _for the Debt_                  5.00
    Tyrone. Mrs. Mary A. Payne                                 1.25
    Woman’s Home Mission’y Union of Iowa, _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Charles City. Ladies’ Soc.                  20.00
        Chester Center. Ladies’ Soc.                 8.25
        Davenport. Ladies’ Soc. of Edwards Ch.      26.00
        Dubuque. Y. L. Soc.                         10.00
        Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                        6.63
        Iowa City. “Gleaners”                        5.00
        Iowa Falls. Ladies’ Mite Soc.                2.00
        Le Mars. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                  9.45
        McGregor. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                 5.95
        Mitchellville. Miss S. A. M. Demorest        5.00
        Montour. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                  4.85
        Osage. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                    1.20
        Postville. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                5.00
        Rock Rapids. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.              5.50
        Tipton. Ladies’ H. M. Soc.                  10.00
                                                   ——————    124.83


  MINNESOTA, $267.55.

    Minneapolis. Lyndale Cong. Ch., 19.51;
      Plymouth Ch., 19; Second Cong. Ch., 15.67;
      Vine Ch., 10                                            64.18
    Northfield. Rev. E. M. Williams, _for Memphis,
      Tenn._                                                  10.00
    Plainview. W. U. M. Soc., _for Jonesboro,
      Tenn._                                                   4.50
    Saint Paul. “Memorial,” 30; “H,” 20                       50.00
    Winona. First Con. Ch.                                    30.81
    Woman’s Minn. Home Missionary Soc., by Mrs. J.
      N. Cross, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Elk River. W. M. S. of Union Ch.            11.00
        Minneapolis. Plym. Ch., W. H. M. S.         57.41
        Minneapolis. Plym. Ch., Y. L. M. S.          4.50
        Saint Paul. Park Ch. W. M. S., to const.
          MRS. CAROLINE K. SEAVER L. M.             30.00
        Waseca. W. M. S.                             5.15
                                                   ——————    108.06


  MISSOURI, $275.85.

    Saint Louis. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 200.05, and
      Mon. Con. in charge of Y. P. S. C. E., 18              218.05
    Saint Louis. Fifth Cong. Ch.                              20.25
    Sedalia. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.10
    Springfield. Central Cong. Ch.                            12.45


  KANSAS, $84.96.

    Burlington. First Cong. Ch.                               12.50
    Cora. Cong. Ch.                                            8.50
    Diamond Springs. Cong. Ch.                                 8.55
    Meriden. J. Rutty                                         10.00
    Olathe. Cong. Ch.                                          5.76
    Sedgwick. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                  1.65
    Topeka. First Cong. Ch., 23; Pres. Peter
      McVicker, 15                                            38.00


  DAKOTA, $48.88.

    Chamberlain. Cong. Ch.                                     8.00
    Huron. First Cong. Ch.                                    40.88


  COLORADO, $5.90.

    Denver. Second Cong. Ch.                                   5.90


  NEBRASKA, $81.13.

    Hastings. “An Old Friend”                                 12.00
    Hastings. Geo. Whicher’s S. S. Class, _for
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Omaha. Mrs. Reuben Gaylord, 20; Hillside Cong.
      Ch., 5.63                                               25.63
    Oxford. F. A. Wood                                         5.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                        6.50
    Santee Agency. Miss Edith Leonard, 20; Miss M.
      W. Greene, 2                                            22.00
    Wahoo. Cong. Ch.                                           6.00
    Wymore. Eunice M. Clark, _for Student Aid,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            2.00


  CALIFORNIA, $555.00.

    Ferndale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          21.00
    Los Angeles. Mrs. Belle E. Holcombe                       24.00
    National City. Theron Parsons                            500.00
    Stockton. Rev. J. C. Holbrook, D.D.                       10.00


  OREGON, $53.00.

    Portland. First Cong. Ch., 23; A. S. Frank,
      30, to const. REV. T. E. CLAPP L. M.                    53.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $25.90.

    Chewelaw. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Medical Lake. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Seattle. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Athens, Ala._                                      10.00
    Seattle. Ladies of Plymouth Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga._; 90c. _for Freight_               0.90


  NEW MEXICO, $30.00.

    Santa Fe. PROF. ELLIOT WHIPPLE, to const.
      himself L. M.                                           30.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $65.39.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                               25.21
    Washington. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                25.00
    Washington. Mon. Con. Coll., Howard U.                    15.18


  MARYLAND, $193.50.

    Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                               193.50


  KENTUCKY, $102.50.

    Williamsburg. Tuition                                    102.50


  TENNESSEE, $976.21.

    Grand View. Tuition                                       45.00
    Jellico. Tuition                                          26.00
    Jonesboro. Tuition                                         2.00
    Memphis. Tuition                                         358.90
    Memphis. A. J. Steele, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     60.00
    Nashville. Tuition                                       474.31
    Nashville. J. F. Black                                    10.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $243.93.

    Asheville. “S.,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._            50.00
    Dudley. Cong. Ch., 1; Tuition, 1.75                        2.75
    Melville. Sab. Sch., by S. A Paris                         1.15
    Raleigh. Rev. G. S. Smith and wife, 10; Mrs.
      Annie F. Hamlin, 5; Edward A. Johnson, 5;
      Ella Baker Hackney, 2.50, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             22.50
    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            1.00
    Wilmington. Tuition                                      156.65
    Wilmington. By Miss H. L. Fitts, 6; by Miss E.
      A. Warner, 2                                             8.00
    Wilmington. Dea. A. Pedan’s S. S. Class, _for
      Indian M._                                               1.88


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $190.50.

    Charleston. Tuition                                      190.50


  GEORGIA, $1,111.55.

    Atlanta. “Friends,” 378.50; Gen’l. J. R.
      Lewis, 25, _for Atlanta U._                            403.50
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch. Tuition                             303.00
    Atlanta. Unknown                                           5.00
    Macon. Tuition, 175.45; Rent, 1                          176.45
    Marietta. Cong. Ch., 2; Sab. Sch., 1                       3.00
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         20.00
    McIntosh. Miss Robertson’s Mission Sch. _for
      Indian M._                                               5.10
    Savannah. Tuition                                        144.95
    Thomasville. Tuition                                      50.55


  FLORIDA, $25.00.

    Saint Augustine. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00


  ALABAMA, $346.13.

    Athens. Tuition                                           41.45
    Citronelle. Mrs. N. C. Schwarzaur, _for
      Talladega C._                                            1.33
    Marion. Nora L. Olin                                       1.00
    Mobile. Tuition                                          218.40
    Talladega. Tuition                                        83.95


  LOUISIANA, $93.67.

    New Orleans. S. B. Steers, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    New Orleans. Teachers and Students of Straight
      U., “Thank Offering”                                    43.67


  MISSISSIPPI, $220.65.

    Tougaloo. Tuition, 190; Rent, 30.65                      220.65


  TEXAS, $246.70.

    Austin. Tuition                                          244.85
    Dodd City. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., _for Tougaloo U._            1.85


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Montreal. “C. A.”                                          5.00


  NEW ZEALAND, $52.25.

    New Zealand. Christ Church, F. J. Louden, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._, £11                              52.25


  INCOMES, $1,500.00.

    Avery Fund _for Mendi M._                                 87.50
    De Forest Fund _for President’s Chair,
      Talladega C._                                          337.50
    Hammond Fund _for Straight U._                           125.00
    Howard Theo. Fund _for Howard U._                        600.00
    La Moyne Fund _for Memphis. Tenn._                        50.00
    Luke Mem. Sch’p Fund _for Talladega C._                   10.00
    Scholarship Fund _for Straight U._                        47.50
    Talladega Endowment Fund, _for President’s
      Chair, Talladega C._                                    37.50
    Talladaga College Sch’p Fund                              50.00
    Tuthill King Fund _for Atlanta U._                       125.00
    Tuthill King Fund _for Berea C._                          25.00
    Yale Library Fund _for Talledega C._                       5.00
                                                         ==========
    Donations                                            $19,091.44
    Legacies                                               4,403.07
    Tuition and Rents                                      2,860.11
    Incomes                                                1,500.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total for May                                    $27,854.62
        Total from Oct. 1 to May 31                      181,693.07
                                                         ==========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for May                                    $31.88
    Previously acknowledged                                  740.86
                                                            ———————
        Total                                               $772.74

                                H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                               56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                Word-Studies in the New Testament.

                    By MARVIN R. VINCENT, D.D.

  The Synoptic Gospels, Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles of
                Peter, James and Jude, 8vo. $4.00.


               _The_ REV. DR. HOWARD CROSBY _says_:

Dr. Vincent’s “Word-Studies in the New Testament” is a delicious
book. As a Greek scholar, a clear thinker, a logical reasoner, a
master in English, and a devout sympathizer with the truths of
revelation, Dr. Vincent is just the man to interest and edify
the Church with such a work as this. Thousands will take delight
in handling the gems which he has brought to view by his careful
research and judicious discrimination. There are few scholars who,
to such a degree as Dr. Vincent, mingle scholarly attainment with
aptness to impart knowledge in attractive form. All Bible-readers
should enjoy and profit by these delightful “Word-Studies.”


_The_ REV. THEODORE L. CUTLER, D.D., _in the New York Evangelist_.

A huge wagon, packed and piled with the golden sheaves of many
years of thorough Bible research, is this precious volume. It is
not a commentary. It is not a dictionary. It is not a series of dry
scraps on philology or lexicography. It is not a cyclopedia for
lazy ministers to crib sermons from. It is just like no other work
on the New Testament that we can find elsewhere, and therefore it
fills a niche that has hitherto been left empty. The very things
which a young minister—and many an older one, also—ought to know
about the chief _words_ in his New Testament, he will be able to
learn in this affluent volume.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE SELF-REVELATION OF GOD.

            By SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., LL.D, Professor of
               Systematic Theology in Yale College.

8vo, uniform with the “Philosophical Basis of Theism.” $3.50.

“Such a work is not brought out in a day, but is the growth
of years of professional study and reflection. Few books on
Apologetics have been recently produced that will be more
influential and formative upon the mind of the theological or
philosophical student, or more useful.”—Prof. W’M. G. T. SHEDD,
D.D., _in the Presbyterian Review_.

“We do not know a better work among recent publications than this
one for building up old hopes and giving a new strength to one’s
faith. The book is thoroughly evangelic, fresh, and well wrought
out.”—BISHOP HURST, _in Northwestern Christian Advocate_.

“The extent of literary, philosophical and theological learning
which the work displays is remarkable. The style is vigorous,
luminous, finished, and sometimes brilliant.”—_Boston Daily
Advertiser._

                 *       *       *       *       *


                   History of Modern Philosophy.

                     DESCARTES AND HIS SCHOOL.

By KUNO FISCHER. Translated by J. P. GORDY. Edited by NOAH PORTER.
8vo. $3.50.

“It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of this work. The
author is remarkable for the lucidity, order, and thoroughness
of his expositions, and is by far the best historian of modern
philosophy.”—_Boston Beacon._


                   SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY.

                      By ARCHIBALD ALEXANDER,
           Professor of Philosophy in Columbia College.
                           12mo. $1.00.

“For clearness and profundity of thought, deftness of presentation,
and lucidity of style, Professor Alexander’s book is not surpassed
by any philosophical work of similar scope in the language. It is
so simple, frank, and straightforward, that it will appeal to a
large class of thoughtful men.”—_Science._


[Illustration]

_These books for sale by all booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on
receipt of price, by_

                     CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS,
                _743-745 BROADWAY, NEW YORK CITY_.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              Liquid

                          Cottage Colors.


The best =MIXED PAINTS= manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are _heavy bodied_, and for
work that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned
(with our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover
better than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of
which have so little stock in them that they will not give a good
solid coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed
out there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent.
Our Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good
paint, should be worked out well under the brush. The covering
property of this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 8-gal. and 5-gal. bailed
buckets, also barrels; in cans of ⅛, ¼, ½, 1-gal. and 2-gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application
to

                   Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,

                   Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,

                           CHICAGO, ILL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

  Mark your
  Clothing!
  Clear Record
  of
  half a
  Century.

[Illustration:

  _PAYSON’S_
  INDELIBLE INK
  for marking Linen, Silk & Cotton
  WITH A COMMON PEN,
  Without a Preparation.

  PAYSON’S
  INDELIBLE
  INK]

  “Most Reliable and Simplest
  for plain or decorative
  marking.”

  Use a
  common
  pen.

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       WORKS OF RAY PALMER.

                         Poetry and Prose.

           By the late Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., author of
                   “My Faith Looks up to Thee.”

This generation has not seen a sweeter, purer life than Ray
Palmer’s. His words are a precious legacy. Read them.

                     COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS.

Hymns, Lyrics, and longer Poems, with Steel Portrait. 8vo, cloth,
gilt edges. Price, $2.50.

               REMEMBER ME; or, the Holy Communion.

Preparatory Lessons for the Communicant. 12mo, red line, cloth.
Price, $1.25.

                       TRUE SUCCESS IN LIFE.

Earnest Words in Short Sermons for Young and Old. 12mo, cloth.
Price, $1.

           HINTS ON THE FORMATION OF RELIGIOUS OPINIONS.

                      12mo. cloth. Price, $1.


                       Abbott on “Matthew.”

         An Illustrated Commentary for Christian Workers.

                      By Rev. L. ABBOTT, D.D.

                     8vo. cloth. Price, $1.75.

“It will rank among the best commentaries of the day.”—_Rev. Wm.
M. Taylor, D.D._ (Cong). “For quick reference on a minister’s
table, for help at family study, for aid in the Sunday-school
lesson, I should commend this as the best book I know.”—_Rev. C.
S. Robinson, D.D._, (Pres). “Students will be wise to possess
themselves of this help.”—_Bishop Foster_, (Meth.) “I have met with
nothing of the kind which, in my judgment, is so eminently adapted
to aid the earnest Sunday-school teacher in his preparation for
teaching.”—_Rev. R. R. Meredith, D.D._, (Cong.) “One of the ablest
commentaries of the century.”—_J. H. Vincent, D.D._, (Meth.)

                            NOW READY:

Matt., Mark and Luke, John, The Acts. 4 vols. Cloth. Price, $1.75
per vol.

[Illustration]

_For Sale by Booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on receipt of price by
the Publishers._

                  A. S. BARNES & CO., PUBLISHERS.

                       NEW YORK AND CHICAGO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Reliable Carpenter Organs

[Illustration]

Containing the Celebrated =Carpenter Organ Action=.

They are pure in tone, perfect in construction, in exact accord
with the voice, and full of patented improvements. More than 50
different styles, ranging in price from $20 up. WARRANTED FOR
8 YEARS. _Where we have no agent, Organs sold direct on easy
payments._ Buy no organ until you have seen our Catalogue. Free to
any address.

                       E. P. Carpenter Co.,

                  (Est. 1850.) =Brattleboro, Vt.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


=EUROPE TENTH SEASON.= The most enjoyable and economical excursions
ever planned. =More furnished for the money= than in =Any Tour yet
offered=. =All Travel and Hotels first-class.= COMPANY SELECT. By
the Palatial, Fast, New Steamship, =CITY OF ROME=.

  Send for circular free.       E. TOURJEE, Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


=Man Wanted= SALARY =$75= to =$100= for our business in his
section. Responsible house. References exchanged.

AM. M’F’G HOUSE, Lock Box 1585. N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


            CHARMING STORIES.      INSTRUCTIVE READING.


                            APPLETONS’

                    INSTRUCTIVE READING BOOKS.


                   _THE NATURAL HISTORY SERIES_,

                        By JAMES JOHONNOT.


  No. 1. =Book of Cats and Dogs, and Other Friends.= For Little
         Folks. Price, 20 cents.

  No. 2. =Friends in Feathers and Fur, and other Neighbors.= For
         Young Folks. Price, 35 cents.

  No. 3. {=Neighbors with Wings and Fins, and some others.=
         {  For Boys and Girls. Price, 47 cents.
         {=Some Curious Flyers, Creepers and Swimmers.=
         {  (Intermediate.) Price, 47 cents.

  No. 4. =Neighbors with Claws and Hoofs, and their Kin.= For
         Young People. Price, 63 cents.

  No. 5. =Glimpses of the Animate World: Science and Literature
         of Natural History.= For School or Home. Price, $1.20.

The publication of this series marks a distinct and important
advance in the adaptation of special knowledge and general
literature to the intelligent comprehension of pupils of all
grades of attainment. While in no wise tending to do away with the
regular school-readers, the “Instructive Reading-Books” introduce
suggestive and valuable information and specific knowledge,
covering many of the subjects which will eventually be more
minutely investigated by the maturing of the pupil’s mind. Sent
postpaid on receipt of price. Special terms made on class supplies.

                  D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,

    NEW YORK.   BOSTON.   CHICAGO.   ATLANTA.   SAN FRANCISCO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. H. ANDREWS & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                    School, Church, Chapel and
                      Sunday-School Seating.

DOVETAILED SCHOOL-DESKS, GLOBES, MAPS, CHARTS, BLACK-BOARDS, &C.

[Illustration]

CHURCH CHAIRS PEWS, PULPITS, COMMUNION TABLES, COLLECTION PLATES,
&C., &C.

[Illustration]

IMPROVED METHODS OF SEATING WITH SETTEES AND TAYLOR PATENT CHAIRS.

Catalogues free on application.

                       A. H. ANDREWS & CO.,
                   686 Broadway, New York City.
                    195 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 Ditson & Co’s Sunday-School Music

ranks with the very best, and no Sunday-school management should
adopt a new Singing Book without carefully examining one of their
“tried and true” =Sunday-School Song Books=.

=Voices of Praise= (40 cts., $4.20 per doz.) Rev. C. L. Hutchins.
Music and poetry dignified and classical, but not dull; in fact,
bright and enthusiastic. Very large collection for the money.

=Singing on the Way= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) by Mrs. Jewett, ably
assisted by Dr. Holbrook, whose noble compositions are known and
loved in all the churches. This, like the book above mentioned,
does excellently well for a Vestry Singing Book for prayer and
praise meetings.

=Songs of Promise= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) J. H. Tenney and Rev.
E. A. Hoffman—the first highly gifted, musically, and the second
the author of many hymns of refined and beautiful quality. One of
the newest books.

=Song Worship= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) L. O. Emerson and W. F.
Sherwin, both celebrated compilers, composers and leaders, and
the latter well-known as having had charge of the music at many
Chautauqua meetings.

For other good books, please send for lists and catalogues.

For a lovely little book for the young children of a Sunday-school,
look no further than FRESH FLOWERS (25 cts., $2.40 per doz.), Emma
Pitt. Sweet Hymns, Sweet Music, Pretty Pictures.

                     Mailed for Retail Price.

                   OLIVER DITSON & CO., BOSTON.

  C. H. DITSON & CO.,
    867 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  WARNER BRO’S

  CELEBRATED
  CORALINE
  CORSETS

  FLEXIBLE
  HEALTH
  HIPS
  NURSING
  ABDOMINAL
  CORALINE
]


=9 MILLION= worn during the past six years.

This marvelous success is due—

1st.—To the superiority of Coraline over all other materials, as a
stiffener for Corsets.

2d.—To the superior quality, shape and workmanship of our Corsets,
combined with their low prices.

Avoid cheap imitations made of various kinds of cord. None are
genuine unless

                      “DR. WARNER’S CORALINE”

is printed on inside of steel cover.

                FOR SALE BY ALL LEADING MERCHANTS.

                         WARNER BROTHERS,

  359 Broadway,                                    New York City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                     Hamilton Vocalion Organs

of 2 manual and 2 sets of pedals $750; equalling in beauty, variety
and volume a pipe organ of 600 pipes by the best maker. Circulars,
with testimonials of leading musicians and organists of the world.

“Without a doubt the Vocalion is at present the nearest approach to
a pipe organ.”—_Clarence Eddy, Organist First Presbyterian Church,
Chicago_

“I have only words of praise in its favor.”—_Henry Eyre Brown,
Organist, Brooklyn Tabernacle._

“Especially valuable for Churches and Concert Rooms.”—_A. H.
Messiter, Organist, Trinity Ch., N.Y._

“A tone so rich and musical must be recognized as valuable for
special and new orchestral effects.”—_Henry Carter, Organist, N.Y._

“Your Vocalion has a magnificent future.”—_Sir Arthur Sullivan._

“A rare combination of power and sweetness.”—_Adelina Patti._

  Catalogue sent free.

WAREROOMS, 28 EAST 23d ST., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S

                            STEEL PENS

                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.

                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Girls’ Rural Costumes


The most taking novelty of the season is our original Knitted Suit
for Girls’ wear, consisting of Blouse waist, full skirt, and sash.
Is made in a variety of colors, sizes from 4 to 14 years. The
demand for this suit exceeds by far that of any child’s suit we
have ever sold. And are for sale only at this house.

                  WE STILL CONTINUE TO SELL OUR
                         OLD AND FAVORITE

                        FRENCH C. P. CORSET

                              AT THE

                      LOWEST POSSIBLE PRICES.


                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.,

                   _Broadway & Eleventh Street_,

                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            6%, 7%, 8%.

                       _THE AMERICAN_
                             _INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,


with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

        7⅔% CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING
               4 Per Ct. Government Bonds
               Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

         Write for full information and reference to the
                            Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            STATEMENT.


                     PHENIX INSURANCE COMPANY

                         OF BROOKLYN, N.Y.


                        JANUARY 1st, 1887.


  CASH CAPITAL                                         $1,000,000.00
  GROSS SURPLUS                                         4,383,171.68
                                                       —————————————
                     Gross Assets                      $5,383,171.68
                                                       =============


                              ASSETS.

  United States Bonds, market value                    $1,104,250.00
  Other Stocks and Bonds                                1,502,858.90
  Loans on Bond and Mortgage                              294,900.00
  Loans on Call                                            80,758.76
  Cash in Bank and Office                                 495,135.83
  Real Estate                                           1,082,787.53
  Premiums in Course of Collection                        667,231.88
  Interest Accrued                                         11,716.42
  Bills Receivable for Marine Premiums                    140,284.55
  Rents Due and Accrued                                     3,247.81
                                                       —————————————
                                                       $5,383,171.68
                                                       =============


                           LIABILITIES.

  CASH CAPITAL                                         $1,000,000.00
  Reserve for Unearned Premiums                         3,466,886.97
  Reserve for Unpaid Losses                               353,759.83
  All Other Liabilities                                     5,438.10
  NET SURPLUS                                             557,086.78
                                                       —————————————
                                                       $5,383,171.68
                                                       =============

  STEPHEN CROWELL, President,
  WM. R. CROWELL, Vice-President.
  PHILANDER SHAW, Secretary.
  GEO. H. FISKE,    }
  CHAS. C. LITTLE,  } Ass’t Sec’s.
  JOHN H. DOUGHERTY,}


                 *       *       *       *       *


            Clinton H. Meneely BELL COMPANY TROY, N.Y.,

                       MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR

                   Church, Chime and Peal Bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1850      Thirty-Seventh Year.      1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                           OF NEW YORK,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.

  Accumulation                             _11,155,000_
  Surplus, by New York standard,            _2,254,000_

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._


                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.
      J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
             H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                           H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                                 S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    PAYSON, DUNTON & SCRIBNER.


                       THE NATIONAL SYSTEM.


               The Standard of American Penmanship.

                     TITLE WON, =NOT= ASSUMED.

  _In Rank: Leading the Advance._  _In Cost: Cheap as the Cheapest._


                         WHOLESALE PRICES.

  P., D. & S. Copybooks, large series         96 cents per dozen.
  P., D. & S. Copybooks, primary series       72 cents per dozen.
  P., D. & S. Copybooks, pencil series        45 cents per dozen.

               SAMPLE COPIES AT SATISFACTORY RATES.


                 POTTER, KNIGHT, AINSWORTH & CO.,

                 SCHOOL-BOOK PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK.


                      _DEPOSITORY AGENCIES_:

  BOSTON: 22 Bromfield Street.          CHICAGO: 377 Wabash Avenue.


                 *       *       *       *       *


         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printers’ punctuation errors have been corrected, except
inconsistent periods after abbreviations in advertisements, which
have been retained.

“Now” changed to “New” in the Warner Brother’s advertisement. (New
York City)

Missing “d” added in “had” in the Ditson’s advertisement. (having
had charge)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 7, JULY, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.