Produced by Joshua Hutchinson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by Cornell
University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: AUGUST, 1887.

  VOL. XLI.

  NO. 8.

  The American Missionary]

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: CONTENTS]


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING—FINANCIAL,                          215
    PARAGRAPHS,                                        216
    A GRADUATE AND A PORTER,                           217
    THINGS TO BE REMEMBERED—NO. 3,                     220
    DEATH OF REV. SIDNEY H. DALE,                      221


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE,                               222
    HOWARD UNIVERSITY—FISK UNIVERSITY,                 224
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE,                                 226
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY,                               227
    GREGORY INSTITUTE,                                 230


  THE INDIANS.

    CLOSING EXERCISES AT SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING
      SCHOOL,                                          231


  THE CHINESE.

    IMPERIUM IN IMPERIO,                               234


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS,                             235


  RECEIPTS,                                            237

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

   Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._
      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._
      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._
      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., 21 _Cong’l House_, _Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., 151 _Washington Street_, _Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XLI.        AUGUST, 1887.        No. 8.

                 *       *       *       *       *




_American Missionary Association._

The next Annual Meeting of the Association will be held at
Portland, Me., Oct. 25th to 27th. Rev. A. J. F. Behrends, D.D.,
of Brooklyn, will preach the sermon. The friends in Portland have
already begun preparations for the reception of the Association.
Life Members, Delegates chosen by contributing churches, Local
Conferences, State Associations and the National Council,
constitute the Annual Meeting. So far as possible, the Portland
churches will entertain those who attend. Those purposing to be
present and wishing entertainment are requested to write to Rev.
C. H. Daniels, Chairman of the Committee of Entertainment, or Rev.
S. K. Perkins, Secretary, Portland, Me. Applications must be made
before Oct. 1st. Special rates will be arranged at hotels for those
who desire to pay their own way. Railroad and steamboat favors will
be secured as far as possible, and notices of reductions and other
matters will appear later in the magazine and in the religious
press.

       *       *       *       *       *

We face an unpleasant fact. Receipts in July last year were a
little over $42,000. This was unprecedented. It was owing to the
special collection taken by the churches July 4th for the debt.
Nevertheless, it became a part of our year’s work, and those heavy
receipts entered into the total. There are now but two months
remaining. Shall our total receipts be allowed to fall behind those
of last year? At the end of June we were just about even with last
year. But the outlook for July is not encouraging. However, we know
that our friends have the money, and we do not believe they are
going to allow us to fall behind. We ask them favorably to consider
our request that they make a special effort to lift the watermark
of our treasury at least as high as it reached last year, and, if
possible, lift it up just a little higher.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conferring the degree of D.D. upon Rev. Henry Hopkins of Kansas
City, and of LL.D. upon Gen. Sam’l C. Armstrong, Principal of the
Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute, Williams College can
hardly be said to have added any special distinction. The college
honors itself fully as much as it does these, her honored sons,
in thus receiving them within the circle of those marked by an
expression of her distinctive regard. Both of them years before had
justly won their spurs. The Christian public, a circle wider than
any college, and not apt to be at fault in its judgment, either,
has for years honored these men because of their works’ sake. We
are glad, however, that Williams College, their Alma Mater, has
been first to voice this wider public sentiment. The American
Missionary Association congratulates the college in what it has
done, because the one, Rev. Henry Hopkins, D.D., is an honored
Vice President of the Association, and the other, Gen. Sam’l C.
Armstrong, LL.D., is at the head of one of the schools founded and
fostered by the Association, and still gloried in as a monumental
evidence of the grand work in which it is engaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

We call the attention of our readers to Rev. Mr. Pond’s article,
“Imperium in Imperio.” It is certainly a pathetic appeal to the
Christian women of America from the heathenism that has come to us
from China. It gives a new glimpse into our Chinese mission work,
and emphasizes its importance. We venture the suggestion that this
article would furnish interesting reading at ladies’ missionary
meetings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Grady’s famous speech before the New England Society, if things
keep going on at the South as they have been, is likely to become
infamous. He asserted for substance that the South had come to
recognize the fact that in the war the North was right, the South
wrong, that the Negro has the fullest protection of our laws and
the friendship of our people.

Recently, Rev. Leonard W. Bacon, who, strange to say, has been
for some time pastor of the Independent Presbyterian Church of
Savannah, Ga., preached to his people a patriotic sermon. He
emphasized the importance of national patriotism. He eulogized
Washington, Lincoln and Grant. He intimated that in the late
unpleasantness the South was wrong. The result of all this was an
excited congregation, an excited community, and the development of
such hostility that Mr. Bacon will probably be forced to resign.

Just a little while before the above incident, a colored
gentleman by the name of Council was refused permission to
ride in a first-class car, though he had paid for and held a
first-class ticket on the Georgia Central Railroad. Mr. Council
laid his grievance before the Interstate Commerce Commissioners.
Commissioner Bragg, of Alabama, happens to know the complainant,
and this is the way he testified concerning him: “I know Council
well. He is one of the brightest and best of our colored citizens.
He is a stanch Democrat, and canvasses the State at every election
for the Democratic ticket. He is not a man who desires to push
himself forward because of any ambition to obtain social equality.
He is modest and unassuming. He is a gentleman.” On another page,
Field-Superintendent Ryder tells us of treatment received on a
Georgia railroad by Rev. Wm. Sinclair, one of our missionaries.
It is rather singular that these incidents happened in Georgia.
Mr. Grady is the editor of the leading newspaper of that State.
He ought to be able to testify as to its thought and feeling upon
the great questions that grew out of the war. It seems to us that
by this time he must begin to feel that his speech before the New
England Society in New York was a most unfortunate affair. We
shall be glad to find out what the New South is, but we shall not
be willing to take Mr. Grady as an instructor. The question still
remains: _Is_ there a New South?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fifth Annual Convention of the Colored Teachers’ Association
of Georgia was recently held in the House of Representatives Hall
at Atlanta. Upwards of one hundred colored teachers formed what
the local press called an “intelligent and decorous body.” The
sessions continued for three days. The papers gave full reports of
the proceedings. Much popular interest was taken. Many white people
attended. The range of the discussions was wide. The science of
teaching in all of its departments was introduced by papers and
addresses, and evoked very general discussion. It was a convention
of both interest and power. It was a demonstration, beyond all
doubt, of the Negro’s intellectual capacity and of his willingness
to use and improve it. One of our Atlanta teachers writing us about
this convention says: “I wish our Northern friends could have
attended it. I am sure, if they could have done so, those who are
helping would want to help more, and those who never have helped
would be stirred up to lend a hand in raising up a people, so
many of whom have proven and are proving that they can be raised.
Certainly those of us here on the field can but feel encouraged and
strengthened to go on.”

       *       *       *       *       *


A GRADUATE AND A PORTER.

There appeared in an Atlanta paper a few days ago, a paragraph
stating that a young Negro man of Atlanta, who had the best
university education, was acting as a porter in a cotton room, and
that all but two of his class, perhaps thirty, had dropped back
into just such work as he was doing, and saying that perhaps a good
deal of higher education was wasted.

This paragraph has been copied by a large number of papers and is
likely to injure the cause of education among the colored people,
and for this reason it seems necessary to call attention to the
errors it contains.

The young man referred to has not a university education, but left
school during his freshman year. He was not a member of a class of
about thirty, although sometimes when his class recited with one in
the normal department, the two combined probably reached about that
number.

While he was junior preparatory his class numbered ten, and when he
was college freshman, eleven. Of these eleven, three went through
the course and were graduated. Two of these are teaching, one in
Texas, and the other as principal of a school in Chattanooga. The
third graduate is employed by a wealthy resident of Atlanta, at
whose home he always has lived, as collector of rents, etc., and
may be said to be “in business.”

So, instead of the young man in question having a university
education, he did not finish his freshman year; instead of his
being a member of a class of thirty, his class numbered only
eleven; and instead of thirty falling from the sublime heights of
university graduates to the low estate of porters in cotton houses,
the three of that class who completed their college course are
occupying the important positions mentioned above.

Unfortunately this instance of misrepresentation is not an isolated
case, but one of a thousand of similar character. The statement
that the graduates from colored colleges are all idle vagabonds,
has become too stale to produce an impression any longer when made
in the abstract.

Now what are the facts upon this point? Let the published list of
graduates from the Atlanta University, with their occupations,
answer.

This school has a classical course of study covering a period of
seven years, for pupils who have completed the common English
branches. From this have been graduated forty students in ten
classes averaging four to a class. This university has also a
normal course of four years, for admission to which the same is
required as for admission to the classical course. From this have
been graduated in thirteen classes one hundred pupils, averaging
about eight to a class.

Of the forty graduates from the classical course, five are
dead, eight are in the service of the U.S. Government, four are
pastors of churches, one is a lawyer, two are in the theological
seminary, one is engaged in business in Atlanta, and the remaining
nineteen are teaching. None are unemployed and all are engaged in
occupations in which considerable education is required, and a
thorough one is desirable. It ought to be added that two of these
graduates are professors in colleges, one is editing a respectable
weekly newspaper, besides teaching, and one of those in the service
of the Government has been promoted three times upon merit alone.

Of the one hundred graduates from the normal department, six have
died, seventeen are keeping house for their husbands, one is in a
medical school, one is pursuing a college course, one is a mail
carrier, one is still living at home, one is a hired housekeeper,
and the remaining seventy-two are teaching.

With reference to putting an education to a practical use, how many
schools in the United States can show a better record?

It may be said that a thorough education is not required to fit a
person for a government position, such as clerks in departments,
postal route agents and letter-carriers. But if such an education
enables one who has it to get from sixty to one hundred and thirty
dollars a month instead of seventy-five cents a day in the city
whenever he can obtain a job, or ten dollars a month and “rashuns”
in the country, it becomes to him an eminently and interestingly
practical thing. Even in the case of this young Negro porter, the
gentleman under whom he works says he could hire some one else to
do the same work for half his wages, but he prefers his services at
the double cost. If three years of Latin and two and a third years
of Greek and the mathematics that go with them double the value of
the services of a colored youth, let us challenge studies that are
usually considered more practical to show a better record and be
careful how we speak sneeringly of higher education.

But are occupations for the fullest use of a higher education by
colored people limited? They certainly are. A white pastor may
minister to a colored church, a white teacher may instruct colored
children, a white physician may prescribe for a colored patient, a
white attorney may counsel for a colored client, a white mechanic
may employ colored laborers, a white merchant may serve colored
customers, but in none of these spheres does the rule work both
ways except in a few rare instances. So the services of educated
colored people in the professions and in business are confined
to their own race, and in that they are crowded by their white
competitors. Furthermore they are not welcomed to these higher
walks of life even among their own people by their neighbors of the
more powerful race; but the general and almost universal public
sentiment is in favor of keeping them down. More than this, many of
their own race prefer the services of white lawyers, physicians,
ministers, teachers, mechanics and merchants.

Under all these adverse circumstances and others that might be
named, it requires great courage and perseverance in a colored
youth to complete a full course of study.

But should they be encouraged or dissuaded?

If the philosophy of civilization teaches anything it teaches that
Nature intended that every man should make the most of himself, and
every race should attain the highest possible development; and if
Christianity teaches anything it teaches the same lesson. Unless
some one knows for certain that the Negro is the descendant of Ham,
and that the descendants of Ham have not yet served their time in
hewing wood and drawing water, why not test the virtue of this
rather queer theory by trying, on a small scale, the experiment
of giving Negroes the opportunity of acquiring all the education
their mental capacity is capable of receiving, and looking on to
see what they will do with it, and what effect it will have upon
the race, and not expect that every individual will be a success or
achieve high place among men?

As the masses become enlightened the demand for well educated men
and women must increase. The “cornfield preacher” who depends upon
the “Sperrit” will step down and out, and the seminary graduate,
with “Bible religion” will take his place. Thoroughly trained and
equipped colored lawyers and physicians will conquer the prejudice
that now exists among their own people against them, and will
conquer it the more easily if they are better prepared for work
than their white competitors. All this need not come about in one
generation. We can transmit the work, with our faith and our hopes,
as a legacy to our children.

But, however divergent the views of different people may be upon
these questions, there certainly is no immediate occasion for a
howl against the higher education of the Negro, for there is not
enough of it to feed the flames of a respectable controversy. Only
a fraction of the so-called universities south of Washington open
to colored students have a collegiate course of study, and the
entire number of graduates from such a course can be expressed by
two ciphers and a small significant figure. What are a hundred or
two of college graduates among six or seven millions of people? The
shades of Hahnemann himself might echo the question.

                           T. N. CHASE, _in New York Independent_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THINGS TO BE REMEMBERED—NO 3.

_The Danger!_ Whatever of sentiment or of poetry may have appealed
to the imagination in the work of foreign missions, has been pretty
much dispelled by contact with foreign races at our own doors. We
find that they are intensely human, and that the task of saving
them is intensely real. The enchantment which comes of distance is
simple commonplace and matter of fact when the object is near at
hand. Hence the danger, now to be apprehended, is that of disgust,
or of indifference. Indeed we are not sure that the feeling has not
taken on a stronger form, and might not now be called hatred, or
scorn. If it be not one of these, what name shall we give to the
feeling towards the Chinese on the Pacific; towards the Indian,
driven from his hunting grounds and chased to the death by our
soldiery; towards the Negro, whipped and shot by midnight raiders,
unprotected by the government he helped to save, and left in his
ignorance, his poverty and his animalism by God’s people, on whom
he is cast for enlightenment and elevation?

How shall we see the vastness and urgency of the work for these
races with such repugnances and disgusts meeting us on the very
threshold? Moral ideas are of slow growth, and churches and
communities turn to new objects of sympathy and labor reluctantly
and sluggishly. While we hesitate and wait, the probability is
that things will take shape and pass beyond our control; or, at
best, that we shall but _partially_ secure results which are now
fully within our reach. At this moment the churches of America
hold the key to the conquest of this world for Jesus Christ! Will
they hold it a generation hence? Not unless they take advantage of
their position to win these races to God before they are absorbed
into the world, and are thus lost as a regenerating force with
which to elevate the unsaved millions of mankind. Suppose, in our
supineness, we see the Chinese driven back into heathenism; the
Indian turned over to the soldiery for extermination, or a deeper
barbarism; the Negro wrested from his rights, and unlifted from
his passions, weaknesses and enthralments of mental and spiritual
darkness: is there any reason to believe that the opportunity
will ever return when it will be possible for us so completely to
control, guide and mould them as we now can?

We are in jeopardy, therefore, of making the most fearful mistake
in Christian ethics and in Christian practice. If these races pass
from our hands uneducated and unsaved, the world will charge us
with the commission of a crime against humanity itself. Now we can
throw upon these fields, if we will, men enough to take possession
of them in the name of Christ. Now, we can raise up _out of these
races_ the laborers to carry our learning, our art, our faith, to
all who speak the same tongue, and to all in whose veins bounds the
same blood. To this work Providence manifestly calls us—to do it
is to walk with God, we verily believe. But whether the churches
see it, or _wish_ to see it; whether they are more ready to walk
in their _own_ light than in the light which shines from heaven, I
cannot answer. I can only say the sun shines, and we have the eyes
to see. If we miss the Divine plan and method it will not be for
lack of light, but the mistake will be none the less sad, and the
misfortune to the world none the less direful, because the ages may
not undo it. From such a peril may the good Lord save his people,
and open their eyes that they may see!

       *       *       *       *       *


OBITUARY.

REV. SIDNEY HAMILTON DALE, pastor at Florence, Ala., died June
18th, and was buried at Talladega, June 25th.

Mr. Dale was graduated from the Theological Department of Talladega
College, June, 1886, and at Christmas was ordained at Florence, the
sermon being preached by Prof. G. W. Andrews, who also conducted
the funeral services at Talladega. Some seventeen years before,
Mr. Dale, then a little boy, was converted in a revival of very
remarkable reach and power, at Marion, under the pastorate of
Mr. Andrews, who was then beginning his many years of service
in Alabama. After some time at the Lincoln Normal Institute, in
Marion, he came to Talladega, where, in addition to normal and
college preparatory studies, he pursued theology under the same
friend who had led him to Christ. He was diligent, growingly
diligent; in his studies strong, active and persevering. He had
a voice of remarkable compass and power, and he composed both
the words and music of the Class Song sung at his graduation.
He was devoted to the ministry, for which he had made years of
laborious preparation, and which he had begun with large promise
of usefulness. His illness continued but a few days, and death
was not expected till the end had almost come. But his faith was
strong. With exultant prayer and triumph he crossed the stream into
the better land. But it seems as if the fields this side, so large
and needy, could ill spare such a young and vigorous reaper; and
a heavy sorrow falls upon the young wife and mother who mourns an
unmeasured loss, yet not without the hope and comfort which God
alone can give.

                                                            D.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER.

“Men are four: He who knows not and knows not he knows not, he
is a fool; shun him. He who knows not and knows he knows not, he
is simple; teach him. He who knows and knows not he knows, he is
asleep; wake him. He who knows and knows he knows, he is wise;
follow him.” So runs an old Arabic proverb. A sermon delivered
by one of our A. M. A. pastors, before a class just graduating
from one of our Southern institutions, proves that in educational
matters this pastor was of the fourth class according to the Arabic
classification. The text of the sermon was Philippians iii, 13-14,
and the preacher spoke as follows, according to report in one of
the local papers:

“There are important lessons in these words of the Apostle Paul for
you. In finishing the course here you have only made a beginning.
The real work and the prize are ahead. A foundation has been laid
on which you must build, patiently, carefully, wisely. Healthy
spiritual and intellectual life are characterized by progress. This
is the touchstone, like a shining light, shining more and more unto
the perfect day. Education is the full development of the man,
and we know that development is a gradual, almost imperceptible
process. It is the leading out of the powers and capabilities which
he may possess. You do not educate a man when you simply tell him
what he did not know, but you do educate him when you make this
knowledge imparted a part of himself, thus causing him to feel what
he ought to feel—conscious power and manhood. Education which does
not make a man more manly and independent, is a decided failure. It
means growth. It is a man’s duty to grow. Remember, then, that you
have not apprehended—for what you must apprehend or lay hold on, is
Christian character and manhood in its highest sense.”

Such manly and discriminating counsel coming from a graduate to
other graduates of his own race, proves that it is safe to appeal
to the results in proof of the value of higher education among the
colored people of the South.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most refreshing news comes to us from a far-off church in Texas.
“Last Sabbath,” writes the faithful pastor, “was a high day for the
church here. Thirteen united with us, and many others were greatly
revived. Meetings of intense interest are still being held, and
many are coming forward for prayers and consecrating themselves to
the Lord.” A revival in midsummer! What a surprising phenomenon in
religious work at the North, but not so surprising for the South,
for there most earnest Christian work is often done during the
heated days of summer. The pastor who reports this encouraging
work has charge of three churches, and travels every week some
fifty miles by wagon in order to fill his appointments. He regrets
his inability to visit all the stations in his field regularly at
present, on account of the great interest at this one point and the
imperative demands there are upon him for special services here. He
begs the prayers of his brethren to whom he writes, and may I not
ask, through these Notes, for the prayers of a much larger circle
than those reached by his letter?

       *       *       *       *       *

These Notes seem to be a scrap-bag, or a sort of patch-work quilt,
made up of bits gathered from different letters. Let me add one
more as illustrating two things: first, the extreme self-denial of
many who are contributing to the work of the A. M. A., and also as
illustrating the high appreciation of this self-sacrifice on the
part of those who are doing the work in the field. A teacher whose
economy in traveling expenses had been so marked as to call for
commendation, writes: “It seems to me that we are in honor bound
to be more prudent in the use of A. M. A. money than in the use of
our own. Some of the money given for the work in the South comes
from very humble people. I have heard of a poor woman in ——, who
earned her living by washing and scrubbing, yet saved out of her
scanty earnings a half cent a day for the A. M. A. It would be a
shame to any one to spend such money carelessly.” There are noble
heroism and self-denial on both sides of the line which divides the
two classes of those engaged in the work of the A. M. A. When the
new Acts of the Apostles is written, it will include in its records
not only the Pauls and Peters who have gone out into this great
Southern field, but also the Tabithas “who are full of good works
and alms-deeds which they do” in their own homes.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Where is the New South?” I repeat the question asked by the
editor of this magazine last month. Report just reaches us that
Rev. W. A. Sinclair, while traveling with his bride, has been
violently and brutally put out of a first-class railway coach and
forced into a “smoker,” although he held a first-class ticket which
he bought of the regularly appointed agent of the road. I do not
know the circumstances connected with this new outrage, but I _do_
know Rev. Mr. Sinclair, and know him to be a quiet, unostentatious,
unobtrusive Christian gentleman. There could have been no excuse
for this outrage. The “New South,” evidently, is not on the railway
trains in Georgia.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD UNIVERSITY THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT.

The Theological Department of Howard University, Washington,
D.C., held its anniversary exercises on May 27th in the First
Congregational Church, in which was assembled a large audience of
colored and white people. Ten young men were graduated, four of
whom made interesting addresses. One of these was a Bulgarian,
who has also taken the medical course in the University, and will
return to his country as a missionary. Each graduate received a
Bible and a copy of Finney’s Autobiography. There were thirty-eight
theological students this year, and these included yet another
Bulgarian, who was converted under the missionaries of the American
Board, and was driven from his country by persecution, but who
hopes eventually to return thither.

Most encouraging reports were received during the year from former
graduates, who are hard at work in their respective fields, and
who to preaching add Sunday-school instruction, teaching in
day schools, temperance lecturing, and often housebuilding. No
department of our University yields richer fruit than does this.

                                                WM. W. PATTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMENCEMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY.

BY REV. A. P. MILLER, AN ALUMNUS.

Being absent on Thursday and Friday, I did not take in the
exercises of the Senior Preparatory Class and the literary
societies of the University, but learned that the young men and
women did themselves and their Alma Mater much credit in their
addresses and essays.

The missionary sermon was preached on Sunday morning by Rev. David
M. Harris, D.D., editor of a Presbyterian organ in Nashville. Dr.
Harris, who is a Southern gentleman, with much feeling referred to
the wrongs endured by the colored people in this country, saying
that he was heartily ashamed of their treatment in the past, but
that he had rather be the wronged than the perpetrators of the
wrong. The Doctor was much pleased with what had been accomplished
by Fisk University during the trying years of her eventful history
for the elevation of the African race in this country, and, through
them, on the African continent.

The baccalaureate sermon in the afternoon, by Pres. E. M. Cravath,
D.D., commanded the closest attention; and at the close, the
President’s very feeling address to the graduates, four young men
and two young women, was very impressive. The music provided for
the services during the day by Prof. Spence and the Mozart Society
was of the highest order.

The Rev. Dr. F. A. Noble, of Chicago, arrived on Saturday, and
seemed to have taken in all round about him during his stay,
visiting classes in all departments under examination. The
exercises of the Normal Department of the University were richly
enjoyed, degrees being conferred on six young men and two young
women. The addresses and essays were thoughtfully conceived,
timely, and well delivered; and to one who, nine years ago, was
graduated from the University, showed marked evidence of advance.
While one member was delivering his address, his fellow-townsmen
were electing him to a position in their school on a salary of $75
per month.

On Tuesday the Alumni associations of the University held their
anniversaries, addresses being delivered by Mrs. Ava Brown
Dismukes, class of ’77, Normal, and the Rev. Albert P. Miller, of
New Haven, Conn., class of 78, College. Mrs. Dismukes’ subject was
“Local Missions.” She vigorously enforced the duty of graduates,
wherever they may be, to make of themselves missionaries for the
upbuilding of the race. The Rev. A. P. Miller spoke on “The duty of
the hour,” and his address was listened to attentively throughout.
Dr. Noble emphasized Mr. Miller’s remarks as to the Negro’s lack
of sufficient moral courage to know and assert his rights. At the
close of the Alumni meetings, Gen. Clinton B. Fisk and wife put
in their appearance and were heartily applauded, and of course a
speech was called for and received with wonted enthusiasm.

Wednesday, beautiful and clear, came, bringing Commencement Day.
Teachers, students, friends and old graduates marched in procession
from Jubilee to Livingstone Hall. The exercises began at 10 A. M.
Music was grand. Addresses and essays gave evidence of deep thought
and careful preparation. Dr. Noble, in his afternoon speech, said
he never heard them excelled in any college, not even in dear old
Yale. Six received the degree of B.A.; some of them having been
in the institution fifteen years, and among those who had been
longest connected with the University was Miss Mary E. Spence, only
daughter of Prof. A. K. Spence, whom I found at Fisk on entering,
seventeen years ago.

Dr. Noble’s address, “Christian Socialism,” was timely, and had a
ring in it that thrilled the hearts of all who heard it. We who
were privileged to meet and hear this noble man and minister of
Christ cannot and will not soon forget him and his visit to Fisk.

After degrees had been conferred, Gen. Fisk delivered one of his
characteristic speeches, thanking and blessing God for Fisk
University, with whose life he had been associated for more than
twenty years. He was proud of its history and of the work done by
its band of noble men and women and students, and urged graduates
to be something. Master’s degrees were conferred on W. R. Morris,
now teacher in Fisk; G. K. McIlvaine, of St. Louis, Mo., and Dr. A.
A. Wesley, recently graduated from medical school at Chicago.

What impressed me most was the desire expressed by the alumni of
Fisk to see their Alma Mater permanently endowed, and an intention
to work in the future among themselves and former students to this
end. The alumni have already pledged one per cent. of their annual
income toward an endowment fund, and as a result several hundred
dollars have been realized, and are now invested in a Nashville
bank. The ball was again started a-rolling at Commencement dinner,
Dr. Noble leading off, followed by Prof. Spence, with $10 each for
the class of ’87, and the amount ran up, swollen by contributions
of students, to about $150, and Gen. Fisk said he knew a gentleman
in New York who would double the sum subscribed on that occasion.
[This gentleman is doubtless Gen. F.] Rev. A. P. Miller was
appointed by the college alumni as corresponding secretary to work
up the endowment fund among the alumni and former students, and it
is to be hoped that friends of Negro education whom God has blessed
with means will turn their attention toward this University, whose
teachers and students have done so much for the mental and moral
regeneration of the South and the Negro race.

Fisk University must be endowed, and we her sons and daughters, who
intend doing what we can in this direction, most sincerely trust
that friends of years gone by will not forget, in the distribution
of what God hath given them, this institution, which has all these
years depended solely on God and a charitable public for its
existence and a continuance of its blessed work. May the richest
blessings of heaven come down on every one, whatever his or her
creed, white or black, who will help to permanently endow Fisk
University.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMENCEMENT AT TALLADEGA COLLEGE.

BY PRESIDENT H. S. DE FOREST, D.D.

Talladega’s seventeenth Commencement began Friday, June 10th, with
exercises of the lower grades from the Cassedy school, and ended
with the oration, essay, and a wedding at the Alumni meeting the
Thursday evening following. Between these dates were the sermon
before the graduates; a missionary sermon by Secretary Powell,
of New York; public examination of students in all grades, from
secondary studies up to theology, including classes taught in
Practice School by Normal Students; exercises of the three literary
societies; an address by Dr. Powell on “Over the sea”; one by
Dr. W. H. Ward on “The testimony of ancient monuments to God’s
Word”; exhibition of industrial work, with orations and essays
by graduates from the Normal and Theological departments. It was
a large bill of fare, we thought well served, and many were at
the table. The attendance all through was excellent, the house
being usually crowded, and often the overflow was very great. The
different examinations, it was conceded by all, gave evidence of
thorough study and solid attainments. Certainly thoroughness is
constantly sought, and those who visit the college bear witness to
good success in securing it. Two, new this year, graduated from
the Theological and thirteen from the Normal department. All are
professed Christians, are exemplary in life, and go to their work
with excellent preparation.

Tuesday afternoon was given to inspection of the industrial
training. A display was made of the girls’ work in cutting, sewing
and repairing; of what the young men had done in blacksmithing,
carpentry and cabinet-making; while samples of cobbling were
walking all around. Students were seen painting, wood-working,
draughting; some were type-setting, form-making, and at press-work.
The garden, farm, wood-saw and feed-mill, stock and barns were
examined. All our visitors are impressed with the results already
secured in industrial training, and some are relieved who feared
that the brain, if it gets much of a start, will paralyze the hand,
forgetting that the hand must be inapt till there is a trained head
to give it cunning.

The mid-winter series of meetings, both at the college and the two
mission chapels, were blessed to several conversions. Young people
have been schooled in a vigorous Society of Christian Endeavor.
Mission Sunday-schools and neighborhood prayer-meetings have
been carried on with growing interest. The different benevolent
societies have had their claims presented in turn; something has
been given to all; and if the offerings have been small, they have,
it is believed, been weighted with prayer.

Important repairs, so far as means are afforded, are to be made by
industrial students. Board is now to be made cheaper, and, with,
no less attention to fundamental branches, more is to be done in
developing college studies; and theological training, a strong
point from the beginning, is still to be kept in the foreground. At
the close of another good year, the college looks hopefully towards
the future.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMENCEMENT AT TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY.

Whatever else we may have or fail to have at our annual
Commencement time, we always _expect_ rain, and we are rarely
disappointed in this particular. This year rain was so greatly
needed, and had been so long devoutly wished for, that it was one
of our causes of rejoicing. However, the showery character of
the weather prevented our having the usual full attendance on
Commencement Sabbath; but by Commencement day we had many visitors
from a distance, who, with our school family and people from our
own vicinity, filled all the space of our new chapel—not quite so
closely as it might have been packed, but comfortably full; the
largest attendance being had at the concert, Wednesday evening,
June 1. These concerts grow in excellence and in favor from year to
year, and our choir has, besides, won some modest laurels, singing
outside the University, which it has worn as modestly.

Our Sunday-school is always delightful, and nothing else is ever
permitted to take its place. At the close of this year we had the
pleasure of disposing of seventy dollars of Sunday-school money.
Forty dollars were voted to missionary work in Africa, twenty-five
to library books, and five to the State temperance lecturer of
Mississippi. A larger average attendance than ever before was
reported.

On Sunday afternoon a Home Mission Institute was held. A list of
topics was presented two weeks beforehand, but no set speeches or
prepared papers were given. The young people, led by President
Pope, did nearly all the talking, and it was good to hear the
earnest and practical way in which they discussed such topics as
these:

“What can we do—

“To secure the better observance of the Sabbath?”

“To introduce good reading matter into the homes of the people?”

“To make our industrial training do home missionary work?”

“By what means can we best promote the interest of the people in
schools, Sunday-schools, missions, temperance, personal and social
purity?”

“What societies shall we seek to organize, or shall we combine all
these aims in Societies of Christian Endeavor?”

In the evening President Pope delivered the sermon to the
graduates, speaking with even more than his wonted force and fervor
in view of his farewell to this field and the transfer of his labor
to the mountain work in Tennessee.

Besides the oral examinations of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday,
there were black-board drawings and displays of written work in
each room, so that those who passed through might see something of
the work of each grade. There were also industrial exhibits of the
young ladies’ work, and work from the shops. Col. Power, of the
State Board of Visitors, spoke of our new school-house and shops
themselves as being a most gratifying industrial exhibit, having
been so largely the work of our apprentices.

On Wednesday afternoon the black-boards in one of the large
school-rooms were seen to bear these scrolls, in dashing capitals:
“Welcome, Alumni!” and “There’s no place like Home.” And presently
about a score of Tougaloo graduates, with teachers and friends,
were gathered to listen to an address by Mr. J. N. Granberry, one
of the very first class graduated here. He said, in beginning,
that he had decided to take for his theme “That which most men try
to shirk, namely: ‘Duty.’” He then spoke of the duty of the sons
and daughters of this institution to themselves, to their school,
to their people, to their country, to the world at large, basing
all upon the thought of duty to God.

At a business meeting, next morning, of the Society of the Alumni,
President Pope pledged funds with which to erect, within two years,
an Industrial Cottage for Girls, and the Alumni pledged funds
for the furnishing. This is with a view to placing our girls’
industries more nearly on an equal footing with those for young
men. In the meantime our good friend, Mr. Ballard, of New York, has
again come to our rescue and made it possible to set the enterprise
of girls’ housekeeping on foot at once—that is, next year—in a
small way, as we can with our present accommodations.

An unusual number of graduates were present at Commencement, and
enjoyed their own separate dinner and “the olive branches” about
the table. There were never so many babies at Tougaloo before, and
a well-behaved and promising little company we thought them, upon
the whole. May God bless the little ones and make them every one
burning and shining lights in His kingdom! Our graduating class was
small this year—two young ladies from the Elementary, and a young
man from the Higher Normal. The exercises were good.

We have always listened with pleasure and profit, each recurring
year, to our annual address, by whomsoever delivered, and faithful
and eminent men have thus favored us; but never have we experienced
greater delight in this part of our service than this year while
being addressed by that grand, large-hearted, eloquent divine and
stanch friend of the colored people from _ante-bellum_ days, the
Rev. Dr. C. K. Marshall, of Vicksburg. He seemed not at all to
address himself to colored people as such, but from a glowing heart
to pour forth universal truth for universal humanity, in the most
genial spirit, counseling our young people as young people anywhere
might rejoice to be counseled on the threshold of active life.

After so prolonged a “feast of reason,” the mortal bodies demanded
refreshment, and the afternoon was far spent when all had been
served. Then good-byes were spoken, students and visitors departed,
and a sort of lonesome quiet settled over Tougaloo; but the chosen
motto of our graduating class looks down in letters of unfading
green from over the rostrum, “Life is earnest,” and carries our
prayerful thoughts out to the army of young workers who, in their
several homes, schools and places of labor, we trust are earnestly
endeavoring to walk in the footsteps of our blessed Master and
“overcome evil with good.”

                                                         J. K.

       *       *       *       *       *


GREGORY INSTITUTE, WILMINGTON, N.C.

Our closing exercises this year partook more of the nature of a
Commencement than heretofore. This is the second year only that our
school has turned out graduates from any of the higher courses.
From the class of ten comprising the elementary normal class,
seven—five young men and two young women—were graduated. One other
young man, who failed to pass on account of being absent teaching
during a part of the year, and who is working hard, determined to
make up the lost studies before leaving the city, will probably
succeed and be granted his certificate during the summer.

The exercises were held on Thursday evening, May 27th, in the
church instead of in the hall, in order to get a larger room.
It was needed, the largest number being present that were ever
assembled within the walls of this beautiful building.

The exercises consisted principally of orations and essays by
the members of the graduating class, interspersed with singing,
all of which were rendered in a highly creditable manner. In
addition to these were recitations by the school of the 23d Psalm,
a Scripture catechism learned during the year, and a missionary
colloquy beautifully rendered by girls from the different classes,
representing, by their dress, many of the heathen nations.

Another and a very interesting feature of the evening’s
entertainment, was a half-hour address by Rev. Geo. S. Smith,
pastor of the Congregational Church, Raleigh, N.C. He was
introduced to the audience as a colored man who had been trained in
the A. M. A. schools, and a noble specimen he is, as an orator, as
a scholar, and as a man. He chose for his subject, “Encouragement,”
from which he delivered an address replete with sound practical
thoughts and advice.

A better behaved, more attentive audience scarcely ever gathered
than that at our Commencement. We feared that they might not like
these exercises as well as those of the usual exhibition order,
but many said this was the best exhibition we ever had. Everything
passed off nicely, with nothing to mar the enjoyment of the evening.

As we looked at the people before us, we thought: “How could any
one in this Christian land have ever said, ‘These niggers have
no souls’; or, ‘You can’t educate a nigger to make anything of
him’?” Even at this late day we hear these or kindred expressions.
I tell you, friends, if you were thrown with this people as we
teachers are, you would soon almost forget that they are colored.
Please don’t forget that they are here to stay, 7,000,000 of them,
and they need your help to rise from their despised, neglected
condition. They are surely marching onward, but much, _very_ much,
yet remains for the Christians of our land to do.

Our enrollment for the past year has been 285, but the average
attendance has not been quite up to the usual mark, owing to
sickness, “hard times,” etc. Death has entered the school, taking
away two of the number, both youths of special promise.

Our workers have never been more untiring in their efforts to
advance the cause of temperance and morality. A flourishing Band of
Hope, taking in nearly every pupil in the three lower departments,
has been doing its good work throughout the year. The society for
the older ones, not strictly confined to the school, has also been
doing its work. White Cross societies have been formed, and without
doubt will prove of great help to their members. The Band of Mercy
belonging to the First Primary Division should not be forgotten.
The school prayer-meeting has been encouraging, and considerable
time has been taken up in the study of the Scriptures.

                                                GEO. A. WOODARD.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLOSING EXERCISES AT SANTEE NORMAL TRAINING SCHOOL.

A beautiful feature of the Commencement season here at Santee was
the communion service of last Sunday, at which time six young
Indian men came forward from among their companions and publicly
united themselves to God’s people! We call them boys, but they are
not boys; they are old enough to realize the position they now
occupy, and it has come to them only after the long, hard struggle
which seems always to insure earnest lives for the future. Most
beautiful of all was the baptism! Tears rolled down their cheeks as
they bent for a blessing from the white man’s God and their God.

The eyes of the teachers, who had prayed and labored so earnestly
for this very occasion, were filled to overflowing. Five different
tribes were represented by these boys: Mandan, Ree, Assinaboine,
Yanktonais and Titon. Two of the young men are the sons of chiefs
still in their blankets, who, recognizing the great needs of their
people, are urging their sons on to more earnest study, so that
they may come back as missionaries to those who wait for them as
for deliverers.

It would seem enough of an achievement that these scores of Indian
boys and girls have been brought out of the superstition, the
unbelief, the savagery of their tribes, into the customs, manners
and religion of civilization, even if the work stopped there; but
the three days following the communion Sabbath have shown such
results in regard to a growth as well as change of mind, that to
one seeing the work for the first time it is simply marvelous.

It is one thing to sit in an Eastern audience and listen to
the most earnest recital of the needs of, and work among, the
Indians, and to say, “O, yes, the needs are very great; the work
is glorious; we fully understand your solution of the ‘Indian
problem’; we agree with you and aid you!” (while in a day the needs
are forgotten, and the work is overlooked). It is another thing to
stand here on the ground and listen to the silent appeals of these
hundreds of thirsty human souls—appeals that are all the stronger
because of their utter helplessness. Another thing is it to stand
and _behold_ the work already done, and the change already made! To
see with our own eyes is to wonder and believe, in such a way that
we can never forget. Would that all men might not only hear, but
see!

On Friday, the 24th, began the yearly examinations of the Santee
Normal Training School. Teachers and scholars were alive to the
duties placed upon them, and the end of the seventeenth year
found all active as ever. The recitations extended throughout
Friday, Monday and Tuesday, and visitors from the Agency and
surrounding towns were made welcome. The school-rooms, thrown open
together, were well filled during most of the sessions. Especially
interesting was the map-drawing and accompanying recitation by the
older geography students. The recitation showed that an Indian may
have as clear and correct an idea of the formation of this earth
and its divisions into hemispheres, countries, etc., as any white
boy. The maps were accurately and admirably drawn. The language
lessons were novel, and showed good work on the part of the
teachers. Stories were read to the students which they were asked
to re-write in as good English as possible. The following from a
boy brought into the school last fall, is a good illustration of
the way in which they think and speak in English: “We get all our
silk from a little creature called worm. The little creature is
green color. She lay number of eggs and then died, and they have
never seen their children and father.”

Music is by no means drudgery to the Indians. Passionately fond of
it, they practice with patience, and the results have been more
than satisfactory. Considering the lack of all discipline in their
natures, the examinations this year, both in vocal and instrumental
music, have been remarkable. Those thousands in the East who heard,
last winter, the singing of the Santee quintette, can easily
believe that this is true.

Gymnastics have been practiced as a means of teaching accuracy and
quickness of thought. The precision acquired by the students shows
that it has been a good discipline, and would do credit to any
school.

The recitations in mathematics were good. The work in algebra
deserves special mention. One thing is very evident in studying
the school work here; that is, that while in everything requiring
simple memory the Indian is fully equal to the white boy, perhaps
more than equal, his reasoning faculties are much behind, on
account of the lack of such faculties in the generations of his
ancestors; so mathematical work requires patient plodding, month
after month, for each step gained. There is very great need of such
discipline among this people, and it is one of the most difficult
things in this work of education and Christianization.

Twenty minutes were given on Monday to the workings of a model
normal class in botany. It was most unique, carried on wholly by
the advanced students. They showed clearly the most approved manner
and methods not only of teaching, but also of learning. The whole
was skillfully and understandingly done.

Tuesday evening was devoted to a literary entertainment. Space
allows only of a word or two in regard to it. A former graduate
of Santee, who is now one of its teachers, read an essay on
“Civilization” well worth repeating. He began with the earliest
known civilization before Christ; came down through the centuries
with examples proving Christianity to be the mainspring of modern
civilization, ending with a touching picture of the angels of God
looking down upon this, the greatest nation of the world, and
watching anxiously to see it turn a listening ear to the plea of
the poor Indian for this very knowledge of God, which he realizes
is his only salvation, his only path to the civilization for which
he longs. Beautifully pathetic were the words in which he spoke of
our common brotherhood and of the longing of his people for better
things.

On Wednesday morning the exercises opened with a battalion drill,
and later, time was given to an exhibition of the industrial
work of the students. The blacksmith, carpenter and shoe shops
held proof of good solid work on the part of the boys; while the
needle-work of the girls and small boys was exceptional. The talent
for free-hand drawing is very general among the Indians, and the
collection of specimens was good.

The exercises closed on Wednesday evening with a social gathering
in the large dining hall. There were present all the boys and
girls of the school, the teachers, employees, and many visitors.
Blanketed Indians mingled with the rest, and many nationalities
were represented. It was a novel company, but all were happy and
glad. With the close of the evening, Santee finished a successful
year. Very early on Thursday morning nearly a score of the students
were busy with preparations for departure. In the quiet of the dawn
some of us heard the sound of music, most unusual at this hour; and
one of the teachers venturing to the chapel, found the young men
holding a meeting for prayer. It was their own idea; they had waked
one another quietly for it. It was the surest safeguard against
the temptations they were going out to meet. This single incident
shows better than words the missionary spirit pervading the whole
school. And so, to-day, with the departure of the students, goes
out the gospel influence of Santee—far North into Canada, East into
Minnesota, and West into Montana, never to diminish, but to grow
and spread until the white man’s God shall be indeed the God of all
the Indians.

What is true of the advance of the pupils of Santee is indicative
of the advance of the whole people. There is surely a bright day
coming for the Indian.

                                          MRS. CHAS. W. SHELTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


IMPERIUM IN IMPERIO.

The story which I have to tell this month may startle our readers
east of the Rockies, though the hard fact underlying it has long
been known to us on this Pacific slope, and especially in San
Francisco.

On Sunday, June 5th, among seven Chinese who were baptised and
received to Bethany church, was one young woman about fifteen
years of age. She was the second female Chinese received to our
fellowship, for out of more than 120 of that nation whom I have
baptised, all but two have been males.

This young woman is remarkably beautiful in person, pleasing in
her ways, and interesting in character. Her father is in China.
Her mother, quite in accordance, perhaps, with the moralities of
Chinese heathenism, had taken to herself another husband for the
time being, and had gone to Arizona to ply her trade, the nature of
which I do not _certainly_ know, and therefore will not suggest. To
raise funds she had _pawned_ this girl for $250, but had paid $100
on her debt. A very estimable Chinaman, not a professed Christian,
but one of whom we have hoped much, knowing the parties and hearing
that little Ah Yung was being harshly treated, advanced the balance
of the debt and took possession of the child. He placed her in the
family of our helper, Jee Gam. Thus she became known to the lady
teachers in our Central Mission, one of whom went up-stairs each
evening to the apartments occupied by Jee Gam’s family, to give her
a lesson, and also (as always) to speak to her of Christ.

At first indifferent and even hostile, she softened at length,
and began to wish that she might become a Christian. With this
softening of the heart towards Christ, there rose, of course, an
abhorrence and dread of the destiny which, according to heathen
customs, awaited her. She did not, however, at first open her heart
fully to her teacher, but said that she would like to earn some
money, and to work for wages in some American family. A place was
found for her which, as being a little remote from the city, was
likely to be a safe refuge. But when the time for her removal came,
unexpected obstacles were interposed. Jee Gam, while quite willing
to have her go, felt that it would be neither honorable nor safe
for him to deliver her to any one except the man who entrusted her
to him; and this one shrunk from the responsibility of letting her
go where it might be difficult for her mother to resume possession
of her. Meanwhile the case became more urgent because of a report
that her mother would soon be in San Francisco, for, with her
arrival, all possibility of legal protection for the child would be
gone. Miss Jessie S. Worley, the principal of our Central School,
suddenly cut the knot by causing herself, with no one’s consent
except that of the child, to be appointed her legal guardian, and
she holds her under such protection now.

The day after Ah Yung’s baptism, I think it was, the mother
appeared. Entreaties proving vain, she sought by other methods
to bring her daughter under her own control, or else to get from
some one the coin she was supposed to be worth; for such a girl,
just budding into womanhood, in our Chinese matrimonial market, is
said to be worth from $500 to $1,500. Last Saturday the Chinaman
who had befriended Ah Yung appeared at my study. It was with great
difficulty that he could maintain his self-control, though he is a
man of strong and steady nerves. His lips quivered as he talked,
and his athletic frame often trembled. The mother had appealed to
the Six Companies, and his life was at stake. Since then, as I
have been informed, a meeting of the representatives of the Six
Companies has been held, and our friend was summoned to appear
before them. He was given till to-day (June 17th) to restore the
girl to her mother—an act entirely beyond his power. Meanwhile, the
High-Binders were already on his track, and he scarcely feels safe
even in Oakland and in his own employer’s house. He will probably
be obliged to flee, perhaps to some point far East, for he will not
be able, even if disposed, to surrender the dear child to the fate
to which, in her mother’s hands, she would be doomed.

This has brought closer home to me than ever before the fact of an
_imperium in imperio_ in our Chinese communities. It stirs one’s
blood to think that this young man can make no effective appeal to
our Government against this secret tyranny. It may very likely be
that if he should be murdered, his murderer, if convicted, would be
hung; but this is at best a cold and shadowy comfort in the present
emergency.

“A good argument, this,” some one avers, “for hustling the whole
brood out of the land!” But in so doing we should not help
ourselves at all, and we should hustle them back into deeper
darkness and severer cruelty. A good argument, rather, as it
seems to me, for pouring in with intenser zeal and more practical
endeavor, the life-giving, freedom-giving light of Christ.

                                                     W. C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


Our matrons and teachers find much to interest them in studying the
characteristics of the students as exhibited in their school life,
and especially are they interested in following the students during
vacations to their homes and among the people on the plantations.
Witness the following extracts from the correspondence of one of
our matrons:

I think you would be more surprised and delighted to make a tour
of our Boys’ Hall, as I did one evening a few weeks before school
closed, than to go through the Ladies’ Hall, because you might
not expect so much of the young men. I must say, the absolute
cleanliness, order and quiet that reigned as I went around in the
time of evening study, was more than I expected.

Nearly every room had its pictures, every one its little case
for books, some a window full of plants, and all the ordinary
conveniences spick and span, with the beds beautifully made up.
Some rooms, especially those of the apprentices, were full of
ingenious little contrivances which they have made themselves,
and so, of course, take double pleasure in. Their matron kept a
diligent eye for something to criticise, and, sure enough, some
of their books were wrong end up, and she asked the boys if they
expected people to stand on their heads to read the titles.

       *       *       *       *       *

The comfort, convenience and neatness of our plain little rooms,
where the girls, and equally the boys, are required to have “a
place for everything, and everything in its place,” form by painful
contrast one of the special trials of our young people when they go
out to cabin life in their teaching and other vacation work.

After they have learned to love the new way, it is very hard for
them to have no room to themselves, no facilities for bathing, and
small chance to display the good taste they have learned to use in
the arrangement and care of their personal belongings.

One of our older girls, who keeps a gem of a room here, felicitates
herself on having a room to herself where she boards, even though
tucked up and the walls full of other people’s clothes, a saddle,
and sundries.

Another of our girls passing through her first experience of “going
out,” wrote a wofully homesick letter, saying there was no place to
hang up or lay down anything where she was staying; that her trunk
had to go under her bed, and after she had made her morning toilet
she couldn’t even find room to put down her comb and brush, but had
to haul out her trunk and put them back into it. We expect to hear
a more cheerful song after her school fills up and she becomes busy
and interested, for she is really a very energetic girl, practical
and positive. We have written advising her to get her brother, who
is skillful with tools and teaches near enough to visit her on
Saturdays, to put up some shelves and other conveniences in her
school-room, to make that as homelike as possible, have her sewing
there, and gather her girls in to learn to sew, crochet, etc., if
practicable.

[This brother is one of our Biblical class, and already beginning
to preach. He had a tramp of a hundred miles or so after school
closed, looking for work for himself and others, back from the
railway in the more inaccessible regions, where the schools are not
snapped up so quickly. In writing of his search, he said: “I have
had what some would call a hard time, but I have enjoyed it, and I
_know_ that the Lord is with me.” Blessed assurance!]

       *       *       *       *       *

All the girls write, sooner or later, to their matron after going
home. Some of the letters are rather amusing.

One harum-scarum little miss, who made no end of care when here,
after being home a fortnight seems to have been visited with some
sense of her shortcomings, and wrote: “If I live I am coming back
in the fall, and try to be a better girl than I was before.”

She refers to the text of Scripture that had been given them all as
a watchword, and says she often thinks of it; then, as if to confer
a like benefit upon her kind friend, she opens her Bible at random
and copies: “And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes
and shave off all his hair and wash himself in water that he may be
clean.” After two or three more of similar tenor, she says: “Think
of these verses as long as you live, and also of me,” and ends all
by this new rendering of a familiar passage: “Be not overcome evil
with good, but overcome good with evil.” Encouraging, isn’t it?

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1887.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $234.31.

    Bangor. Hammond St. Cong. Ch. 76.98; Sab. Sch.
      of First Parish Ch., 14.32                             $91.30
    Bethel. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                     11.00
    Biddeford. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Savannah, Ga._                                15.00
    Blanchard. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Blue Hill. Mrs. H. W. Johnson, 1; Mrs. M. S.
      Mayo, 1                                                  2.00
    Brewer. M. Hardy (10 of which _for Pleasant
      Hill, Tenn._)                                           25.00
    Castine. Mrs. C. M. Cushman, for _Tougaloo U._             2.75
    Gardiner. Ladies, _for Debt_.                              4.65
    Kennebunk. Union Ch. and Soc.                             22.00
    Lyman. Cong. Ch.                                           8.00
    Machias. Center St. Cong. Ch., 6.70; “C. L.,” 5           11.70
    Machias. Sara P. Hill’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Indian M._                                               1.25
    Scarboro. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.25
    South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis’ S. S. Class, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        1.50
    Waterford. First Cong. Ch.                                13.00
    Winthrop. Bbl. and Box of C., _for Wilmington,
      N.C._; 1.91 _for freight_                                1.91
    Yarmouth. Mrs. Reynold’s S. S. Class, _for
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        8.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $374.79.

    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        15.75
    Bennington. Cong. Ch. and People                           9.31
    Canaan. “Friends,” Bbl. Books etc., _for
      Straight U._
    Concord. Mrs. L. N. Barron, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00
    Concord. “A Friend of the Colored Race” 5.05;
      J. W. Chandler, 1                                        6.05
    Derry. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                       19.00
    Durham. Cong. Ch.                                         44.93
    Exeter. “A Thank Offering”                                25.00
    Franklin. “Friends” 3; Mrs. John H. Rowell, 2,
      _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                            5.00
    Great Falls. Bbl. of C. _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Henniker. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MISS
      ZILPHA BARNES L. M.                                     38.00
    Hinsdale. Cyrus Newhall                                    1.00
    Hollis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                18.76
    Jaffrey. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                    4.00
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch.                                      14.40
    Lebanon. “Friends,” Bbl. Books, etc., _for
      Straight U._
    Nashua. Sab. Sch. Class by Miss Dora Spalding,
      _for Storrs Sch._                                       20.00
    Portsmouth. North Ch. and Soc.                           101.19
    Salem. Ladies of Cong. _Ch., for Debt_                     6.00
    Salisbury. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Atlanta
      U._                                                      2.00
    Tilton. C. C. Sampson, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             3.00
    Walpole. Y. P. M. Circle of Cong. Ch.                     11.40


  VERMONT, $1,326.27.

    Benson. Miss J. Kent                                       1.50
    Bridport. Ladies, 26; Sab. Sch., 5, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                   31.00
    Brownington. S. S. Tinkham                                 5.00
    Burlington. 2 Bbls. and Box of C., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._
    Cornwall. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (25 of which from
      Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._)                            73.01
    Dorset. Mrs. William D. Marsh, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Dorset. Sab. Sch. and W. H. M. S. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                      30.00
    Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                       4.75
    East Fairfield. Cong. Ch.                                  3.61
    Georgia. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs.
      Ellen D. Wild                                            9.00
    Granby. “A Friend,” _for Debt_                             5.00
    Granby. Infant Class, by W. H. Matthews, _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       1.10
    Manchester. Cong. Ch., 36.01; Samuel G. Cone 50           86.01
    Manchester. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                                       5.00
    Middlebury. Lillie C. Chapman, _for Indian M._             0.20
    Norwich. Ashley Blodgett                                   5.00
    Rutland. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Straight U._
    Swanton. Mrs. Augusta Dorman, _for McIntosh,
      Ga._, by Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                              2.00
    Swanton. Box of C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
    Springfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           8.45
    Townshend. Cong. Ch. (5 of which from Mrs.
      Rice)                                                   15.50
    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                               15.14
                                                             ——————
                                                            $326.27

    LEGACY.

    Saint Johnsbury. Estate of Miss Emma L.
      Taylor, by James C. Taylor, Ex.                      1,000.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,326.27


  MASSACHUSETTS, $3,346.37.

    Amherst. North Ch.                                        10.00
    Amherst. Miss M. E. Fowle, _for Tougaloo U._               1.00
    Andover. “A Friend” Map of U.S. _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. JOHN
      WING L. M.                                              41.31
    Ayer. Orthodox Cong. Soc.                                 16.40
    Ballardvale. Union Ch. and Soc.                            4.00
    Belchertown. Mrs. R. W. Walker                             2.00
    Bernardston. Cong. Soc.                                    4.00
        Boston. Union Ch. and Soc.               108.35
        East Boston. Emma Fales and Sister         1.00
        Dorchester. Village Ch. and Soc.          46.40
        Dorchester. Miss Grace S. Wilder           5.00
        Jamaica Plain. Boylston Cong. Ch.          5.37
        Jamaica Plain. Mrs. L. G. Jarvis,
          _for Oahe Indian M._                     5.00
        Roxbury. Mr. Susan Collins                10.00
        Roxbury. Walnut Av. Cong. Ch.            184.67
                                                 ——————      365.79
    Bradford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 40.40;
      Ward Hill Sab. Sch., 12.63                              53.03
    Brockton. Mrs. Sanford, Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Campello. South Cong. Ch.                                115.00
    Charlemont. Edward Graves                                 10.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.00
    Danvers. Mrs. Lucy D. Carleton                             5.00
    Douglas. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    East Dennis. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Easthampton. Home M. Band, Bbl. Bedding, etc.,
      _for Straight U._
    East Templeton. Joel Fairbanks                             3.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.00
    Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                            190.25
    Fitchburg. Rollstone Ch, 50; also Box of
      Goods, _for Student Aid, Straight U._                   50.00
    Framingham. Sab. Sch. of Plym. Ch., and
      “Friends in the Church,” 50; “A Quartet,”
      42; Ladies of Plym. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   92.00
    Gloucester. Sab. Sch. Miss’y Soc., Patchwork,
      _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              28.29
    Groton. Union Cong Ch.                                    47.25
    Hatfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Fisk U._
    Holden. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Holyoke. Ladies, Box of C. _for Straight U._
    Housatonic. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            66.18
    Huntington. First Cong. Ch.                                3.24
    Hyde Park. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      32.58; First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 15                     47.58
    Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. Ch., to const. ANDREW
      J. PHILLIPS L. M.                                       30.00
    Kingston. Mayflower Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    Leicester. Ladies’ Char. Soc., by Miss E. E.
      Loring, _for Woman’s Work_                              25.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch.                                    16.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             18.00
    Longmeadow. “T. P. C.”                                     2.00
    Lynn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 22.10; Sab.
      Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 14                             36.10
    Lynnfield Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       9.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          54.00
    Marblehead. J. J. H. Gregory, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
    Mattapoisett. Cong. Ch.                                   16.00
    Middleton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., ad’l _for Debt_            0.10
    Mittineague. Ladies’ Aid Soc., Box of C.,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Monson. Mrs. C. O. Chapin                                  3.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. I. H. Bartlett, Jr.                     30.00
    Newburyport. “Member North Cong. Ch.,” 30, to
      const. MRS. NELLIE MILLS L. M.; Harriet O.
      Haskell, 2                                              32.00
    Newtonville. Cen. Cong. Ch.                              110.15
    Northampton. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Indian M._                                         50.00
    Northboro. Mrs. Martha D. Wells                            4.50
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                        100.00
    North Brookfield. “Two Friends,” _for Indian
      M._                                                      2.00
    North Brookfield. Ladies of First Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Fisk U._
    North Middleboro. “A Friend,” to const. ADNA
      P. KEITH L. M.                                          30.00
    North Weymouth. Nathan Ford                                2.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                  107.58
    Norwood. Ladies’ M. Circle, by Mrs. J. C.
      Lane, _for Woman’s Work_                                20.00
    Pepperell. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Storrs Sch._                                            25.15
    Pittsfield. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      12.17
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          70.00
    Quincy. Miss Harriet Proctor, Box of Books,
      _for Straight U._
    Reading. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 17.50; “A Friend
      in Cong. Ch.” 3; “A Friend in Cong. Ch.” 3              23.50
    Reading. Mrs. Eliza A. White, Box and Bbl. of
      C. etc., _for Macon, Ga._
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc. (150 of which
      from Joseph H. Towne, to const. MISS LYDIA
      A. TOWNE, EZRA L. WOODBURY, JAMES SHATSWELL,
      FRED. A. FULLER and EDMUND A. BROWN L. M’s)            290.69
    Salem. “Two Individuals” 1 each, _for Marie
      Adlof Sch’p Fund_                                        2.00
    Sheffield. First Cong. Ch.                                18.00
    Somerville. Prospect Hill Ch.                             10.48
    Southboro. Mrs. M. J. Temple, Bbl. of C., _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Southbridge. Miss N. Vinton, Bbl. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N.C._
    South Easton. James Rankin                                 7.50
    South Hadley. “Mt. Holyoke Sem.” 36; First
      Cong. Ch., 25                                           61.00
    South Royalston. Amos Blanchard                           10.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 50.00
    Springfield. Y. P. S. of C. E. First Ch. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Swampscott. Miss Emeline B. Sayer                          2.00
    Townsend. Miss M. A. Proctor, 65 Books, _for
      Straight U._
    Walpole. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        62.23
    Waltham. _For Student Aid, Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            3.00
    Wellfleet. Second Cong. Ch.                                6.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       50.60
    Westhampton. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., by Mrs. E.
      P. Torrey, adl., _for Tougaloo U._                      10.00
    West Medway. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            3.00
    West Stockbridge. Cong. Ch. adl.                           1.25
    West Warren. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             5.00
    West Washington. Mrs. Esther Melins                        1.00
    Whately. Cong. Ch.                                        13.00
    Williamstown. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                      20.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Parish                    70.00
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             36.00
    Winchester. “A Friend”                                    20.00
    Worcester. Union Ch, 205.12; J. M. Bassett,
      100; Geo. W. Ames, 3; Polly W. Ames, 3                 311.12
    Worcester. Ladies Benev. Soc., Union Ch. 2 and
      Bbl. of C., _for Talladega C._                           2.00
    Yarmouth. Cong. Ch., by Rev. L. Reynolds, _for
      Selma, Ala._                                             6.30
    ——. “A Friend in Mass.,” _for Debt_                        1.00
    By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass’n:
        Ludlow                                    21.20
        Mittineague                               25.66
        Monson. Sab. Sch.                         50.00
        West Springfield. Park St.                45.77
                                                  —————      142.63

    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

    Auburndale. “Friends in Cong. Ch.” 1 Bbl.,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Boston. Mrs. H. N. Ayers, 1 Bbl., _for Santee
      Indian M._
    Linwood. D. C. M. Rupp, 1 Bbl.
    Maynard. Friends in Cong. Ch., 1 Bbl.
    Medford. Miss Washburn, 1 Bbl., _for Oaks,
      N.C._
    Waverly. M. A. Chany, Clothing


  RHODE ISLAND, $422.41.

    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  53.00
    East Providence. “A Friend”                              200.00
    Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch. 75; North Cong.
      Ch. 45.32; A. L. Ordway, 25                            145.32
    Providence. Ralph Ernest Larry, _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               0.10
    Westerly. Cong. Ch.                                       23.99


  CONNECTICUT, $4,024.93.

    Bethel. Y. L. M. Circle, Bbl. of C., _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch.                                    117.60
    Bridgeport. Ladies of South Cong. Ch.,
      _Freight for Thomasville, Ga._                           1.45
    Canaan. “For Missionary Work”                              5.00
    Canton Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.24
    Colchester. First Cong. Ch. 65.65, and Sab.
      Sch., 3.50                                              69.15
    Cornwall Hollow. “Thanksgiving Workers”
      Patchwork, for quilt, _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Durham Center. Miss E. H. Newton and Miss A.
      P. Camp, Patchwork, Apron and 50c. _for
      Student Aid, Thomasville, Ga._                           0.50
    East Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      15.00
    East Hampton. Philo Bevin                                 25.00
    East Hartford. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Indian M._                                         50.00
    East Hartford. First Ch. (2.55 of which _for
      Indian M_)                                              20.00
    Ellington. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Box of C.,
      _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
      W. S. GOSLEE, CORA HALE, AMELIA HUTT, MARY
      ROBINSON, MINNIE COUCH, MRS. ELLEN A.
      GAINES, MRS. JAMES GAINES, MRS. JUSTIN
      HOLLISTER, H. E. LOOMIS, P. H. GOODRICH,
      MRS. ADELADE DEAN, and MRS. GEO. W. BARTLETT
      L. M’s                                                 400.00
    Granby. First Cong. Ch.                                    7.07
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const. MISS
      NELLIE C. SNOW L. M.                                    30.00
    Hartford. Roland Mather 1,000; First Ch.
      339.23; Windsor Av. Cong. Ch. 15; Asylum
      Hill Cong. Ch. 7                                     1,361.23
    Hartford. Benev. Soc. of Fourth Cong. Ch. 1.40
      _for Freight_; Benev. Soc. of Park Ch. Box
      of Goods, 3 _for Freight_; The Parsonage
      Circle of First Ch. Bbl. of Goods, _for
      Thomasville, Ga._                                        4.40
    Higganum. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Kensington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                              25.00
    Lakeville. L. M. S. 1; Ladies of Cong. Ch.
      Bbl. of C., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                   1.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               50.32
    Mill Brook. Mrs. E. R. Allen                               0.50
    New Britain. First Church of Christ                      115.00
    New Britain. Willie Peck, 1 years “Nursery,”
      _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    New Haven. United Ch.                                    154.00
    New Haven. Ferry St. Ch., _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._                                                  32.70
    New London. First Cong. Ch.                               52.16
    North Haven. E. Dickerman                                  2.00
    Plainville. Ladies’ Soc. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Putnam. “Mission Workers,” _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    Quinebaug. Pkg. S. S. Papers, _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                50.69
    Simsbury. Cong. Ch.                                       41.81
    Southbury. Ladies, by Julia E. Bull, _for Debt_            1.00
    Stamford. First Cong. Ch.                                 67.21
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      50.75
    Torrington. Ladies’ Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. (39.53 of which _for
      Indian M_)                                             112.91
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch.                              323.42
    West Chester. “A few Ladies,” by Mrs. E. Brown             2.00
    West Hartford. “Gray Girls,” _for Sch’p,
      Indian M._                                              40.00
    West Hartford. “A Friend”                                 10.00
    West Hartford. Mrs. Richards, fifty S. S.
      Books, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    Windsor Locks. “True Blue Cards,” by Mrs. J.
      H. Goodell, _for Indian M._                             10.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch.                                26.07
    Woman’s Home Mission’y Union of Conn., by Mrs.
      S. M. Hotchkiss, Sec., _for Conn. Ind’l
      Sch., Ga._:
        Bridgeport. Ladies’ Social Circle, So. Ch.            41.75
                                                             ——————
                                                          $3,424.93

    LEGACY.

    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven
      (100 of which _for Indian M._)                         600.00
                                                             ——————
                                                          $4,024.93


  NEW YORK, $985.36.

    Berkshire. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       74.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch.                                     8.75
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch.                              426.16
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
      M._                                                     37.50
    Brooklyn. The Ch. of the Pilgrims, adl.                   20.00
    Canandaigua. Ladies’ Aux., _for Student Aid,
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._, by Mrs. L. H. Cobb            70.00
    Daysville. L. S. C., Clock, _for Schoolroom,
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._
    Durham. “A Friend”                                         3.50
    Homer. B. W. Payne                                        10.00
    Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Little Valley. Cong. Ch.                                   5.75
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    Lysander. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Munnsville. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
    New York. “A. M. R.” 50; Pilgrim Ch. 10; Morey
      Hale Bartow, 2; F. P. Shumway, 1.50                     63.50
    Northville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                        10.00
    Norwich. Mrs. L. H. Upton, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                14.00
    Oneonta. Mrs. L. J. Safford                                5.00
    Oswego. Cong. Ch. to const. SAM’L. JOHNSON,
      MRS. ELIZABETH CHESTNUT, MRS. EMILINE
      COOPER, MRS. HENRIETTA LORD and MRS. H. G.
      MATTHEWS, L. Ms                                        134.40
    Portland. Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Coon, 25; Mrs.
      Cyntha Reynolds, 50c                                    25.50
    Pulaski. R. D. Gillespie, _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._                                                   5.00
    Saratoga Springs. Mary L. Bailey, deceased, by
      Eleanor Bailey, Adm’x                                   25.00
    Westmoreland. First Cong. Ch. 13.30; “A
      Friend,” _for Indian M._ 5                              18.30


  NEW JERSEY, $167.12.

    Bordentown. L. Bewkes                                      3.00
    Chester. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Montclair. W. H. M. S. of First Cong. Ch. _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            75.00
    Montclair. S.S. Class, First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               7.00
    Newark. Belleville Av. Cong. Ch.                          42.12
    Summit. Central Presb. Ch., _for Hampton
      Inst._, and to const. REV. F. F. WHITE,
      D.D., L. M.                                             35.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $534.00.

    Canton. H. Sheldon                                        10.00
    Clark. S. P. Stewart                                       2.00
    Philadelphia. Miss Mary E. Morrill                         5.00
    Scranton. Plymouth Ch.                                    17.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             $34.00

    LEGACY.

    Philadelphia. Estate of Benj. Coates, by Geo.
      Morrison Coates, Ex.                                   500.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $534.00


  OHIO, $686.37.

    Ashland. Mrs. E. F. Thomson                                2.28
    Berea. First Cong. Ch.                                    11.18
    Bryan. S. E. Blakeslee                                     5.00
    Cincinnati. Central Cong. Ch., 139.30; Sab.
      Sch. of Central Cong. Ch. 14.50                        153.80
    Cleveland. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Jennings Av.
      Cong. Ch., 10 _for Indian M_., 25 _for
      Memphis, Tenn._                                         35.00
    Cleveland. John Jay Low, to const. J. W. MOORE
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Cleveland. Sab. Sch. of Olivet Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    7.00
    Conneaut. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          10.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch., 118.06 and Sab. Sch.
      40                                                     158.06
    Freedom. Cong. Ch.                                        18.40
    Greensburg. Mrs. Helena B. Harrington                      3.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         10.23
    Kelloggsville. Mrs. P. F. Kellogg                          3.00
    Mansfield. James Lawson                                    4.50
    Medina. Y. P. S. of C. E., by May Woodward                12.00
    North Amherst. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 6
      Packages Sab. Sch. Papers, _for Macon, Ga._
    Oberlin. “A Friend”                                       20.00
    Rock Creek. Ladies of Cong. Ch. 2 Bbls. and
      Box of C. etc. _for Fisk U._
    Tallmadge. Young Ladies’ M. S., _for Indian M._           20.00
    Toledo. Miss L. Whitney, _for Austin, Tex._               20.00
    West Andover. Henry Holcomb                                3.00
    Youngstown. “Mrs. W”                                       2.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Ohio, by Mrs.
      Ella J. Mahoney, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Burton. Mrs. E. A. Hitchcock               2.00
        Chester. Saint Paul’s Band                 5.50
        Cleveland. L. M. S. of Euclid Av.
          Cong. Ch.                               20.00
        Cleveland. Y. P. S. of C. E.,
          First Cong. Ch.                          3.25
        Columbus. “Mite Box and Friends”          16.00
        Hudson. L. H. M. S.                        3.15
        Kelley’s Island. Aux.                      3.75
        Kirtland. L. M. S.                         3.07
        Medina. L. H. M. S.                        5.55
        Oberlin. L. H. M. S. of Second
          Cong. Ch.                               85.65
        Sandusky. L. H. M. S.                     10.00
                                                 ——————      157.92


  INDIANA, $72.22.

    Fort Wayne. Plym. Cong. Ch.                               20.50
    Michigan City. Cong Ch.                                   51.72


  ILLINOIS, $1,390.24.

    Alton. Church of the Redeemer                             29.85
    Amboy. Mrs. D. W. Slauter                                  3.00
    Brimfield. Cong. Ch.                                       7.80
    Chicago. Union Park Cong. Ch., 210.17; First
      Cong. Ch., 100.; Leavit St. Cong. Ch.,
      10.27; Western Av. Cong. Ch., 5.60                     326.04
    Chicago. Ashland Av. Sab. Sch., _for Oahe
      Indian M._                                              15.00
    Chicago. Ladies’ Aid Soc. of Plym. Cong. Ch.,
      _for Indian M._                                         50.00
    Chicago. Marder, Luce & Co., _for Memphis,
      Tenn._                                                   5.00
    Chuay. Mrs. E. H. Gillette, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 2.00
    Elmwood. Mrs. M. D. Wiley, _for Mobile, Ala._              4.00
    Fremont. Cong. Ch.                                        20.50
    Galesburg. “Aunt Lizzie” to const. CASSIUS H.
      MURRAY L. M.                                            30.00
    Galva. Cong. Ch.                                          34.53
    Gridley. Woman’s H. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           14.35
    Lacon. First Cong. Ch.                                    19.51
    La Harpe. Cong. Ch.                                       12.75
    Lewistown. Mrs. Myron Phelps                              50.00
    Moline. L. H. Ainsworth, Patchwork, _for
      Mobile, Ala._
    New Windsor. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                        2.51
    Oak Park. Cong. Ch., (30 of which to const.
      REV. FRANK V. STEVENS L. M)                            234.65
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         22.78
    Peoria. K. Rutherford’s S.S. Class, _for
      Mobile, Ala._                                           12.00
    Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                            189.15
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch.                               214.74
    Saint Charles. Cong. Ch.                                   7.35
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch.                                       32.73
    Woodburn. Mrs. C. E. Sturges, deceased, by A.
      L. Sturges                                              50.00


  MICHIGAN, $451.04.

    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     20.00
    Ann Arbor. Cong. Ch.                                       2.50
    Calumet. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      35.00
    Detroit. Miss M. L. Miller, _for Woman’s Work_            25.00
    East Gilead. Rev. L. Curtis                                1.50
    East Saginaw. First Cong. Ch.                            113.33
    Galesburg. “A Friend”                                    110.96
    Muskegon. Cong. Ch. to const. MRS. G. P.
      KINGSBURY and WILLIAM MCMILLAN L. Ms                    60.00
    Niles. Dr. James Lewis                                    25.00
    Romeo. “Little Sunbeams” 5; Miss Annie McKay
      5; Mrs. Greenshields 5, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            15.00
    Wheatland. _For Student Aid, Athens Ala._                  5.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Mich. by Mrs.
      E. F. Grabill, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
        Detroit. W. H. M. S. of Woodward
          Av. Cong. Ch.                           25.00
        Grand Blanc. “Willing Workers”            12.50
        West Adrian. L. M. S. adl.                 0.25
                                                 ——————       37.75


  WISCONSIN, $267.87.

    Beloit. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Straight
      U._                                                     10.00
    Beloit. L. Meacham                                         3.00
    Brodhead. “Friends,” _for Memphis, Tenn._                  3.00
    Clinton. John H. Cooper                                    5.00
    Kaukanna. Cong. Ch.                                       24.00
    Kenosha. Y. P. S. of C. E. by Carrie L. Bray               4.08
    Lake Mills. Cong. Ch.                                      3.00
    Oshkosh. Second Cong. Ch., Welsh, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               5.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                      10.87
    Waukesha. First Cong. Ch.                                 50.00
    ——. “A Friend in Wis.” _for Macon, Ga._                   10.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wis. _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Arena. W. H. M. S.                         1.00
        Beloit. W. H. M. S. of First
          Cong. Ch., to const. ANNA B.
          KEEP and MISS SARAH F.
          BLAISDELL L. M’s                        60.00
        Clinton. W. H. M. S.                       3.00
        Green Bay. W. H. M. S. of Presb.
          Ch.                                     20.00
        Menasha. “Cheerful Workers.”               3.56
        Milwaukee. W. H. M. S. of Grand
          Av. Cong. Ch.                           25.00
        Winnebago. Convention                     22.36
        Amiret, Minn. Mrs. L. H. Dwinell           5.00
                                                 ——————      139.92


  IOWA, $316.16.

    Burlington. Children’s Mission Band, _for
      Savannah, Ga._                                           3.00
    Cedar Rapids. Eugenia, Helen and John
      Brocksuit (birthday memorial to sister
      Gertrude)                                                1.00
    Corning. Cong. Ch.                                         6.57
    Des Moines. Mrs. J. F. Rollins 2; Ladies of
      Plymouth Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. C. C. Wheat                                  2.00
    Fairfield. “Friends,” Box Books, _for Straight
      U._
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch.                                        6.62
    Hampton. First Cong. Ch.                                   7.19
    Marcus. “Life Member”                                      1.00
    McGregor. J. H. Ellsworth                                 10.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                                      66.00
    Osage. Cong. Ch.                                          50.00
    Sawyer. Francis Sawyer                                    20.00
    Sibley. Viola Mission Band, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            4.55
    Webster City. “Friends,” _for Pleasant Hill,
      Tenn._                                                  10.00
    Woman’s Home Mission’y Union of Iowa, _for
      Woman’s Work_:
        Des Moines. L. H. M. S. North
          Park Cong. Ch.                           2.50
        Grinnell. W. H. M. S.                      4.79
        Iowa City. Y. P.                          10.00
        Iowa City. W. H. M. U.                    25.00
        Lansing Ridge. Ladies of German
          Cong. Ch.                                5.00
        Marion. “Busy Gleaners”                   20.00
        Marshalltown. Ladies                       5.00
        Mount Pleasant. Ladies                     7.00
        New Hampton. Ladies                        1.75
        Osage. Ladies                              2.94
        Osage. Y. P. S. C. E.                      5.11
        Polk City. Ladies                          0.60
        Prairie Hill. Ladies                       0.04
        Sioux City. Ladies                         6.50
        Tabor. L. M. S.                           15.00
        Waucoma. Ladies                           15.00
                                                 ——————      126.23


  MINNESOTA, $106.14.

    Leech Lake. “A Friend”                                     4.50
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch. 25.50; First Cong.
      Ch. 9.64; Pilgrim Cong. Ch. adl. 5; Mrs. R.
      Laughlin 1                                              41.14
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Northfield. First Cong. Ch.                               14.80
    Northfield. Rev. A. Willey, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Rushford. Rev. W. Snell and others, Box
      Papers, etc., _for Jonesboro, Tenn._
    Saint Paul. Mrs. J. L. Howard, _for Oahe
      Indian M._                                               2.00
    Zumbrota. Cong. Ch.                                       23.70


  MISSOURI, $49.00.

    Garden City. W. B. Wills, 10; Miss A. C.
      Wills, 1; F. P. Morlan 1; P. M. Wills, 50c              12.50
    Laclede. Mrs. E. D. Seward                                 3.00
    Lebanon. Cong. Ch.                                        18.50
    Pierce City. Ladies Miss’y Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch.                                                     10.00
    Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00


  KANSAS, $5.00.

    Topeka. Mrs. S. Officer                                    5.00
    Topeka. Rev. M. O. Harrington, Box of Books,
      etc., _for Macon, Ga._


  DAKOTA, $59.75.

    Columbia. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Oahe
      Indian M._                                               6.75
    Huron. W. M. S., by Mrs. F. M. Wilcox, _for
      Oahe Indian M._                                          8.00
    Oahe. Endowment Fund                                      20.00
    Oahe. Miss S. Lindermann, 10; “In memory of
      Cornelia M. Riggs,” 5                                   15.00
    Plankenton. Girls’ Circle, by Mrs. F. Kinney,
      _for Oahe Indian M._                                    10.00


  NEBRASKA, $30.62.

    Ashland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.55
    Chadron. Cong. Ch.                                         3.50
    Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                       16.00
    Ogallala. Cong. Ch.                                        2.57
    South Bend. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00


  COLORADO, $86.61.

    Colorado Springs. First Cong. Ch.                         81.61
    Highland Lake. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $1,589.65.

    Galt. Rev. Edward Dyer, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Los Angeles. Miss A. C. Nichols, _for
      Savannah, Ga._                                           5.00
    Pomena. Mrs. L. N. Suydam                                  1.00
    Riverside. Edwin C. Brown’s Sab. Sch. Class,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          8.00
    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                      1,550.65


  OREGON, $1.90.

    East Portland. First Cong. Ch.                             1.90


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $75.00.

    Washington. Ministering League of First Cong.
      Ch., _for Marie Adolf Sch’p Fund._                      50.00
    Washington. Gen. E. Whittlesey                            25.00


  KENTUCKY, $95.50.

    Williamsburg. Tuition                                    95.50


  TENNESSEE, $710.37.

    Jonesboro. Tuition                                         3.00
    Memphis. Tuition                                         283.90
    Memphis. Second Cong. Ch.                                  6.00
    Nashville. Tuition                                       389.97
    Nashville. Sab. Sch. of Fisk U.                           15.00
    Nashville. Union Cong. Ch.                                12.50


  NORTH CAROLINA, $185.75.

    Dudley. Cong. Ch.                                          1.15
    McLeansville. Rev. Andrew Connet                           4.50
    Pekin. Cong. Ch.                                           1.55
    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            1.00
    Wilmington. Tuition                                      150.95
    Wilmington. “Odd Minutes Miss’y Soc.,” _for
      Indian M._                                              15.60
    Wilmington. Miss H. L. Fitts, 7.25; E. A.
      Warner, 2; Miss E. J. Peck, 1.75                        11.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $179.50.

    Charleston. Tuition                                      179.50


  GEORGIA, $742.02.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch. Tuition                             255.80
    Covington. Dinah P. Watts, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                           35.00
    McIntosh. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Indian
      M._, 18.27; Young Ladies, 1.10                          19.37
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         18.50
    Savannah. Tuition                                        133.00
    Macon. Tuition                                           177.90
    Thomasville. Tuition                                     102.45


  ALABAMA, $344.80.

    Athens. Tuition                                           51.00
    Mobile. Tuition                                          222.45
    Mobile. Woman’s Sew. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Indian M._                                          5.00
    Mobile. Three Pkgs. Patchwork, from unknown
      sources
    Talladega. Tuition                                        66.35


  FLORIDA, $83.00.

    Saint Augustine. Rent                                     83.00


  LOUISIANA, $618.85.

    New Orleans. Tuition                                     618.85


  MISSISSIPPI, $23.25.

    Tougaloo. Tuition, 15; Rent, 8.25                         23.25


  TEXAS, $256.50.

    Austin. Tuition, 236.90; E. F. Newton, 12                248.90
    Austin. Girls’ Mission Soc., Tillotson Inst.,
      _for Indian M._                                          7.60


  INCOMES, $1,965.00.

    Avery Fund. _for Mendi M._                               790.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    Gen’l Endowment Fund                                      50.00
    Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._                    150.00
    Graves Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._              125.00
    Haley Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                     50.00
    Hastings Scholarship Fund, _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    Howard Theo. Fund, _for Howard U._                       400.00
    Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                      200.00
    Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                       25.00
    Tuthill King Fund, _for Berea C._                        100.00


  AFRICA, $20.00.

    Natal. Mrs. Abbie F. Wilder                               20.00
                                                             ======




    Donations                                            $14,633.20
    Legacies                                               2,100.00
    Tuition and Rents                                      3,129.47
    Incomes                                                1,965.00
                                                         ——————————
          Total for June                                 $21,827.67
          Total for Oct. 1 to June 30                    203,520.74
                                                         ==========

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for June                                   $83.63
    Previously acknowledged                                  772.74
                                                             ——————
          Total                                             $856.37

       *       *       *       *       *

  RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,
    from Sept. 20th, 1886, to May 10th, 1887. E.
    Palache, Treas.:

    FROM LOCAL MISSIONS.—Alameda, Chinese Mon.
      Off’s, 8.75.—Alturas, Rev. and Mrs. G.
      Griffiths, 7.50; Mon. Off’s, 15.—Marysville,
      Mon. Off’s, 37.35; Ann. Mem., 8; Anniversary
      Coll., 8.40. Oroville, Mon. Off’s,
      24.20.—Petaluma, Mon. Off’s,
      12.55.—Sacramento, Mon. Off’s, 43.50; Ann.
      Mem., 2; Last year’s off’s, 53.—San Diego,
      Mon. Off’s, 10.50; American Friends, 27;
      Chinese Pupils, 20.50, _for San Diego
      Mission House._ Santa Barbara, Mon. Off’s,
      59.35; Teachers and Friends, 8.95; Ann.
      Membs., 8. Gin Fooking, 20; Ye Loy, 15; Gin
      Chow, 20; Woo Yung, 15; Pon Dan, 12; Other
      Chinese, in sums of 5 and less, 94.20; Mrs.
      E. M. Shattuck, 20; W. N. Hawley, 20; Mrs.
      Fuller, 10; Seven little girls, 2.80—Santa
      Cruz, Mon. Off’s, 36.63; Cong. Ch., 20;
      Anniversary Coll., 12.20.—Stockton, Mon.
      Off’s, 44.80; Mrs. Langdon, 2; Mrs.
      Patterson, 1.—Tulare, Mon. Off’s, 6.25; H.
      E. Dye, 2.25                                          $708.70

    FROM CHURCHES.—Berkeley, Cong. Ch., “A
      Friend,” 5.—Pescadero, Cong. Ch.,
      2.—Haywards, Cong. Ch., Y. P. S. of C. E.,
      8.75; Bible Class, 1.25.—San Francisco,
      Bethany Ch., S. McLellan, 6.25; Mrs. H. W.
      Lamont, 8; “Other American Friends,”
      4.—Central Mission, Mon. Off’s, 21.15. West
      Mission, Mon. Off’s, 29.90; Dea. S. W., 2.50            88.80

    FROM INDIVIDUAL DONORS.—Balfour, Guthrie &
      Co., 500; Mrs. J. E. Sanford, 12; W. F.
      Whittier, 11.50; Rev. E. N. Dyer,
      10.—Lugonia, Edson D. Hale and J. S.
      Edwards, 7.—Sandwich Islands, Kohala Rev. A.
      Ostrom, 5                                              545.50

    FROM EASTERN HELPERS—Bangor, Me., “Friend,” by
      Mrs. Mary T. Pond, 10; “Almost Home,”
      5.—Belfast, Me., Mrs. E. M. Pond, 5.—Derby,
      Vt. “Young People,” 2.—Marlboro, Mass., Miss
      H. J. Alexander, 5; Miss Ellen Beckford,
      5.—Stockbridge, Mass., Miss Alice Byington,
      _for Santa Barbara Mission House_, 100, _for
      General Work_, 50.—Niagara Falls, N.Y., Rev.
      H. S. Huntington, 5.—Detroit, Mich., The
      Bright Shining Stars, by Mrs. W. T. Black,
      _for San Diego Mission House_, 20.65                   207.65
                                                             ——————
          Total                                           $1,550.65

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         BRADFORD ACADEMY,

      An Institution for the Higher Education of Young Women.

                          BRADFORD, MASS.


                        INCORPORATED 1804.

[Illustration]


                             CALENDAR.

  The year 1887-88 closes with public anniversary, June 20, 1887.

                         THE YEAR 1887-88.

  First Term opens,  Tuesday, September 6, 1887.
  First Term closes,  Monday, December 5, 1887.
  Second Term opens,  Tuesday, December 6, 1887.
  Second Term closes,  Friday, March 2, 1888.
  Third Term opens,     Tuesday, March 20, 1888.
  Third Term closes,  Wednesday, June 20, 1888.
  Recess at Christmas time.

The academic year closes on the last Wednesday but one in June,
and consists of three terms. The year 1887-88 will commence on the
first Tuesday in September.


                             EXPENSES.

            BOARD, including washing, fuel, and lights.

  FIRST TERM                                               $90.00
  SECOND TERM                                               90.00
  THIRD TERM                                                90.00
  TUITION, including English branches, Latin and French,
    Greek or German, and Vocal Music in Classes ($20
    per term), for the year                                 60.00
                                                          ———————
  Total expenses for the year                             $330.00


Special terms to daughters of Missionaries and Clergymen.

No extras except the following:—

=Tuition in Music and Art=: Instruction on Piano, per term,
$20.00 to $40.00. Use of Piano one hour a day, per term, $3.00.
Instruction in Art, including Linear and Perspective Drawing, and
Painting, according to the ability of the pupil, per term, $16.00.

In case of failure after an engagement has been made, information
should be given immediately. Application may be made to

                       J. D. KINGSBURY, Treasurer, Bradford, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            STATEMENT.


                     PHENIX INSURANCE COMPANY

                         OF BROOKLYN, N.Y.


                        JANUARY 1st, 1887.


  CASH CAPITAL                           $1,000,000 00
  GROSS SURPLUS                           4,888,171 68
                                         —————————————
                Gross Assets             $5,383,171 68
                                         =============

  ASSETS.

  United States Bonds, market value      $1,104,250 00
  Other Stocks and Bonds                  1,502,858 90
  Loans on Bond and Mortgage                294,900 00
  Loans on Call                              80,758 76
  Cash in Bank and Office                   495,135 83
  Real Estate                             1,082,787 53
  Premiums in Course of Collection          667,231 88
  Interest Accrued                           11,716 42
  Bills Receivable for Marine Premiums      140,284 55
  Rents Due and Accrued                       3,247 81
                                         —————————————
                                         $5,383,171 68
                                         =============

  LIABILITIES.

  CASH CAPITAL                           $1,000,000 00
  Reserve for Unearned Premiums           3,466,886 97
  Reserve for Unpaid Losses                 353,759 83
  All Other Liabilities                       5,438 10
  NET SURPLUS                               557,086 78
                                         —————————————
                                         $5,383.171 08
                                         =============

  STEPHEN CROWELL, President,       GEO. H. FISKE,    }
  WM. R. CROWELL, Vice-President.   CHAS. C. LITTLE,  } Ass’t Sec’s.
  PHILANDER SHAW, Secretary.        JOHN H. DOUGHERTY.}


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing! Clear Record of half a Century.

[Illustration]

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.”

Use a common pen.

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

_Pastors or Committees_ about to _build_, _remodel_ or _decorate_
Churches, may obtain valuable information by reading D’Orsay’s New
Handbook on plans, ventilation, stained glass, and =SECCO PAINTING=
OR STEREO-CHROME.

This new method of Church decoration is far superior to Fresco.
The colors are rich, imperishable, and _warranted proof against
leaky roofs_. Plans for NEW or the remodeling or decoration of old
Churches furnished reasonably. Handbooks sent free _as above_ in
_Middle States_. Address

                       J. S. D’ORSAY & CO.,

                 CHURCH ARCHITECTS AND DECORATORS,

                       67 BIBLE HOUSE, N.Y.


                         Established 1847.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Reliable Carpenter Organs

[Illustration]

Containing the Celebrated =Carpenter Organ Action=.

They are pure in tone, perfect in construction, in exact accord
with the voice, and full of patented improvements. More than 50
different styles, ranging in price from $20 up. WARRANTED FOR
8 YEARS. _Where we have no agent, Organs sold direct on easy
payments._ Buy no organ until you have seen our Catalogue. Free to
any address.

                       E. P. Carpenter Co.,

(Est. 1850.) =Brattleboro, Vt.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


           CHARMING STORIES.       INSTRUCTIVE READING.


                            APPLETONS’

                    INSTRUCTIVE READING BOOKS.


                   _THE NATURAL HISTORY SERIES_,

                        By JAMES JOHONNOT.


  No. 1. =Book of Cats and Dogs, and Other Friends.= For Little
            Folks. Price, 20 cents.

  No. 2. =Friends in Feathers and Fur, and other Neighbors.= For
           Young Folks. Price, 35 cents.

         {=Neighbors with Wings and Fins, and some others.= For
  No. 3. {  Boys and Girls. Price, 47 cents.
         {=Some Curious Flyers, Creepers and Swimmers.=
         {  (Intermediate.) Price, 47 cents.

  No. 4. =Neighbors with Claws and Hoofs, and their Kin.= For
           Young People. Price, 63 cents.

  No. 5. =Glimpses of the Animate World: Science and literature
           of Natural History.= For School or Home. Price, $1.20.

The publication of this series marks a distinct and important
advance in the adaptation of special knowledge and general
literature to the intelligent comprehension of pupils of all
grades of attainment. While in no wise tending to do away with the
regular school-readers, the “Instructive Reading-Books” introduce
suggestive and valuable information and specific knowledge,
covering many of the subjects which will eventually be more
minutely investigated by the maturing of the pupil’s mind. Sent
postpaid on receipt of price. Special terms made on class supplies!

                  D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,

  NEW YORK.      BOSTON.      CHICAGO.      ATLANTA.      SAN FRANCISCO.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. H. ANDREWS & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                    School, Church, Chapel and
                      Sunday-School Seating.

[Illustration]

                            DOVETAILED
                           SCHOOL-DESKS,
                           GLOBES, MAPS,
                       CHARTS, BLACK-BOARDS,
                                &C.

                          CHURCH CHAIRS,
                          PEWS, PULPITS,
                             COMMUNION
                              TABLES,
                            COLLECTION
                         PLATES, &C., &C.

                             IMPROVED
                            METHODS OF
                           SEATING WITH
                            SETTEES AND
                           TAYLOR PATENT
                              CHAIRS.

  Catalogues free on application.

                       A. H. ANDREWS & CO.,
                   686 Broadway, New York City.
                    195 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              Liquid

                          Cottage Colors.

The best =MIXED PAINTS= manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are _heavy bodied_, and for
work that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned
(with our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover
better than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of
which have so little stock in them that they will not give a good
solid coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed
out there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent.
Our Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good
paint, should be worked out well under the brush. The covering
property of this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 3-gal. and 5-gal. bailed
buckets, also barrels; in cans of ⅛, ¼, ½, 1-gal. and 2-gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application
to

                   Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,
                   Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,
                           CHICAGO, ILL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:
  WARNER BRO’S

  CELEBRATED
  CORALINE
  CORSETS]

=9 MILLION= worn during the past six years.

This marvelous success is due—

1st.—To the superiority of Coraline over all other materials, as a
stiffener for Corsets.

2d.—To the superior quality, shape and workmanship of our Corsets,
combined with their low prices.

Avoid cheap imitations made of various kinds of cord. None are
genuine unless

                      “DR. WARNER’S CORALINE”

is printed on inside of steel cover.

                FOR SALE BY ALL LEADING MERCHANTS.

                         WARNER BROTHERS,

  359 Broadway,       New York City.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Hamilton Vocalion Organs

of 2 manual and 2 sets of pedals, $750; equalling in beauty,
variety and volume a pipe organ of 600 pipes by the best maker.
Circulars, with testimonials of leading musicians and organists of
the world.

[Illustration]

“Without a doubt the Vocalion is at present the nearest approach to
a pipe organ.”—_Clarence Eddy, Organist, First Presbyterian Church,
Chicago._

“I have only words of praise in its favor.”—_Henry Eyre Brown,
Organist, Brooklyn Tabernacle._

“Especially valuable for Churches and Concert Rooms.”—_A. H.
Messiter, Organist, Trinity Ch., N.Y._

“A tone so rich and musical must be recognized as valuable for
special and new orchestral effects.”—_Henry Carter, Organist, N.Y._

“Your Vocalion has a magnificent future.”—_Sir Arthur Sullivan._

“A rare combination of power and sweetness.”—_Adelina Patti._

  Catalogue sent free.

WAREROOMS, 28 EAST 23d ST., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S

                            STEEL PENS

                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.

                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 Ditson & Co’s Sunday-School Music

ranks with the very best, and no Sunday-school management should
adopt a new Singing Book without carefully examining one of their
“tried and true” =Sunday-School Song Books=.

=Voices of Praise= (40 cts., $4.20 per doz.) Rev. C. L. Hutchins.
Music and poetry dignified and classical, but not dull; in fact,
bright and enthusiastic. Very large collection for the money.

=Singing on the Way= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) by Mrs. Jewett, ably
assisted by Dr. Holbrook, whose noble compositions are known and
loved in all the churches. This, like the book above mentioned,
does excellently well for a Vestry Singing Book for prayer and
praise meetings.

=Songs of Promise= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) J. H. Tenney and Rev.
E. A. Hoffman—the first highly gifted, musically, and the second
the author of many hymns of refined and beautiful quality. One of
the newest books.

=Song Worship= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) L. O. Emerson and W. F.
Sherwin, both celebrated compilers, composers and leaders, and
the latter well-known as having had charge of the music at many
Chautauqua meetings.

For other good books, please send for lists and catalogues.

For a lovely little book for the young children of a Sunday-school,
look no further than FRESH FLOWERS (25 cts., $2.40 per doz.), Emma
Pitt. Sweet Hymns, Sweet Music, Pretty Pictures.

                     Mailed for Retail Price.

                   OLIVER DITSON & CO., BOSTON.

  C. H. DITSON & CO.,
    867 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           _6%, 7%, 8%._

                       _THE AMERICAN
                              INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

  7⅔%

  CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING
  4 Per Ct. Government Bonds
  Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

Write for full information and reference to the Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


  _Hymns and Songs for Social and Sabbath Worship. 60 cts._

  “Hits the Golden Mean.”

  FOR PRAYER & PRAISE MEETINGS.

[Illustration: Carmina
  Sanctorum

  The Newest Church Hymn
  Book, and the Best.

  “The nearest to perfection.”
  _The Christian Union_.]

Rev. J. S. DICKSON, Pastor Woodland Presbyterian Church,
Philadelphia, and a rare musician and singer, says: “I have just
gone over the ‘Carmina Sanctorum,’ by Rev. Drs. Hitchcock, Eddy and
Mudge, and find that it is by all odds the best hymnal I have ever
seen.”

Rev. THOS. B. McLEOD, Clinton Avenue Church, Brooklyn, N.Y.—“It
satisfies me beyond anything of the kind I have ever seen. Of
course, the names of the editors warranted high reputation. But
considering the progress made in the direction, and the number of
fine Hymn Books recently published, I was not prepared to see a
work so eclipsing as this.”

EDWARD H. MERRILL, Pres’t Ripon College.—“The ‘Carmina Sanctorum’
is a superb book in all ways. I advise Churches about to change
books to examine this one.”

Rev. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D.—“It is a model collection.”

Rev. P. T. FARWELL, Stockbridge, Mass.—“The book is a thorough
delight.”

E. C. EVANS, St. Paul, Minn.—“It has already contributed not a
little to the enriching of the devotional part of our services.”

CONGREGATIONALIST.—“One of the most practically serviceable hymnals
which we have seen.”


SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES, PHILADELPHIA.—“It is a book of great merit, as
might be expected from the character and experience of its editors.”

INDEPENDENT, NEW YORK.—“Any congregation that likes to have its
hymnal represent careful thought and full culture, would do well to
examine this collection of Carmina Sanctorum.”

EVANGELIST, NEW YORK.—“The hymns are only the choicest, and they
have been carefully edited by that accomplished authority in
hymnody, Dr. Hitchcock. As the American Churches have grown in
taste and capacity for musical expression in worship, this book
seems to meet their wants completely, giving them plenty of tunes
they can and will sing, and at the same time educating their taste
and improving their public worship.”

Returnable Examination copies sent to Pastors and Committees upon
request.

  A. S. BARNES & CO., Nos. 111 and 113 William Street, New York.

      By DRS. HITCHCOCK, EDDY and MUDGE.       Price, $1.20.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Clinton H. Meneely

                           BELL COMPANY

                            Troy, N.Y.,

                       MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR

                         Church, Chime and

                            Peal Bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1850      Thirty-Seventh Year.      1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                           OF NEW YORK,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                     _11,155,000_
  Surplus, by New York standard,    _2,254,000_

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._


                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.

  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
      H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
          H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
              S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ham and bacon

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    PAYSON, DUNTON & SCRIBNER.


                       THE NATIONAL SYSTEM.


               The Standard of American Penmanship.

                     TITLE WON, =NOT= ASSUMED.

               _In Rank: Leading the Advance.
                 In Cost: Cheap as the Cheapest._


                         WHOLESALE PRICES.

  P., D. & S. Copybooks, large series      96 cents per dozen.
  P., D. & S. Copybooks, primary series    72 cents per dozen.
  P., D. & S. Copybooks, pencil series     45 cents per dozen.

               SAMPLE COPIES AT SATISFACTORY RATES.


                 POTTER, KNIGHT, AINSWORTH & CO.,

                 SCHOOL-BOOK PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK.


                      _DEPOSITORY AGENCIES_:

  BOSTON: 22 Bromfield Street.    CHICAGO: 377 Wabash Avenue.


                 *       *       *       *       *


         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors have been corrected.

“Perspectve” changed to “Perspective” in the Bradford Academy
advertisement.

“Commitees” changed to “Committees” in the advertisement for
D’Orsay’s New Handbook

Missing “d” in “had” replaced in the Ditson advertisement.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 8, AUGUST, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.