Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: OCTOBER, 1887.

The American Missionary

Vol. XLI.

No. 10.]




[Illustration: CONTENTS]

       *       *       *       *       *


  EDITORIAL.

    ANNUAL MEETING,                                           279
    END OF THE FISCAL YEAR,                                   279
    PARAGRAPHS,                                               280
    THE GLENN BILL,                                           281
    THE INDIAN LANGUAGE IN MISSION WORK,                      282
    MEMORIAL ON INDIAN EDUCATION,                             283
    OUR INDIAN WORK AT OAHE,                                  285
    CANADIAN INDIANS,                                         289
    BREADTH OF THE A. M. A. WORK,                             290
    A CENTENARIAN,                                            292


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE,                                      293
    CHARLESTON, S.C.,                                         294
    SHOTGUN IN LOUISIANA,                                     295
    DEATH OF REV. WILLIS POLK,                                296


  THE INDIANS.

    THE MANDAN INDIANS OF NORTHERN DAKOTA,                    297


  THE CHINESE.

    FRUIT AT PETALUMA,                                        298


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    LADIES’ MISSIONARY SOCIETIES AND OUR ANNUAL MEETING,      300
    MISSIONARY WORK—WHAT CAN BE ACCOMPLISHED,                 300
    NEED OF CONTINUED WORK OF THE A. M. A.,                   301


  FOR THE CHILDREN.

    LETTER FROM A YOUNG SANTEE,                               302


  RECEIPTS                                                    302

                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._
      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._
      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._
      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ———— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ———— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *




                               THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XLI.       OCTOBER, 1887.       No. 10.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


For notice of Annual Meeting see last page of cover. An excellent
opportunity for a healthful sea voyage.

       *       *       *       *       *


END OF THE FISCAL YEAR.

With this month our fiscal year ends. At this writing we are very
anxious about the outcome. As we noticed last month, July receipts
this year fell off, as compared with last year, $17,000, and in
August they fell off, as compared with last year, about $3,000.
This puts a heavy strain upon September. When this magazine reaches
our readers there will still be a few days in September left.
They ought to be golden days for our treasury. The thought that,
if every one will do his duty, it is possible for all deficit
to be overcome and all debt to be wiped out, makes us urgent to
make yet one more plea before our books are closed. The time for
hand-to-hand action has come. Reader, can _you_ not do something?
Do you not know some individuals and churches that have given
us nothing the past year? There are a great many of them in the
country. Can you not, by a little personal effort, induce them to
do something before September ends? A little effort all round, and
God will bless it to our complete deliverance.

       *       *       *       *       *

A friend of our work sends us word that in his judgment the
Association should not only be speedily relieved of its debt, but
that a good balance should always be in hand to meet emergencies.
He therefore makes a proposition that he will be one of a hundred
who shall give $1,000 each to secure this most desirable end. But
where are the ninety and nine? We lay the suggestion before our
readers. We believe that among the constituents of the A. M. A.
there are a great many more than the required number possessing
means in over-abundance to meet the call. We appeal to all such to
take the suggestion under consideration and let us hear from them
at their earliest convenience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Indian boys are interested in the Association’s closing the
year free from debt. A teacher in the Santee school writes: “Some
of the young men who live in the Young Men’s Hall wish to help
the Association pay its debt.” Here follow the names of eight
young men who contribute $9.25 for this purpose. The teacher adds:
“This is money that the boys have earned besides paying for their
clothing and making other contributions.” Were the church members
in the country to do proportionately as well as these Indian youth,
there would not only be no debt threatening, but the new fields
so urgently calling for cultivation would be entered and our work
greatly enlarged.

       *       *       *       *       *

The editor of the MISSIONARY rejoices in having such a little
friend as the writer of the following letter, and he greatly
desires that her tribe may increase:

“_Dear Friend_—I learned from a friend, one of our late
missionaries, that you was in debt, and as I am a little girl and
interested in it, I will give one dime toward the debt.”

                                                        M. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

The field is the world, and the work is one. Frequently we have
occasion to realize this blessed truth. Two contributions just
received bring it up with fresh emphasis. One is from a home
missionary who sends us a generous contribution for our work, and
the other is from a former foreign missionary, who in sending
his gift from over the sea, accompanies it with these inspiring
words: “Your grand work still broadens out on all sides. God give
his people hearts to devise and execute liberal things. The light
surely is increasing and hope grows stronger as your work rolls
onward with its mighty power—the power with which alone the spirit
of God can endue it—is enduing it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The questions with which we have to do are inseparably connected
with the welfare of our beloved land. They strike deep at the
roots of the life of the churches. They touch the mission work
in which the churches are engaged all along the line. Both home
and foreign missions will languish if they are prosecuted at the
neglect of just the work which the American Missionary Association
is doing. The heathen world is a common object for the prayer,
thought, sacrifice and effort of the churches of Christendom.
But the heathenism of the neglected classes of America must be
reached by the churches of America. Over that heathenism we cannot
spring; past that heathenism we must not go without giving faithful
attention to it on the way.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GLENN BILL.

HAS A WHOLE STATE LOST ITS POISE?—It would seem as if the white
people of Georgia had done this in so far as they are represented
by their Legislature in its action on the Glenn Bill. The sentiment
of the civilized world is against them. Of this they might easily
satisfy themselves; yet it is reported that Mr. Glenn, during one
of his speeches in favor of his infamous chain-gang bill, cried
out: “What do the people of Georgia care for the sentiment of the
world?” There is evidence, however, Mr. Glenn to the contrary
notwithstanding, that Georgia does care for the sentiment of the
world. In the Senate the bill has been called to a halt, and
several attempts have been made to modify it. Here is a bill that
has been passed by the Assembly about as unanimously as was the
Glenn Bill:

“_Resolved_ by the House of Representatives, the Senate concurring:
That in future the Governor be directed not to draw his warrant
for the annual appropriation of $8,000 to Atlanta University,
under the act of March 3d, 1884, until such a plan of expenditure
as will secure the exclusive use of the same for the education
of the colored children, in accordance with the declared and
settled policy of the State on the subject of the co-education
of the races, has been submitted and approved by the Commission
constituted in said act for the supervision of the expenditure of
said appropriation.

“_Resolved_ further: That said Commission be directed to see
that said fund is faithfully applied according to said plan of
expenditure, and in no other way.”

This bill is practically as wicked as the one for which it is
offered as a substitute. As the New York _Independent_ says,
it “imposes a fine of $8,000 per year upon an institution for
permitting the child of a teacher to recite to his own father.”
Such legislation is a disgrace to the century. Private and
missionary schools should have the fullest liberty in this Republic
to teach whom they will. A missionary school opens its doors and
says, in the language of the gospel whose teachings it is bound
to follow, Whosoever will, may come. The Georgia Legislature sets
itself up above the gospel, and says, Whosoever will, may _not_
come. Shame upon the State that, while calling itself Christian,
dares to legislate in violation of Christian principle. It will
not, it cannot prosper, till it changes its course. What the
final outcome will be we cannot yet say; but this is certain, the
legislation will be against our principles and our work. In the
meantime, it is pertinent for us to ask the churches if they intend
to stand by us as we attempt to stand for the principles on which
as an Association we rest—principles that we believe to be the
very essence of the gospel? To close this year with a debt would
certainly be a great discouragement in our work. Friends, bend to
the rescue with a will.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN LANGUAGE IN MISSION WORK.

There has been severe and just criticism on the policy of the
Indian Commissioner prohibiting the use of the vernacular in the
schools among the Indians, not only in those sustained by the
Government, but in those supported wholly by private contributions.
We wish to give due credit to the Commissioner. He is honest in
his purpose, and his general aim is good. He is right in wishing
to make the Indian a civilized _man_, and not a civilized Indian.
The Indian dross must be taken out and the manhood-gold polished.
A man’s language is a part of himself, and the language of the
Indian, while it is rich in metaphors relating to natural scenery,
comparatively pure in reference to the social virtues, and exalted
in its conception of the Great Spirit, yet, in many respects, it
holds him to his old life, with its cruelties and superstitions. It
is true that as the Roman and Greek languages, conveying originally
only human and mythological ideas, came at length to be the vehicle
for Christian meanings, so may the Indian’s vernacular. But the
process is long and tedious, and the number of Indians who use it
is so small and its vocabulary is so meagre, that the effort to
make it a permanent vehicle for thought and speech is not worth
making, especially as there is a language so much better just at
hand. The only question relates to the mode of transition from the
one to the other, and how far the Indian tongue can be made a means
of more speedily and accurately teaching the English; or, rather,
how far the Indian language can be used to help the Indian into a
Christian civilization.

Here is the Commissioner’s great mistake. No square rule is wise.
It depends on persons, locations and surroundings. For example:

1. The Indian pupil at Hampton or Carlisle is surrounded by
English-speaking people, and he will learn English perforce, as
an Englishman learns French in France, or German in Germany. Yet
even here the process is slow. The Indian youth is so bashful that
he makes reluctant use of his opportunities, so that it requires
three or four years to acquire the English language at Hampton; and
withal, an interpreter is an essential helper there.

2. The Indian boy at the Santee Normal School has only the teachers
as his English-speaking associates; the rest are Dakotas. He must
spend toilsome years in getting a little knowledge through a dense
medium, when an occasional Dakota word would at once illuminate
the meaning of the English. What the pupil wants is English ideas,
rather than English words. Whatever will give this should be used.

3. But the greatest difficulty is in the schools at out-stations,
which have a _missionary_ aim. Here the idea is mainly the making
of Christian character and life. The teacher is usually a native,
a pupil from the Santee or Oahe schools. He has some knowledge of
English, enough to enable him to give more precise and better
meaning to the Dakota, but not enough to enable him to teach or
preach in it, and if he could his hearers would not understand
him. He must use his native tongue mainly, or not work at all.
The Missionary Societies would find their work ruinously crippled
if these out-stations were cut off. They are the pioneers of
missionary work.

4. Then, again, there is the mass of the adult Indians that can
never learn a new language. They must hear the gospel in their
native tongue, or never hear it. The President of the United
States, Secretary Lamar and Commissioner Atkins have all committed
themselves to the value—nay, the necessity—of religion as a lever
for the elevation of the Indian. Do they mean now to forbid the
Missionary Societies from training teachers and preachers for these
people? This is an assumption of authority that befits Russia, and
we are sure the people of these free United States will submit to
no such Star-Chamber dictation.

       *       *       *       *       *


MEMORIAL ON INDIAN EDUCATION.

ADOPTED BY THE CHICAGO MINISTERS’ MEETING.

_To his Excellency the President of the United States:_

The Congregational ministers of Chicago and vicinity, in their
weekly session at the Grand Pacific, September 5th, to the
number of thirty-five, desire to memorialize you in behalf of
a modification of the recent orders of the Indian Department,
whereby the use of the native language is interdicted in all Indian
reservation schools, not only those that are under Government
patronage, in whole or in part, but also those that are private or
are under missionary societies.

From the first we have favored the policy proposed by missionaries
among the Indians, now adopted by the Government, and heartily
approved by yourself, of bringing these aborigines into American
citizenship and of securing them land in severalty, with the
surplus turned into a school fund.

Nor do we question the motives of the heads of the Indian
Department. Indeed this is forefended by the fact, as semi-officially
stated, that “the question of the effect of the policy of the
office upon any missionary body has never been considered;” and
this fact gives us the more assurance in soliciting you, that the
missionary view may yet receive a due consideration.

We are clear, with the Indian officials, that in the effort to
Americanize these natives, the English language must be introduced
as fast as possible. But we would not do this to the total
exclusion of the native tongues in the missionary and interior
station schools, being confident that the final result will be more
speedily secured by the use, in part, of the Indian language.

We are confident that the greatest civilizing power among any pagan
people will be that which comes from the ideas and the influence of
the Christian religion; and that these can be made most effective
through the Bible of that religion in the native tongue. This has
been the wisdom of missions in all times and countries, and none
the less in those to the Indians of America. By this process alone
have we secured the civilized “nations” we now have in the Indian
Territory, in New York, in Wisconsin and in other parts of our
country. So the missionaries to the Sioux gave them the Bible, the
catechism, Pilgrim’s Progress, spelling-books and readers in their
own dialect, and in this way gave them the really American ideas,
as well as the religion of Christ. And what is the result? Two
thousand of them gathered into the Christian church and twice that
number civilized.

Of the people it is not possible that any but the children will
be taught English, and of these, for a long time, only a small
portion. For the adult people and even for the young, as for the
process of helping them to heaven, “one hour of their vernacular
is worth a cycle of any other tongue,” and this must be from the
native’s Bible in hand. The new order will close eighteen schools
and stations of our missionary body, and as many more under the
care of the Episcopalians and Presbyterians. It will deprive seven
or eight hundred children of the instruction they are fitted to
receive, and will prevent access to about 6,000 who are near these
schools, but not yet reached. Principal Belfield of our Chicago
Manual Training School, after a recent visit to the Normal and
Industrial Training School of the Santee Agency, under Rev. Alfred
L. Riggs, reported in one of our dailies, in terms of the warmest
admiration and commendation, of the comprehensive system of manual,
industrial and moral training of that school, which he declared was
working a wonderful transformation among the Indian youth of both
sexes. And yet it is against this school in particular that the new
orders are aimed. And this, not because the English language is not
chiefly used there, but solely because the Dakota, in connection
with the English, is used at school in reading the Bible and
singing gospel hymns.

The station schools back in the interior of the Sioux Reservation,
under native teachers only, having no connection with the
Government, are also ordered closed. But these teachers have been
trained at the Santee and Oahe schools, to which some of their
pupils have been brought forward; and these again furnish the
scholars who are secured for the institutions at the East where
the English is exclusively used. This process shows the relation
of the vernacular schools to those of the advanced English. It
also shows how unfair it is to decide the whole case of teaching
exclusive English by the selected specimens to be found at Hampton
and Carlisle.

This plan keeps up a connection between the young and the old,
between the raw interior and the more civilized front. It agrees
with the established policy for assimilating people of foreign
tongues in our country—that of using both the vernacular and the
English in their public worship. It would be a gross usurpation for
our country to interdict such peoples from thus using their native
language in parish schools for imparting their own religious views
of truth and duty.

We feel sure that to insist that these new candidates for
citizenship, in addition to all the other new things implied in
this revolution of their old ways, shall be tied up in all their
schools to a new language, will be a disheartenment that will
defeat the desired result.

Our petition is, that you will secure such a modification of the
recent orders as will allow, in private and mission schools, a
discretionary use of the native along with the English language,
and all this in order, as we think, to a more speedy extinction
of the one, and the prevalence of the other, among all the Indian
tribes.

And so we respectfully appeal.

    (Signed)   J. D. MCCORD, Pres.
    (Signed) F. D. ROOD, _Sec._

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR INDIAN WORK AT OAHE.

AN ILLUSTRATION OF WHAT THE U. S. GOVERNMENT _proposes_ TO KILL.

It was my privilege to attend the closing exercises of our Indian
school at Oahe, in Dakota, which is under the direction of Rev.
T. L. Riggs. About forty children have been in school during
the winter, and now in mid-summer they return to their homes to
spend two months. Mr. Riggs has sent word to all the out-stations
that the parents and relatives of the children were expected to
come here for their children at that time. As school closed on
Wednesday, those living at a distance of ninety miles started the
Saturday previous. Many of them reached Oahe on Tuesday, and on
Wednesday morning we watched them coming in in their white covered
wagons and on their ponies. Stopping near the river they pitched
their tents, and thus had temporary homes. There were here then
one hundred and fifty in number who came from all parts of the
“Cheyenne River Agency Reservation,” and some from the “Spotted
Tail Agency.” The mission house was open to all, and not a few came
at once to pay their respects, staying only a few moments. The
school exercises were intensely interesting. The delighted parents
in their blankets and with feathers in their hair, looking uncouth
enough to please the most fantastic taste, themselves satisfied
beyond qualification, seated and standing, filled every available
space when the exercises began. These were recitations and songs,
etc., which made even the phlegmatic red people smile audibly. One
little fellow named Mark “spoke his piece” as follows:

    “I am a little boy
      Not quite four feet high,
    I hope when I grow big
      I’ll not be quite so shy;
    I can’t be very sure,
      But I will surely try.”

The unity of the human race was confirmed in the way in which
Mark picked at his trousers, and in the way in which he did not
know what to do with his hands and his feet during his eloquent
oration. The Indians laughed at his embarrassment “just like white
folks.” The wives of the teachers and the Christian women from
the out-stations had come to this great entertainment. They met
at an Indian home (Spotted Bear’s) and decided to call a meeting,
inviting Miss Collins to address them, as she had just returned to
her old home and people after a long absence. About fifty women,
of whom about thirty were Christians and twenty were in varied
stages of darkness, made the congregation. Miss Collins opened
the meeting with a hymn of rejoicing, which was sung with a will
by all the people. Next she read the verses in Matt. 5.—“Ye are a
city set on a hill. Do men light a candle,”—etc. “Let your light
shine.” Speaking first to Christians who have been taught, she
reminded them that the heathen were looking to them for help, and
that if they did not honor God and the Church, then, instead of
giving light to their people, they were making the darkness more
dense—that even from the far-away districts they knew what the
Indians at Oahe and up and down the Cheyenne River were doing—and
if they followed Christ closely so would those beginning to see the
light follow them. It was as if they were making a road across the
trackless plains; if they kept on in a straight way, avoiding all
the bad places, finding the good camping places by the way;—those
who followed would be safe. Then she reported from her work at
Grand River, trying to impress upon the women the necessity of
working in their Missionary Society, to earn money to help give
the gospel to the people. Luluwin Deprey, a half-breed woman who
became a Christian and united with the church among the first
converts, reported from their workers on the Cheyenne. She brought
fancy articles made of buckskin trimmed in beads and porcupine
quills, to be sold for the Missionary Society. In all, they will
bring about ten dollars. She spoke in a quiet, modest way, saying
that in making all these things they had asked no help whatever to
buy material. They gave the material themselves, so that all that
they brought was clear gain to the work. She urged the necessity of
the church doing more, saying: “We have now but little money on
hand and September is not far off, and we must work much. We have
been ‘playing mission work’; now let us go to work and raise all
the money we can, for if we are Christ’s we must not be idle or
selfish. We must do all we can to help our heathen people, for many
of our neighbors are in darkness. Many in this room are yet without
the knowledge of God. We must _lift up the candle_.” Elizabeth
Winyan spoke eloquently of the work done in the white churches by
the Christian women for those who were living and dying without
the gospel. All people who are without the Bible are alike. None
can live without the Bible without starving the soul. It is true
we Dakota Christians are “a city set on a hill.” Bad actions are
seen even farther than good ones. If you keep your house well, the
others will learn from you. If you keep your children well, others
learn from you. If you pray, so will others learn to pray. It is
now time for the Dakotas to arise and with one action and one voice
proclaim themselves children of Christ. Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, gave Himself for us. He was an only son, and you and I know
how precious He was to His Father. We must now give ourselves and
all that we have to this work as these women (the white women) have
done. Our Indian Missionary Society has done but little, but now
let us truly lift up our hands and lay hold of this work. We have
learned the truth. We must learn to be the leaders and walk before
these people so that we may lead them to Christ. Our missionary has
brought tears in relating the sufferings of our people. Now let
us see what we can do to bring the people into the light. Without
the Bible our people will die. With the Bible we shall live and
multiply and be a strong people. We are “only women,” but women can
give the light to those in darkness, and the command to go into
all the world, means for you to help; you, and you, and me;—every
one. No one has a right to say: ‘Let others work; I will be good
myself but cannot help.’ When we see these white missionaries
who leave all and come to us, it is a shame if we who have been
brought to Christ should hold back anything from Christ. We can
do something whether we have money or not. We have our hands and
eyes and brains. We can make something that will sell and get a
little, and if only ten cents or five cents, the Lord will bless it
and make it do something for His honor and glory. Let us be more
diligent—pray more—and then shall our own strength be made greater
and our own hearts more steadfast and our own lives more fruitful,
and our light will shine so that the way shall no longer be dark
but plain and clear to those coming after us. We cannot sit all the
day idle if we are servants of God; we must bestir ourselves. Work
for God and honor him and save our people, and in this way shall we
strengthen our souls. Pray, depend upon God and do as He teaches,
and though now you may not understand all He teaches, your mind
will open and you will become wise.

“Ptanwin,” or Buffalo woman, the mother of Spotted Bear’s wife,
and more than sixty years of age, then spoke. She came down here
from Spotted Tail Agency a long time ago, and attended school
all winter. She learned to sing many hymns and to read a little
in the Bible. Becoming a Christian and uniting with the church,
she remained here a year, and then said: “I must go back to my
relatives, who are still in darkness, and teach them.” She had held
meetings in various places, sometimes going thirty miles to hold a
prayer-meeting. All this time her son was asking for a missionary.
This poor woman, lame, wholly blind in one eye, and aged, was thus
passing the light along. Once in her sickness her daughter heard a
sound coming from her room, and on going in she found her mother
singing, “Jesus loves me; this I know,” in her own tongue. The
daughter said, “Mother, what is the matter?” She replied, “The pain
will not let me sleep, and when I pray and sing, it strengthens me
and helps me to bear it.” In her address she said: “I found you
had not collected much money, so I said: ‘I will help.’ I got a
buckskin, tanned it, and brought it down. I give it to you to make
little things out of, that the people will buy. When I started to
come I expected to have a good time, and strengthen myself with
your presence. Now I am here, God has given me even more than
this—He has permitted me to see and take by the hand the one who
brought me to Christ (Miss Collins), and my heart is full of joy.”

Her daughter, Spotted Bear’s wife, then made a few remarks in
behalf of the sick. She said: “We have tried to help the sick,
but we have but little money now, and so can do nothing. We want
more money. I remember nothing influenced me in my early Christian
experience so much as the way the missionaries cared for the sick.
All of you know how the care of your body draws your heart toward
the one who cares for you. Now, in many cases if we are good to
the sick, we may win the souls to Christ. Then let us not be close
or stingy. Let us help all we can. Christ came down from heaven.
He gave his body to die on the cross, to be pierced and spit upon,
and nailed to the cross. All this He did for us. What shall we do
now for the people? We cannot die for them; it is not necessary. We
cannot give our bodies for them; this is finished; but we can help
them. We can give money; we can read the Bible and pray with them.
Let us do something; we must be doing something, for these are our
brothers, our sisters, our children and our parents who are living
in darkness. We can help. We know the blessing of the gospel. We
must give this blessing to our people. We must be faithful. Our
American Missionary Association is not able to do all that the
Indians need, and we must help. As surely as we pray and read the
Bible and _give_ to this work, just as surely will we ourselves
develop into large and strong Christians. I will now ask your help
for this work.”

A hat was passed, and ten dollars collected—ten dollars, lacking
one cent.

Then Mrs. Riggs, Secretary of their Missionary Society, reported
the amount on hand—twenty-two dollars—and told the women that
“the work was far below what it ought to be; the people at the
out-stations have done well, but we must continue to give—must do
more, and if we will help ourselves, God will help us, and we shall
save many.”

So closed this interesting missionary meeting among the red Dakota
people. In the afternoon, after a lunch, the parents took their
children home for the vacation, but there were no Saratoga trunks
to pack or carry.

All of this, let it be remembered, was in the Dakota language—which
is now forbidden—the only language which they can use, or in which
the gospel can be made known to them.

                                                      A. F. BEARD

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FOLLOWING INCIDENT, taken from a letter received at this office
from Miss Collins, is at least an intimation of how heartlessly
cruel is the proposition to deny the Indians the use of their own
language in their schools:

“One of our Santee school boys is dying. He is a true child of God.
He wishes to see his relatives all saved, and O! the light in his
face. It is grand as he reads in his own tongue to the old men and
women and the young people the sweet words, ‘Let not your heart be
troubled.’ He has plead with them to turn to Christ to be saved. He
says: ‘I am not afraid to die.’”

       *       *       *       *       *


CANADIAN INDIANS.

REV. SILAS HUNTINGTON, a missionary of the Montreal Methodist
Conference, has been laboring along the line of the Canadian
Pacific Railroad. In his report recently made, Mr. Huntington gives
an incident illustrative in a striking manner of the power of the
gospel over the pagan heart. He says:

“The Hudson Bay Company has an important post established on the
line of this road in connection with which I have found a band
of Indians, numbering seventy-two souls, who were converted from
paganism at Michipicoton over twenty years ago under the labors
of the late Rev. Geo. McDougall. They claim to be Methodists, and
through all these years, although separated from the body of their
tribe, they have kept their faith and maintained their religious
worship without the aid of a missionary.

“The testimony of Mr. Black, the Hudson Bay Company’s officer, on
their behalf was given in the words: ‘These Indians are a godly
people. I often attend their services, and find their prayers and
addresses fervent and intelligent, and they have not been corrupted
by the vices of the white men.’ Persistent efforts have been made
by bigoted ecclesiastics to seduce them from their allegiance to
Christ, but hitherto they have resisted all such overtures. I
baptised five of their children and promised to do what I could to
obtain a teacher for them.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BREADTH OF THE A. M. A. WORK.

BY REV. NELSON MILLARD, D.D.

There are certain considerations which entitle this American
Missionary Association to the peculiar esteem of our churches.
There are in these churches not a few who cherish a paramount,
not to say an exclusive, interest in _foreign_ missions. On the
other hand, there is another considerable number who cherish
a like primary and preponderant concern for _home_ missions.
Many are ready to give largely to the work abroad, but little
to the domestic field, and _vice versa_. I regard this drawing
of a sharp line of distinction and division of interest between
the two departments of missionary activity as unfortunate and
illogical. Foreign and home missions are in their essential nature
one. Our navy, when striking at an enemy in distant seas, is in
essential spirit and aim at one with our army operating within
our own borders. Nevertheless, the division of feeling, however
illogical, exists, and what I desire to say is, that this American
Missionary Association offers itself to the earnest interest of
_both_ parties, because it combines in itself the elements of
both the foreign and the home work. In carrying the gospel to the
Indians and the Chinese, it is taking it to _pagans_. So also,
in carrying it to many of the Negroes and to the poor whites of
the mountain regions of the South, it is taking it to those whose
ideas of religion are far more pagan than Christian, and whose
gross superstition causes them to need the pure gospel as much as
if they lived in India or Japan. So that this Association may be
rightly regarded as a foreign missionary agency. And yet, on the
other hand, these various populations to which I have referred are
dwelling within our own borders, are to a considerable extent a
part of our body politic, and are being more and more incorporated
into it; so that the work is also home missionary in its character.
And we may cordially and confidently commend this Association to
our churches, because it combines both grand forms of religious
enterprise. To those most interested in carrying the Gospel
to pagans, we can say, “We are doing that work,” and to those
centering their regard upon the evangelization of our own land, we
can say, “We are laboring toward that end also.”

But this Association commends itself to us, again, because it
has borne, on account of those for whom it works, a vast amount
of obloquy and scorn, but, in spite of it all, has persisted in
exhibiting unflinchingly the innermost spirit of the Gospel—namely,
that of self-sacrifice for the peculiarly needy, and identification
of itself with the cause of the outcast and forlorn. Foreign
missions have not had to bear any stigma of contumely or disgrace.
Home missions have even felt the favoring breath of popularity.
But this Association, in espousing the cause of what many regarded
as pariah and outcast classes, had to bear from certain quarters
unmeasured obloquy and contempt. But it bore them not only without
shrinking, but rejoicing that it was counted worthy to suffer for
Christ’s sake.

Its noble teachers and other workers, in many and constant
exhibitions of splendid heroism and self sacrifice, gladly made
the cause of the friendless and despised their own. They have
rejoiced to illustrate that great principle of the Gospel, that
we owe not simply those who have done something for us, but those
for whom we can do something. And they have believed, and never
failed to assert, that the most infernal of all arguments and the
very spawn of hell, is that because a man is already under or
inferior, therefore you may still further oppress and keep him
down. That is just the reason for helping and lifting him up. All
honor to a society that has had, and that has cordially accepted,
the opportunity, not afforded to all benevolent enterprises, of
illustrating the spirit of Christianity in the midst of obloquy and
scorn.

And then, this Association commends itself to our hearty regard
by the breadth and enlightenment of its views concerning the
work it undertakes. It has intelligently grasped and acted upon
the principle that the only effectual antidote for the gross
superstition of the classes among which it labors is, in the full
sense of the term, _light_—light educational, moral, religious. It
has not believed, to its credit be it spoken, that even a little
learning is a dangerous thing, but rather that it is better than
none. It knows that though intelligence without faith may be
perverted to evil, equally so may faith without intelligence. If
the former can make an infidel, the latter can make a bigot. If the
former may make an Ingersoll, the latter may make a Torquemada,
between whom there is little to choose. By furnishing, as the
antidote of superstition, at once secular, moral and religious
light, this Association gives fundamental and radical treatment
to the evil, and by the breadth and enlightenment of its views
commends itself to our intelligent denomination.

Need I rehearse the grand motives which should incite us to
sustain this noble society in its work? Are we patriots? Then let
us take the darkened masses of our land for Protestantism, for if
we do not they will be taken for Catholicism. I am not blind to
the many elements of good in the Catholic church; but one fact
stands out bold and prominent in her long history, viz.: that she
is the foe of free institutions. To be such is the instinct of
an irresponsible hierarchy. So long as the Negro was without the
ballot, the Romish church paid little heed to him; but when she
saw in his hand that white symbol of power, she went for him, for
she takes the scent of power as quickly as the deerhound takes the
tainted gale. Are we patriots? Then let us win the Freedmen to
Protestantism and its liberty, if we would not have them won to the
Papacy with its religious and political bondage.

Need I mention that love of man which is a higher motive even than
love of country, that philanthropy which is a nobler incentive than
patriotism? Or need I mention that love and loyalty to Christ,
which is a motive finer than love of country and loftier than
love of man? Under the mighty and splendid impulsion of all these
incentives, let us count it a privilege to give ourselves, with an
ever fresh and ever constant enthusiasm, to the aid of this noble
Association and its noble work.

       *       *       *       *       *


A CENTENARIAN.

Mrs. Betsy Averill, of New Preston, Conn., last May celebrated her
centennial birthday. She is still living. As the Constitution was
not adopted until September, 1787, she is older by a few months
than the Republic. She lives in the house in which Horace Bushnell
was born. Dr. Tyler was her pastor. Dr. Lyman Beecher she knew
well, and Dr. Jeremiah Day, President of Yale College, was her
personal friend. For more than eighty years she has been a faithful
follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. She has been conspicuously the
friend of missions, and her zeal in this direction is greater now
than ever. She has been a contributor to the American Missionary
Association ever since its formation in 1846. The Negro, Chinese
and Indian have had in her a true friend. An Indian girl whom she
helped to educate sent her a picture and congratulations on her
centennial anniversary. The Connecticut Indian Association passed
special resolutions of kind appreciation, which were presented to
her on the same occasion.

Fifty of her descendants and relatives sat down with her at the
birthday dinner. This was her centennial message to the company:
“I have lived a century. Long have I tested the love of God and
the faith in Christ. I want to recommend to you all that loving
Saviour who is my closest friend and my precious hope of glory.”
She still retains to a remarkable degree health of body and vigor
of mind. The editor of THE MISSIONARY “presented the cause” in New
Preston, recently; he of course called upon this venerable “Mother
in Israel.” To his great regret, she was not at home. She had gone
off on a visit to a friend, some miles distant; but he brought away
her photograph and a card on which she had, with slightly trembling
hand, written her autograph.

Says her pastor, Rev. Frank S. Child: “There is a precious and
inspiring lesson written upon the pages of such a rare, long life.
May we learn the lesson and weave it into character.” And so say
we. The American Missionary Association is proud of having had such
a constituent since the beginning of its history, and THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY of having such a subscriber and reader. God bless her.

Moral: If you want to have a happy old age, serve God; become a
life member of the American Missionary Association, and a constant
reader of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY. Try it.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD-SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER.

I have no extended missionary trip to report this month, as the
schools of the Association are closed, and the church work is
somewhat quiet this season of the year.

A run into Ohio, to assist in the ordination of Rev. J. F. Cross,
who goes as a missionary among the Sioux Indians, may, however,
legitimately furnish a basis for “Notes in the Saddle.” A good
New England friend recently asked, in all seriousness, if there
really were a horse belonging to the A. M. A., or whether I hired
one, from time to time, as the occasion demanded? What a wild Tam
O’Shanter ride it would be from Washington to Texas in four or
five days! But such a ride, taken once or twice a year, would only
cover a small portion of the field of the Association. Here on the
west is the work among the Indians, stretching from Santa Fé, New
Mexico, away up to Dakota. The A. M. A. has schools and churches
all along the line. This Council in Ohio gave its commission to a
new harvester going out into this field.

Mr. Cross is a graduate of Adelbert College, Cleveland, and of Yale
Theological Seminary. He has had somewhat peculiar preparation for
the missionary work upon which he now enters, through experience
gained in home missionary fields. He enters upon this new work with
his eyes open, fully appreciating its hardships. He will be located
at Park Street Station, among the Blanket Sioux. Three villages,
containing some 8,000 Indians, will constitute his parish. His work
will include school teaching and almost every form of religious
service. His nearest missionary neighbor will be at Rosebud Agency,
sixty-five miles away. In 1885 an old building was purchased from
the natives, and in 1886 a new building was erected, the Park
Street Church, Boston, contributing the funds. This building is
not a modern parsonage, with hot and cold water, gas, furnace, and
all the luxuries with which many churches delight to furnish their
pastor’s home. This parsonage of the prairie is a log building,
with shingle roof, containing two rooms; and yet it answers the
purpose for which it was built well. A native missionary with
Christian passion for his people, has gone into this field already.
Brother Cross follows Jacob Good Dog, who was the Boniface in this
pioneer missionary work. In a letter written by Francis Frazier,
who is the son of Rev. Artemus Ehnamani, the Indian pastor, there
is the following pleading petition for his people: “Thus God has
blessed this people; and that God will give them understanding to
go on to comprehend His laws, and that they may believe and have
faith in Him, when you pray will you remember them?” This tender
and passionate appeal for the Indians gains additional emphasis by
the going out of a new missionary to this field.

       *       *       *       *       *

The churches and pastors of Ohio I found were greatly stirred up
by the proposed outrages against our missionaries and teachers in
Georgia. Cordial words were spoken on every side in endorsement
of the A. M. A., and in condemnation of the un-Christian and
un-American attempts to violate personal liberty and freedom of
conscience under the flimsy pretense of legal right. A tremendous
Republican uprising will follow this attempt on the part of Georgia
to introduce again the policy of suppression and inhumanity that
had its culmination, years ago, in the cruelties of the prison
stockade of Andersonville. The thumb screw and rack and chain-gang
as instruments for the suppression of freedom of opinion, are
things of the past, and no feeble attempt to legalize them can be
permanently successful in this land to-day.

Sad news just reaches us from Texas of the defeat of the
prohibitory amendment to the State constitution. Ignorant Mexicans
were brought over the border to vote for rum, and so overcame
the honest vote of the Christian and moral people of the State.
Jefferson Davis, after permitting a member of the Woman’s Christian
Temperance Union, who was more enthusiastic than patriotic, to pin
a silver badge of that society upon his coat in evidence of the
esteem in which this prohibition society held him, wrote a letter
to the people in Texas denouncing the prohibitory movement. Mr.
Davis’ prohibition seems much like his patriotism, “conspicuous for
its absence.”

       *       *       *       *       *


CHARLESTON, S.C.

The past year has been a prosperous one for Plymouth church,
notwithstanding the earthquake. The people are struggling manfully
toward self-support, and will in the course of two or three years
be able to relieve the Association of the greater part, if not the
entire burden of the appropriation which is now granted to it.

The earthquake has proven of much benefit to Charleston in various
ways—a real blessing in disguise. Many houses have been repaired
which probably would have remained unimproved, and the city
presents a more lively appearance than before the disturbance. Many
persons were shaken into their senses from a spiritual standpoint,
and the work of God’s servants has been greatly blessed. We have
reaped a goodly harvest. During the past year and six months,
102 persons have united with the church, about 25 of whom were
more or less impressed with the manifestation of God’s power in
the earthquake. There are many careless, lethargic places which
might be benefited by a similar experience. There has been more
faithful preaching of the Gospel to sinners since than before.
There is perhaps in the South, as well as in the North, too much
of a tendency toward speculative and æsthetic discourse, rather
than direct and comprehensive exposition of God’s word. Wherever
the cross of Christ is preached with earnestness, good results are
sure to follow, as is plainly shown in the sequel of the Charleston
earthquake.

We are working hard to raise funds for the erection of a parsonage
for our church, which will cost about $1,800; we have raised
already $400, and have the lot. The parsonage completed and
paid for will enable the church to become in a large measure
self-supporting. We shall lay the foundation as soon as half of the
amount needed is raised. We hope to begin this work the coming fall.

America is a wonderful mission field, and we who are laboring in
that field can appreciate the American Missionary Association and
its work. Withdraw the influence of this work from the South, and
it would prove a calamity more serious in its results than a dozen
earthquakes. The needs of the work grow greater year by year, and
we rejoice that the hearts of a generous Christian people are
expanding and enlarging to meet the demand.

                                                    GEO. C. ROWE.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHOTGUN IN LOUISIANA.

[The outrage referred to in the following letter was perpetrated
only a few weeks ago. We suppress names and dates for obvious
reasons. We know the writer and can vouch for the truth of the
statement. We have in our possession additional and corroborative
evidence.—Ed.]

“My very last days at school were saddened by a most distressing
outrage in which the father and elder brother of one of my own
good, manly, big boys, were shot down in unjust, merciless and
indiscriminating slaughter; the other two grown-up sons obliged
to flee; the mother, grandmother and two younger children left
desolate but not unfriended, and the large, rich and heavy crop,
which would have sufficed to send all the children to school next
year, of necessity abandoned. That was the trouble: the white men
around were jealous of his business methods, his prosperity and his
determination to educate his children—said they were ‘getting too
smart for niggers’—so, when an alleged crime by another colored
man or boy furnished a pretext, they improved the opportunity for
wholesale massacre—six or seven in all were killed, some of them
resisting and killing two white men. I was amazed at the Christian
meekness shown by my boy, the elder of the two who escaped, a
large, strong young man. He spoke with gratitude of the two white
men who tried to save his father, and he seemed disposed to leave
the murderers entirely in the hands of the great Judge of all,
saying, ‘If the Lord saw fit to punish them He could _meet up with
them_ any time.’

“I said, with a view to learning how this severe tribulation had
affected his trust in Christ—for he is but a young disciple—‘some
people, when great trouble is permitted to come upon them, feel
that the Lord has deserted them.’ He responded at once, ‘I don’t
feel that way. I think the Lord must have been _very near_ me when
I was dodging through the young corn, neither high enough nor
thick enough to hide me in the bright morning light, and they all
shooting at me as if I had been a deer, or they would certainly
have killed me.’

“In answer to some remarks of mine, he said: ‘You needn’t be afraid
of my taking to any meanness on account of this. I never can find
it in my heart to be mean to anybody. I feel too sorry for people.’
His only anxiety was to find work and make enough to get the rest
of his people away from there.

“When I went into my school room after hearing of this
heart-rending affair, a horror of great darkness came over me for
an instant, and a sound was in my ears as of a knell; then the
students’ plaintive song seemed to vibrate through the air—How
long, Master, how long? These distressful experiences weigh heavily
on the hearts and nerves of our missionaries, who are here so
nearly all the year around and have such a care for everything that
affects the school or its members.”

                                                        A TEACHER.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEATH OF REV. WILLIS POLK.

Died, at his home in Fayetteville, Ark., after a lingering illness,
Rev. Willis Polk, pastor of the Colored Congregational Church of
that place. He came to Fayetteville in the fall of 1884, and took
charge of the public school for the colored people; and up until
the time he was disabled by sickness, he labored in the school-room
during the week, and preached in the little church, which he
had organized, on the Sabbath. His education and his gifts as a
preacher were above the average of his race. He met death calmly
and peacefully, and died in the blessed hope of a home in heaven.
He was kindly nursed and provided for by the members of his little
flock and others, during his long sickness, and his mortal remains
were reverently laid in the tomb by the same kind hands. He leaves
a wife and four small children to mourn his loss, and the little
flock to which he ministered without a shepherd.

                                                          J. N.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


Away up in the northern part of the Territory of Dakota, on the
bank of the Missouri, live the Mandan Indians. They are a small
tribe, numbering not quite 400, are peaceably inclined, and are
somewhat ambitious. They have a tradition that “they came from
under the earth, where they lived near a subterranean lake. They
ascended by means of a grape vine, which a heavy woman broke, so
that part of the tribe were left below.” They are lighter in color
than many other tribes, and gray hair is often seen even among the
young people. They live with the Arickarees and Gros Ventres, in
a very friendly way, but are a distinct tribe by themselves, with
their old chief at their head.

Little can be said in praise of their morals; they are far below
the Sioux nation in this. Polygamy is very generally practiced,
although the younger people are beginning to adopt the white man’s
ways, and to give up this with others of their old customs.

They are doing quite well at agriculture, raising corn and wheat,
and storing hay. The Government supplies all those who seem
industrious with implements and machines for use in farming; and
some of the men learn quickly their use and manipulation, so that
the results of their labor would often do a white farmer credit.
The great drawback to their success is their natural tendency
to work awhile and then shirk awhile. They soon tire of steady
employment, and form all kinds of excuses for absence. Like the
Irish, they always have sick relatives who demand their attention
at the most inopportune times. This is not more characteristic
of the Mandans than of all Indians. The lack of discipline in
their natures is a very great disadvantage, and is something that
missionaries and agents have constantly to fight. Of course, for
generations back the Indians have followed their own sweet wills,
and have roamed the prairie and forest at pleasure, traveling
when they wished to travel, and halting when they wished to halt,
so that the idea of any necessity for steady toil day after day,
is one that they grasp with difficulty. They must learn first
that there is a to-morrow—a fact they have never realized. This
accomplished, a long step ahead will be gained.

Little missionary work has been done among the Mandans in their own
language, and few of them understanding other languages—even those
of the Arickarees and Gros Ventres—it is little they can learn
of the Christian’s God and religion. The fear of their own gods
arouses them to sacrifice and worship, often of the most horrible
kind, and even while they gaze with red, swollen eyes at the sun,
in painful worship, there is a yearning in their hearts for better,
higher things, and this it is that prompts their heathen prayers
to all nature, through their ignorance of the one true source from
which these better things can be.

While I have spoken of their ambitious attempts at agriculture as a
tribe, there are still many among them who are idle. Young Indian
men in the very prime of life, powerful, and abundantly able to
labor with the strongest, spend their days sitting around the camp
fires with the old men and the dogs, in among blackened kettles,
and all the filthy paraphernalia of their lodges—sit, and smoke,
and talk, and sleep. I asked, one day: “What are these people
saying—what can they find to talk so much about?” “Oh,” said my
Indian companion, “they talk of the old times—of their wars and
their dances!” Sad enough was the picture!

Among these Mandan people, whom he calls his children, lives an old
man—a chief. He stands somewhat between the wild Indian and the
civilized. With yearnings after the civilization of which he has
heard and known, he is yet tied to the old ways through the want of
a teacher and guide. He is intelligent, and anxious for a different
state of affairs among his people. Two sons had he of great
promise. The elder went out to war against some hostile Indians,
and died. It was a great blow to his father, who had looked to his
sons for the deliverance of his people. The younger son was sent
to the Normal School at Santee, to become educated, and to learn
of the white man’s ways. He is still there at school, and his old
father waits at home patiently, while the years of preparation go
on. He sends occasional messages of encouragement to his son, and
is doing all in his power to prepare himself and people for the
work ahead. In order that he may conform to the customs his son is
adopting, he has even had his long hair shorn, a year before the
boy’s return, that it may please him to see his father as white men
are. Long hair is to the Indian very much what the cue is to the
Chinaman—he is slow to part with it.

A short time ago Santee students were engaged in writing letters to
Eastern friends, and the old chiefs son, among the rest, wrote of
his home, his people and his plans. He was trying to tell what I
have told—the condition of his tribe, the lack of missionary work
among them, and their inability to understand the teachers of the
other tribes. As he wrote of this, and of his plan to go back to
them as a teacher, his head dropped forward on his desk and the
tears rolled down his cheeks as he realized the awful want of a
starving nation—a nation crying out for the Gospel of Christ. Yet
this was an Indian boy—was once a wild Indian, a savage! Why will
not Christian people believe that the Indian is a _man_—is a man
with a soul! Why are we all so slow to understand that the Indian
has a heart and a mind!

Surely God remembers the Mandans. God himself believes in the
Indian.

                                              MRS. C. W. SHELTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


FRUIT AT PETALUMA.

Our Petaluma mission has for several years been apparently barren.
Its first years were by far its best ones. It would have been
abandoned but for the faith and self-denying persistency of its
excellent teacher, Mrs. M. H. Colby. Throwing off 50 per cent. of
the meagre salary promised her when she entered upon the work;
soliciting aid from friends in Petaluma; interesting, as far as
possible, her pupils to contribute, she has made her mission the
least expensive of them all; and she has hoped against hope that
the promise would sooner or later be fulfilled, and her labor be
not in vain in the Lord. Others grew discouraged. Chinese helpers
sent to work with her came back to urge that the work be suspended.
The hearts were too hard. The families or _clans_ represented in
the Chinese population of Petaluma were too hostile one to another.
There was too much gambling; there was too much opium. Even those
who had attended the school for years, seemed no less averse to
Christianity than those who had never entered the schoolroom door.

About three months ago the teacher was able to write me that she
believed the ice was broken, and that three of her pupils were
really asking after the true God and salvation. I had learned,
however, by hard experience that the “heathen Chinee”—among other
“tricks that are vain”—can play pious on occasions, and do it so
well as to deceive the very elect. More than once have I been
compelled, by the adverse reports of trustworthy Christian Chinese,
to decline to baptise, or in any way to encourage in Christian
profession, those whom American Sunday-school teachers had come to
regard almost as model saints; and I feared that Mrs. Colby’s warm
heart might have started hopes which a careful scrutiny would prove
unfounded.

Accordingly I sent Jee Gam to visit these young men. He spent
two Sabbaths with them. At another time Chin Kue, our faithful
helper at Oakland, spent several days with them. The result of
their inquiries brought joy to all our hearts. The new converts
were found to be sincere, fervent, courageous and though sadly
in need of instruction, yet earnestly desiring it. So they were
organized into a branch of our Association of Christian Chinese,
and were shown how to commence effective Christian work among their
countrymen. Three weeks ago word came of another who seemed to be
turning to Christ. His brethren were doubtful about him, but Mrs.
Colby hoped quite strongly. This time Loo Quong, who has done so
good service in an evangelistic way in our Northern missions, was
asked to go and spend a Sabbath with them. His experience I give
in something like his own idioms as he reported it to me. Speaking
of this new convert he said: “Before I have chance to speak to
him, the others told me that they had heard that he had been in
the gambling places, but they were not sure about it. So my first
question to him was this: ‘Do you wish to be a Christian?’ He
said ‘Yes.’ ‘Have you been gambling before?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Don’t you
know that gambling is wrong, and not fit for a Christian to do?’
‘Yes, I found that out some time ago.’ So we went on, question and
answer, till I found him truly sincere, and wanting to try to love
the Saviour. So I made arrangements for him to be brought into the
Association on Sunday evening. On Sunday morning five of us were
going to the Congregational church. While we were passing through
Chinatown some of our countrymen, about ten in number, standing by
the doors of the Chinese shops began to make fun of us, calling us
‘_cabbages_.’ This means, in Chinese, a very dirty word, and at the
same time, it has a sound very near to the word _Jesus_ in Chinese.
After they had called us all by this name, they turned especially
upon Wong Tim Ban (the young Christian) saying to him: ‘Come, have
a smoke of opium before you go to church.’ ‘Come play cards with
us once more.’ In all this he kept silent, and so did all of us.
After church was dismissed we came back the same way, and they came
out to meet us again. They called Wong Ban a very bad name. But he
only smiled and returned them a very kind word, saying: ‘Yes, I am
a Christian now, no matter what I had done before. I am going to be
a better man and do not mind your laughing.’” So when evening came
he was welcomed to the Association by the vote of all the members.
And so _we_ stand rebuked for unbelief; and the faithful teacher’s
perseverance is rewarded; and we take courage to work on though
hearts are hard and for the time the field seems like unbroken
fallow ground.

Those who remember my article of two months ago on _Imperium in
imperio_, will be interested to know that the young Chinese maiden
spoken of has been adopted into an excellent Christian family and
is now at home with them in an Eastern State. It would not be wise
perhaps to make a more definite publication of her whereabouts.

                                                    WM. C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


We call special attention to the fact that in connection with our
Annual Meetings we always have a distinct presentation of our
Woman’s Work by lady missionaries from the field. We take the
liberty of suggesting that the various Ladies’ Missionary Societies
that contribute to our work should make an effort to be represented
at the approaching Annual Meeting in Portland. Conference
collectors and church collectors for woman’s aid to the A. M. A.
will find this meeting to be of special help in furnishing them
with a wide and inspiring view of our great work. Let the ladies of
Maine and the adjoining States have a large representation at the
Portland meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *


The following, from a colored woman, shows what can be accomplished
by a single missionary; also the great need of faithful Christian
workers. Speaking of one of our missionaries, this colored woman
says:

“Miss ———— was with us last Sabbath. If we could have her here
for a while we could soon build up a work, and some of these poor
erring children who are being led astray by the world and the other
churches, which are no better than the world, would be reclaimed
and put into the right way. I have been with her studying for
six weeks, and have seen what a great work she is doing, and I
long to have her saintly influence at this place. There are in
this place about fifty or more young colored girls just coming to
womanhood, and out of all you will not find three respectable ones.
Drunkenness, gambling and licentiousness are so common that they
are not looked upon as sin. The church and the world are hand in
hand. The whites look on and smile. It is just as they wish it.
They say the Negro cannot rise above these things; but I do know
that this is false. I know that my people are as capable of leading
pure and holy lives as the whites are, but we need pure-minded
leaders—those who will put their whole heart and soul into the
work, as this dear friend has done. The colored people have no
truer friend than she.”


FROM A TEACHER.

_Dear Friends_: I would like to give you some facts which show the
need of the continued work of the A. M. A.

Let us visit a school-house where a large congregation is gathered
in and around the house. A dark man is preaching. Judging by the
loudness of voice and furious gesticulations, and the groaning and
fervent “Amens” of his hearers, he must be saying something very
important. But hark! He declares that Jesus cursed. His text, as he
read it and repeats it to prove his assertion, is: “I do _curse_
to-day and to-morrow,” etc.—Luke xiii, 32.

Another time we find the same man giving the history of the ten
commandments, saying that God gave Moses one set of commandments
and Moses went down and read them to the people. They said they
were too hard, so Moses broke the stones and went back and told the
Lord that his commands were too hard, so God gave him some easier
ones.

Again, this minister is proving that Jesus was baptized by
“mersion.” He says that when Jesus came up out of the water, he ran
so fast to the wilderness that no one could keep up with him, but
they tracked him by the water that dripped from his clothes. They
tracked him in this way forty days before they found him.

Some of the people near that school-house are anxious for better
instruction, and have applied to the Association for a minister.

Another school-house, two miles from one of the A. M. A., has been
used for meetings held by a regularly licensed minister who does
not know a letter. Some of his members say “his sermons beat the
’postle Paul,” and if noise and violent gestures count, probably
they are right.

There are many such preachers as those I have told you of, but
where the true light is brought by the American Missionary
Association and other missions, they are driven out, or are coming
to the light to prepare for better work.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOR THE CHILDREN.

       *       *       *       *       *


                              SANTEE AGENCY, NEB., June, 1887.

_To My Friends at the East:_

I want to write you a letter. First I want to tell you about
my home and my people, how they are, and their ways. I suppose
you know their old way of living, but let me tell you a part of
it again. The general way is to dance, and give away ponies,
and worship stones. They have “visions of the deer,” and think
themselves sacred. They have foolish “visions of the bear,” and
think themselves sacred. They do not go to war now. But when they
used to go to war, they first tied up parcels of tobacco and took
them around to the houses of the men they trusted in, and, opening
the door of the house, they led out the brave man. Then the women
appeared glad, and would dance and shout. So they did; and right
away they would go off to war, and kill men, and bring home their
scalps, or else the hands of the slain, tied to their horses.

But now the people do much better. Now, since the Word of God has
been preached among my people, they do better. And still there are
many who do not know anything. I have grown up but recently, and
yet I know something. I have been several years at Santee Normal
Training School, and have learned some things. Though I cannot talk
English much yet, I understand some, and I wish to keep on learning
as long as I can. And whether I learn or do not learn, I am always
going to try.

And my father and mother are now believers in God. They now have
understanding and knowledge. So that they have now sent my sister
to school, and very soon I shall get letters from her, and I shall
be glad.

And for myself, I wish to live having faith in God, and to learn
all I can here.

Now, my friends, I have told you all about how it is with me; so I
will say no more.

                                                             A. W.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR AUGUST, 1887.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MAINE, $1,586.24.

    Acton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 $7.00
    Bangor. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          31.00
    Bath. “A Friend”                                          20.00
    Brewer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          11.50
    Brunswick. First Cong. Ch.                                29.17
    Castine. Rev. Alfred E. Ives                               3.00
    Castine. Class No. 9, Trin. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                1.11
    Cherryfield. John W. Coffin                               30.00
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch.                                     8.88
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch.                             13.15
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                67.58
    Hallowell. Mrs. Simon Page, _for Williamsburg,
      Ky._                                                    10.00
    Hampden. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                          18.00
    Limerick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              20.09
    Limington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    Machias. “Machias”                                        10.00
    Newcastle. Second Cong. Ch.                               60.00
    North Waterford. Cong. Ch.                                 5.52
    Portland. Seamen’s Bethel Ch.                             42.75
    Saccarappa. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      6.49
    Sherman Mills. Washburn Mem. Ch.                           5.00
    Topsham. Cong. Ch.                                         6.50
    Wells. B. Maxwell, 27.50; Second Cong. Ch., 12            39.50
    Woman’s Aid to A. M. A., by Mrs. J. M.
      Sturgis, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_,
      1886–’87, “Women of Maine”                           1,130.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $288.36.

    Amherst. “Friend”                                          3.00
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch.                                       14.50
    Bedford. “G. E. O.,” 5; Presb. Ch., 1.85                   6.85
    Campton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Concord. “A”                                               5.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             59.00
    Hampstead. Misses H. T. and A. M. Howard, 5
      each                                                    10.00
    Hanover. Dartmouth College Ch.                            60.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  20.00
    Meriden. Cong. Ch.                                        13.00
    Orfordville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.01
    Pembroke. Cong. Ch.                                       27.00
    Penacook. Cong. Ch.                                       28.00
    Piermont. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Wentworth. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    Wolfboro. Rev. Sumner Clarke                               5.00


  VERMONT, $530.17.

    Barton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                19.00
    Barton Landing. Wm. Spencer                                5.00
    Brattleboro. Cong. Ch., 15; Mrs. Burnham, 1               16.00
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             35.00
    Chelsea. Cong. Ch.                                        25.50
    Chester. “A Friend”                                       15.00
    Derby. Ladies, 3.60; Miss’y Concert, 1.40, by
      Mrs. David Hopkinson                                     5.00
    Essex. Cong. Ch.                                           7.60
    Fairhaven. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                                       5.00
    Hubbardton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 6.07; “A
      Friend,” 2                                               9.07
    Johnson. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
    McIndoes Falls. Cong. Ch.                                 15.75
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch.                                    17.00
    Orange Co. “A Brother”                                    10.00
    Pawlet. “A Well-wisher” (5 of which _for
      Indian M._)                                              6.00
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                         191.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Mrs. Olive W. Howard and Mrs.
      E. D. Blodgett, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              50.00
    South Woodbury. Cong. Ch.                                  5.00
    Townsend. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Underhill. Cong. Ch.                                      13.25
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           10.00
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
    Westminster West. Rev. A. Stevens, 10; “A
      Friend,” 5                                              15.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,866.92.

    Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                                 11.50
    Amherst. North Cong. Ch.                                 100.00
    Barre. Evang. Cong. Ch.                                   62.00
    Bedford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.00
    Billerica. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                        20.00
    Blackstone. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.00
      Boston. Dr. and Mrs. Edward Strong          25.00
      Boston. Jere. A. Dennett                    10.00
      Boston. Cong. S. S. Pub. Soc., Pilgrim
      Quarterlies and Golden Text Books, for
      _Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Austin, Texas_
      Jamaica Plain. Central Ch.                  50.00
      Roxbury. Immanuel Cong. Ch.                 58.40
      South Boston. Phillips Ch. and Soc.        100.00
                                                 ——————      243.40
    Brockton. Mrs. J. R. Perkins                               5.00
    Brookfield. Evan. Cong. Ch.                              100.00
    Chelsea. Children’s Soc., First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              50.00
    Curtisville. Cong. Ch.                                    30.81
    Dalton. W. Murray Crane, 250; Mrs. Louise F.
      Crane, 50; Miss Clara L. Crane, 50; Dea.
      John Carson, 20; Payson E. Little, 5; “M. E.
      B.,” 1; _for Mountain Work_                            376.00
    Dalton. J. M. Stearns, Printing Press, _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._
    Dedham. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00
    Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
    Dunstable. “Thank-offering, Soc. of C. E.,”
      6.12; Others, 6.88; by Martha J. Davis                  13.00
    Duxbury. Mrs. Rebecca R. Holmes                            2.00
    East Billerica. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    East Granville. Y. P. Soc. of C. E.                        3.70
    Easthampton. Sab. Sch. of Payson Ch., _for
      Santee Indian M._, and to const. MRS. J. E.
      CLARK and MRS. L. G. FALES, L. M’s                      75.00
    Easton. “A Friend”                                         1.00
    Falmouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 10, _for
      Indian M._, and 10 _for Atlanta U._                     20.00
    Fitchburg. “A Friend”                                     10.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                        121.87
    Framingham. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Ch., 25.09;
      Sab. Sch. in District No. 7, 10; Mrs. C. M.
      Clark, 5; _for Dakota Indian M._                        40.69
    Gilbertville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Glove Village. Evan. Free Cong. Ch., 10; Sab.
      Sch. Evan. Free Ch., 18; _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                28.00
    Hanson. Ladies of Cong. Ch., by Mrs. A. C.
      Childs, _for Tougaloo U._                               20.00
    Hardwick. Calvinistic Ch. and “A Friend”                  18.00
    Haverhill. North Ch.                                     200.00
    Hawley. Cong. Ch.                                          4.68
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                  13.86
    Ipswich. First Ch. and Soc., to const. REV.
      GEO. H. SCOTT, L. M.                                    30.00
    Leicester. Geo. H. Sprague                                 5.00
    Malden. Mrs. Ellen M. Wellman, _for Straight
      U._ and to const. herself, L. M.                        50.00
    Marshfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     128.90
    Medfield. “A Friend”                                      20.00
    Methuen. Sab. Sch. of First Parish Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   37.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         20.43
    Millbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Indian
      M._                                                     50.00
    Mittineague. Southworth Co., Box of Paper,
      _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst._
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      79.50
    North Abington. Rev. Chas. Jones                           1.00
    North Andover. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. PLUMA
      ATWOOD HOLT and MRS. SUSIE PETERS DOWNING,
      L. M’s                                                 100.00
    North Leominster. Mrs. Susan F. Houghton, to
      const. MRS. MARY L. MAYNARD, L. M.                      30.00
    North Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                 1.71
    Randolph. Miss Abby W. Turner                             20.00
    Reading. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Reading. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.50
    Rockland. Cong. Ch.                                       50.00
    Rockport. First Cong. Ch.                                 17.95
    Rockport. Rev. A. F. Norcross, 1; “I’ll Try”
      Soc., 1; _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                      2.00
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 39.42; and Sab.
      Sch., 15                                                54.42
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                   6.70
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch., 16, and Sab. Sch.,
      5.31                                                    21.31
    South Weymouth. “A Friend”                                50.00
    Southwick. Cong. Ch.                                       3.30
    Springfield. A. C. Hunt                                   10.00
    Sturbridge. First Cong. Ch.                               44.05
    Taunton. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    Topsfield. Cong. Ch., to const. WM. B. WELCH,
      L. M.                                                   47.77
    Truro. Cong. Ch.                                           7.15
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                  18.24
    Wellesley. Miss’y Soc., Wellesley College,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              16.70
    West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   18.70
    Westhampton. “Pledge at 4th of July Picnic”
      _towards Debt_                                          20.60
    Westhampton. L. B. S., 13.50, and Bbl. of C.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              13.50
    West Stockbridge. Rev. W. W. Curtis                        5.00
    West Warren. Rev. G. H. Morss                              2.00
    Whitman. “A Friend,” to const. EVERETT COLE,
      MISS ANNA M. BROWN, MISS EMMA F. BROWN and
      HERBERT BROWN, L. M’s                                  120.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             21.36
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 8.62
    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE:
    ———— One and One-half Bbls., _for Wilmington,
      N.C._
    Exeter, N.H. Rev. Jacob Chapman, Box Theo.
      Vols., _for Straight U._


  RHODE ISLAND, $109.18.

    Bristol. “The Wide-Awakes” of Cong. Ch., _for
      Dakota Indian M._                                        5.00
    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  38.18
    Little Compton. United Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 16.00
    Providence. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              50.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,613.88.

    Barkhamstead. Cong. Ch.                                    2.50
    Bolton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    Cheshire. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Clinton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         8.00
    Cromwell. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        18.00
    East Hartford. “A Friend,” _for Mountain Work_             1.00
    East Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                 15.00
    Fairfield. Mrs. Abby Nichols                               5.00
    Farmington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Mechanical Building, Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._                                                  62.63
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                         38.68
    Goshen. First Cong. Ch. (10 of which from
      Moses Lyman)                                            16.35
    Greens Farms. Cong. Ch.                                   19.25
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
    Hampton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. (12 of which
      for Indian M.)                                          20.00
    Hartford. “A Friend”                                     100.00
    Hartford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._, and to const. MRS. JOHN G.
      PARSONS and DEA. WILLIS S. TWITCHELL, L. M’s.           70.00
    Kensington. Edward Cowles                                  5.00
    Lebanon. First. Ch.                                       32.00
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch.                                          8.50
    Litchfield. Dea. Geo. M. Woodruff, 25; Miss
      Clarissa B. Denny, 25; Prof. Sam’l Harris,
      10; Miss Wheeler, 10; Mrs. W. B. Wheeler,
      10; Miss Wheeler, 5; Mrs. E. S. Van Winkle, 5           90.00
    Litchfield. James Humphrey, 5; F. D. McNeil,
      5; “A Friend,” 2; John Coit, 3; Mrs. Alice
      Camp, 1; Henry Coe, 1; Mrs. H. Kilbourne, 1             18.00
    Manchester. Judge James Campbell, _for
      Mountain Work_                                          10.00
    Meriden. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Sch’p, Fisk U._                                         50.00
    Kensington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       5.00
    Middle Haddam. Second Cong. Ch.                            4.25
    Mt. Carmel. Cong. Ch.                                     58.94
    Naubuc. Mrs. N. W. Goodrich                               96.00
    Naugatuck. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    New Haven. Dwight Ch., Mrs. Nelson Hall, 30;
      Mrs. Eunice M. Crane, 10                                40.00
    Niantic. Cong. Ch.                                         5.35
    North Branford. J. A. Palmer                               2.00
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch.                                  60.00
    Plainville. Rev. A. T. Reed                               10.00
    Poquonock. Cong. Ch., Chandelier, _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       14.00
    Putnam. W. W. Foster                                      10.00
    Putnam. Bbl. of C., _for Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst., Austin, Tex._
    Redding. Cong. Ch.                                        23.38
    Rockville. Geo. Sykes, 25; Dea. Geo. Maxwell,
      25; Judge Loomis, 10; Eli Smith, 3; “A
      Friend,” 1; _for Mountain Work_                         64.00
    Rockville. Two Classes Sab. Sch. of Sec. Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                          8.85
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                           7.00
    Salisbury. Rev. J. C. Goddard                              1.00
    South Coventry. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 13.46;
      Mrs. H. W. Mason, 5; Mrs. Lyman Cogswell,
      2.50; Miss Clara Kingsbury, 50c; _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                      21.46
    South Norwalk. Soc. of Christian Endeavor,
      First Cong. Ch.                                          9.00
    Stonington. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     88.50
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Indian M._, by G. A. Scott, Sec. and Treas.             17.50
    Terryville. Elizur Fenn, 5; Mrs. Elizur Fenn, 5           10.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      29.25
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.45
    Torringford. “A Friend,” by Mrs. S. M.
      Hotchkiss, Sec. W. H. M. U. of Conn.                     1.00
    Torrington. Mrs S. A. Welch, 3; Mrs. A. E.
      Perrin, 2; Daniel D. Rice, 2                             7.00
    Unionville. First Ch. of Christ                           33.35
    Vernon Center. Cong. Ch.                                  11.00
    Wallingford. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., 12, and Bbl.
      of C., val. 32, _for Williamsburg, Ky._                 12.00
    Washington. Cong. Ch.                                    110.77
    Waterbury. “A Friend,” to const. LILIAN L.
      DAVENPORT L. M.                                         30.00
    West Chester. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        12.00
    West Haven. Mrs. Emeline Smith                           100.00
    Wethersfield. Cong. Ch.                                   60.64
    Wethersfield. True Blue Card, by Miss Fannie
      Clark                                                    5.00
    Wethersfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                        35.00
    Williamsville. Cong. Ch.                                   2.50
    Windsor Locks. Chas. A. Porter                            30.00
    Wolcott. Members of Cong. Sab. Sch., by Mary
      R. Hough, _for Rosebud Indian M._                        2.50
    Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                                      7.27
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $1,689.88
    LEGACIES.

    New London. Estate of Mrs. Sarah S.
      Huntington, by J. C. Learned, Ex.                      824.00
    Colchester. Estate of Miss Eliza M. Day, by
      Enoch P. Hincks                                        100.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $2,613.88


  NEW YORK, $726.24.

    Brooklyn. Lewis Av. Cong. Ch., 13; Rev. S. W.
      Powell, 2; Mrs. Wm. E. Cone, 50c.                       15.50
    Brooklyn. Young Ladies’ Ass’n of Clinton Av.
      Cong. Ch., Box of Goods, _for Williamsburg,
      Ky._
    Buffalo. Mrs. W. G. Bancroft, _for Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        50.00
    Buffalo. Y. P. S. for C. E. of Cong. Ch.                   5.00
    Chatham. E. Cook                                          10.00
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     26.15
    Cincinnatus. Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
    Coventryville. Cong. Ch.                                   6.00
    Dansville. Mrs. D. W. Noyes                                0.50
    Eaton. Cong. Ch.                                           7.40
    Fairport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. Primary
      Class, _for Santee Indian M._                           20.00
    Jamesport. Cong. Ch.                                       1.00
    New York. C. R. Agnew, M.D., _for Luke Mem.
      Sch’p, Talladega C._                                    25.00
    New York. Chas. W. Whitney                                15.00
    Nineveh. Mrs. Lucy M. Peck                                10.00
    Norwood. First Cong. Ch.                                  16.00
    Penn Yan. Chas. C. Sheppard                              250.00
    Poughkeepsie. First Reformed Ch.                          19.79
    Rennselear Falls. Cong. Ch.                                5.00
    Riverhead. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. REV. WM.
      I. CHALMERS L. M.                                       20.00
    Rodman. Cong. Ch.                                         13.40
    Sing Sing. C. E. Judd, 20; H. M. Cole, 10; to
      const. REV. GEO. W. MOORE L. M.                         30.00
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                     40.00
    Verona. E. Day                                            10.00
    Victor. Mrs. C. L. McDermid                                0.50
    Walton. Thomas Ogden, 20.00; Dea. Geo. Fitch,
      10; Augustus Fitch, 10; Prof. Strong
      Comstock, 5; Gen. Benj. J. Bassett, 5; Geo.
      O. Mead, 5; J. A. Warner, 5; Mrs. Henry
      Ogden, 5; Rev. G. W. Nims, 1; John Olmstead,
      1; Lewis Marvin, 1; Lyman Fitch, 1; Rhoderic
      Fitch, 1; _for Mountain Work_                           70.00
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.
      H. Cobb, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Buffalo. First Cong. Ch.                                40.00


  NEW JERSEY, $10.00.

    Bound Brook. Bbl. of C., _for Tillotson C. &
      N. Inst., Austin, Tex._
    East Orange. C. B. Clark                                  10.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $155.00.

    Philadelphia. Chas Burnham                                50.00
    Pittsburg. By P. O. Matthews, _for Oahe Ind’l
      Sch._                                                    5.00
    West Alexander. Mrs. Jane C. Davidson.                   100.00


  OHIO, $377.86.

    Adams Mills. Mrs. M. A. Smith                             10.00
    Bellevue. S. W. Boise                                     20.00
    Brighton. Cong. Ch.                                        3.15
    Brownhelm. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Columbus. Eastwood Cong. Ch.                              34.35
    Cornerville. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
    Cortland. Cong. Ch.                                        3.00
    Dover. May Griffin                                         0.10
    Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                        6.65
    Hudson. Mrs. Harvey Baldwin                                5.50
    Lorain. Miss Penfield, Package of goods, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Austin, Tex._
    Marietta. Second Cong. Ch.                                 2.00
    Newark. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    North Monroeville. Cong. Ch., 6.80 and Sab.
      Sch., 2                                                  8.80
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 66.75; Second Cong.
      Ch., 7.50; Mr. Searls, 1                                75.25
    Oberlin. “A Friend,” _for sick-room Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst._                                          30.00
    Oberlin. Friends, _for Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._                                                  15.00
    Ravenna. Miss Minnie Gladding, 5; Mrs.
      Gladding, 1, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                  6.00
    Rockport. Cong. Ch.                                       11.80
    Springfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., S. E. Fay’s
      Class, 5; Miss Lucia Fay’s Class, 5; Miss
      Joanna Fay’s Class, 2.50; Miss E. R.
      Bartholomew’s Class, 3.50, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                16.00
    Strongsville. First Cong. Ch.                             10.00
    Tallmadge. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   31.64
    West Andover. Cong. Ch., _for Mountain Work_               7.04
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  16.58
                                                           ————————
                                                            $327.86
    LEGACY.

    Marysville. Estate of Jane A. Cherry, by T. B.
      Fulton, Att’y                                           50.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $377.86


  ILLINOIS, $1,521.16.

    Amboy. Cong. Ch.                                          45.00
    Aurora. Rev. W. Windsor                                    5.00
    Bartlett. Cong. Ch.                                       20.85
    Belvidere. Mrs. M. C. Foote, 5 _for Indian
      M._, 3 _for Woman’s Work_                                8.00
    Buda. Cong. Ch.                                           50.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., 130; Dwight Needham,
      2; Plym. Cong. Ch., 52.56; “A Friend,” 10              194.56
    Chicago. Ladies of N. E. Cong. Ch., 22.50;
      Milliard Av. Cong. Ch., 10; Mrs. C. H.
      Smith, 10; L. M. Soc., Lincoln Park Ch.,
      8.15, _for Oahe Ind’l Sch._                             50.65
    Chicago. Sab. Sch. of Union Park Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    Chillicothe. R. W. Gilliam                                10.00
    Collinsville. J. F. Wadsworth                             10.00
    Earlville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          2.37
    Greenville. Box of C., by Mrs. T. P. Joy, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._
    Hampton. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               3.00
    Hennepin. Cong. Ch.                                        7.20
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch., 32.06; “Mite Box Fund,”
      Sab. Sch. Class. 5.32; ————, 25c., _for Oahe
      Ind’l Sch._                                             37.63
    LeGrange. Woman’s Miss’y Union                             5.00
    Oak Park. Mrs. Elizabeth Durham                            5.00
    Peoria. Mrs. John L. Griswold, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                          100.00
    Peoria. A. A. Stevens                                     10.00
    Plano. Rev. C. H. Morse                                    5.00
    Ravenswood. “A little German boy,” _for Oahe
      Ind’l Sch._                                              0.10
    Roseville. Mrs. G. C. Axtell, _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                   10.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. E. G. Coe, Bbl. of Bedding &c.,
      _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Austin, Tex._
    Sterling. Wm. and Catharine McKinney                      10.00
    Wyoming. Cong. Ch. adl.                                    1.80
                                                         ——————————
                                                            $641.16
    LEGACY

    Chicago. Estate of Mrs. Harriet B. Whittlesey,
      by Wm. H. Bradley and Henry B. Whittlesey,
      Executors                                              880.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $1,521.16


  MICHIGAN, $306.65.

    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                38.25
    Benton Harbor. Rev. W. H. Brewster                         5.00
    Benzonia. Amasa Waters                                    14.00
    Detroit. Mrs. E. Y. Swift, 20; Young Peoples’
      Soc., Westminister Presb. Ch., 15; Mrs. E.
      W. Bussell, 10; F. D. Eatherly, 10; Little
      “Sld,” 10c. _for Oahe Ind’l Sch._                       55.10
    Dexter. D. Warner                                         20.00
    Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                             15.81
    Frankfort. Cong. Ch.                                       5.60
    Grand Rapids. First Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Ind’l
      Sch._                                                   18.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         13.81
    Lansing. Lena Almendinger, 1; ———— 25c.; _for
      Oahe Ind’l Sch._                                         1.25
    Manistee. Friends, 77.55; Cong. Ch., 20; _for
      Oahe Ind’l Sch._                                        97.55
    Michigan Center. Cong. Ch.                                 4.40
    Pontiac. Cong. Ch.                                        17.88


  WISCONSIN, $378.49.

    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Ind’l Sch._            50.50
    Greenbay. First Presb. Ch.                                47.10
    Kenosha. Cong. Ch., 23; Y. P. Soc. of C. E.,
      Cong. Ch., 5.87                                         28.87
    La Crosse. First Cong. Ch.                                50.00
    Lake Geneva. Young People’s Miss’y Soc. _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                         16.00
    Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch., _for Oahe
      Ind’l Sch._                                             13.46
    Milwaukee. Mrs. W. Davis, _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              10.00
    Racine. First Presb. Ch.                                  30.00
    Sheboygan. For Freight                                     2.50
    Stevens Point. Mrs. Faith H. Montague                      5.00
    Wauwatosa. “Three Life Members”                          100.00

    GOODS RECEIVED AT AUSTIN, TEXAS, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._:
      Beloit. Mrs. Prof. Emerson, Bbl. of C.
      Columbus. “Olivet Busy Workers,” 1 Box.
      Green Bay. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., 1 Box.
      Fox Lake. Coral Builders, 1 Box.
      Hartland. Bbl. of C.
      Madison. Children’s Band, 1 Box.
      Platteville. Little Gleaners, 1 Box.
      Sheboygan. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., 1 Box.
      Stoughton. Miss Sewell’s Class, 1 Box.
      Wauwatosa. Young Ladies’ Soc., 1 Box.


  IOWA, $169.69.

    Amity. Cong. Ch.                                           8.50
    Atlantic. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           8.50
    Blairstown. Mrs. J. H. French, 12; Miss Mary
      French, 2                                               14.00
    Charles City. First. Cong. Ch.                            36.68
    Creston. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                                 2.37
    Edgewood. Cong. Ch.                                        7.25
    Hillsboro. John W. Hammond                                 5.00
    Keokuk. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., _for Indian M._                                    20.00
    Le Grand. W. V. Craig                                      5.00
    Quasqueton. Cong. Ch.                                      2.50
    Sargeant’s Bluffs. Cong. Ch., 2.50; Rev. and
      Mrs. D. W. Comstock, 2.50                                5.00
    Sloan. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Ch.                                        7.60
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union of Iowa, _for
      Woman’s Work_:
      Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                        9.60
      Humboldt. Ladies                             5.00
      Lewis. Ladies                                8.00
      Magnolia. Ladies                             2.65
      McGregor. L. M. Soc.                         7.10
      Onawa. W. H. M. U.                           9.18
      Prairie Hill. Ladies                         0.16
      Polk City. Ladies                            0.60
                                                  —————       42.29


  MINNESOTA, $209.93.

    Granite Falls. Cong. Ch.                                   2.12
    Litchfield. “M W”                                          5.00
    Minneapolis. Ladies of Plym. Ch., 57; Infant
      Class Plym. Cong. Ch., 3, _for Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                           60.00
    Minneapolis. Plym. Ch., Box of reading Matter
      for Jonesboro, Tenn.
    Minneapolis. Bethel Miss. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Minneapolis. Plym Ch.                                     28.00
    Northfield. L. H. M. S., Box of C., _for
      Jonesboro, Tenn._
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                        5.48
    Rochester. Cong. Ch.                                      34.33
    Saint Paul. Plym. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            25.00


  MISSOURI, $22.20.

    Kidder. First Cong. Ch.                                   12.20
    Saint Louis. Mrs. Wm. G. Webb, _for Storrs
      Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                                     10.00


  KANSAS, $24.09.

    Plumb Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     1.42
    Seneca. First Cong. Ch.                                    2.50
    Stafford. Cong. Ch.                                        2.17
    Topeka. First Cong. Ch.—Mrs. Reed, 5; Mrs. S.
      Officer, 5; Thomas H. Bain, 2; _for Storrs
      Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                                     12.00
    Wabaunsee. C. B. Lines, _for Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            1.00
    White City. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  DAKOTA, $30.00.

    De Smet. W. M. Soc., by C. G. Black                        7.00
    Lake Preston. Cong. Ch.                                    3.00
    Oahe Ind’l Sch. Sale of Indian Curiosities, 2;
      Sale of Elizabeth’s Pictures, 1.50                       3.50
    Sioux Falls. W. M. Soc., 10; Sab. Sch. of
      Cong. Ch., 6.50; by C. G. Black                         16.50


  COLORADO, $5.00.

    Fort Lewis. Mrs. J. B. Irvine, _for Oahe Ind’l
      Sch._                                                    5.00


  NEBRASKA, $5.00.

    Ponca. Ponca Mission, by Mrs. J. E. Smith                  5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $130.70.

    San Bernardino. First Cong. Ch.                           30.70
    San Diego. Mrs. Harriett Marston                         100.00


  KENTUCKY, $10.00.

    Louisville. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., by Miss S. S.
      Evans, _for Indian M._                                  10.00


  TENNESSEE, $12.37.

    Grand View. Rev. F. A. Chase                               5.00
    Jellico. Sab. Sch., by A. A. Myers, _for
      Chinese M._                                              2.25
    Knoxville. Cong. Ch. (50c. of which from Sab.
      Sch.) _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                         5.12


  NORTH CAROLINA, $5.00.

    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00


  GEORGIA, $16.00.

    Atlanta. Storr’s Sch. Tuition                             11.50
    Marietta. Cong. Ch., 2, and Sab. Sch., 1                   3.00
    Rutland. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            1.50


  ALABAMA, $15.00.

    Mobile. Woman’s Sew. Soc., _for Indian M._                 5.00
    Talladega. “A Giver”                                      10.00


  TEXAS, $6.15.

    Austin. Tillotson Inst., Teachers and Others               3.15
    Austin. Barnes & Scott, Box of Raisins and 40
      lbs. Candy
    Dallas. Sab. Sch. of Plym. Ch., 2.50; Pastor
      Roberts, 50c.                                            3.00


  INCOME, $32.55.

    Avery Fund, for Mendi M.                                  32.55


  ————, $75.00.

    ————. “A Friend,” _for Hope Station, Indian M._           75.00


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $250.00.

    Kohala, Hawaii. “A Friend”                               250.00


  SCOTLAND, $39.87.

    Perth. North United Presb. Ch., by D. Morton              39.87


  FRANCE, $25.00.

    Paris. Rev. J. W. Hough, D.D.                             25.00
                                                            =======


    Donations                                            $10,667.15
    Legacies                                               1,854.00
    Incomes                                                   32.55
                                                         ——————————
      Total for August                                   $12,553.70
      Total from Oct. 1 to August 31                     242,061.03
                                                         ==========


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for August                                 $52.92
    Previously acknowledged                                  943.30
                                                           ————————
      Total                                                 $996.22
                                                           ========

                                   H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: Estey Organ]

Its leading position is due to its =TONE=, the =MATERIAL=
used in its construction, and the =CARE= given to every detail.

                 Illustrated Catalogue sent free.

               Estey · Organ · Co. Brattleboro · Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


      INTERNATIONAL SONG SERVICE BY PHILIP PHILLIPS & HIS SON

                WITH GEMS OF SONGS FROM 50 AUTHORS

                          [Illustration]

                     LATEST, CHEAPEST AND BEST

      160 Pages.                           Strong Board Covers.
    30 cents each, postpaid.                      $25.00 per 100.

                              SEND TO

                   THE PHILLIPS PUBLISHING CO.,

                      Bible House, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Reliable Carpenter Organs

Containing the Celebrated =Carpenter Organ Action=.

[Illustration]

They are pure in tone, perfect in construction, in exact accord
with the voice, and full of patented improvements. More than 50
different styles, ranging in price from $20 up. WARRANTED FOR
8 YEARS. _Where we have no agent, Organs sold direct on easy
payments._ Buy no organ until you have seen our Catalogue. Free to
any address.

                       E. P. Carpenter Co.,

              (Est. 1850.)         =Brattleboro, Vt.=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Fall Dress Goods

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.


offer among their large assortment of Fall Dress Goods, the
following Special Lines:

Two lines Stripe and Check Cheviots, 44 inches wide, at 60 cents;
worth $1.00.

Also, Three lines Check and Stripe Suitings, 64 inches wide, at 75
cents; well worth $1.25.

    =ORDERS=}   From any part of the country
      =BY=  }   will receive
    =MAIL=  }   careful and prompt attention.

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.

                    BROADWAY and ELEVENTH ST.,

                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing! Clear Record of half a Century.

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.”

Use a common pen.

[Illustration]

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            STATEMENT.

                     PHENIX INSURANCE COMPANY

                         OF BROOKLYN, N.Y.

                        JANUARY 1st, 1887.

  CASH CAPITAL                         $1,000,000.00
  GROSS SURPLUS                         4,383,171.68
                                       —————————————
        Gross Assets                   $5,383,171.68
                                       =============


                              ASSETS.

  United States Bonds, market value    $1,104,250.00
  Other Stocks and Bonds                1,502,858.90
  Loans on Bond and Mortgage              294,900.00
  Loans on Call                            80,758.76
  Cash in Bank and Office                 495,135.83
  Real Estate                           1,082,787.53
  Premiums in Course of Collection        667,231.88
  Interest Accrued                         11,716.42
  Bills Receivable for Marine Premiums    140,284.55
  Rents Due and Accrued                     3,247.81
                                       —————————————
                                       $5,383,171.68
                                       =============


                           LIABILITIES.

  CASH CAPITAL                          $1,000,000.00
  Reserve for Unearned Premiums          3,466,886.97
  Reserve for Unpaid Losses                353,759.83
  All Other Liabilities                      5,438.10
  NET SURPLUS                              557,086.78
                                        —————————————
                                        $5,383,171.68
                                        =============

  STEPHEN CROWELL, President,      GEO. H. FISKE,    }
  WM. R. CROWELL, Vice-President.  CHAS. C. LITTLE,  } Ass’t Sec’s.
  PHILANDER SHAW, Secretary.       JOHN H. DOUGHERTY,}


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. H. ANDREWS & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                    School, Church, Chapel and
                      Sunday-School Seating.


  DOVETAILED
  SCHOOL-DESKS,
  GLOBES, MAPS,
  CHARTS, BLACK-BOARDS,
  &C.

[Illustration]

  CHURCH CHAIRS
  PEWS, PULPITS,
  COMMUNION
  TABLES,
  COLLECTION
  PLATES, &C., &C.

[Illustration]

  IMPROVED
  METHODS OF
  SEATING WITH
  SETTEES AND
  TAYLOR PATENT
  CHAIRS.

Catalogues free on application.

                       A. H. ANDREWS & CO.,

                   686 Broadway, New York City.
                    195 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              Liquid

                          Cottage Colors.

The best MIXED PAINTS manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are _heavy bodied_, and for
work that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned
(with our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover
better than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of
which have so little stock in them that they will not give a good
solid coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed
out there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent.
Our Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good
paint, should be worked out well under the brush. The covering
property of this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 3-gal. and 5–gal. bailed buckets
also barrels; in cans of ⅛, ¼, ½, 1–gal. and 2–gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application
to


                   Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,

                   Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,

                           CHICAGO, ILL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 Ditson & Co’s Sunday-School Music

ranks with the very best, and no Sunday-school management should
adopt a new Singing Book without carefully examining one of their
“tried and true” =Sunday-School Song Books=.

=Voices of Praise= (40 cts., $4.20 per doz.) Rev. C. L. Hutchins.
Music and poetry dignified and classical, but not dull; in fact,
bright and enthusiastic. Very large collection for the money.

=Singing on the Way= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) by Mrs. Jewett, ably
assisted by Dr. Holbrook, whose noble compositions are known and
loved in all the churches. This, like the book above mentioned,
does excellently well for a Vestry Singing Book for prayer and
praise meetings.

=Songs of Promise= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) J. H. Tenney and Rev.
E. A. Hoffman—the first highly gifted, musically, and the second
the author of many hymns of refined and beautiful quality. One of
the newest books.

=Song Worship= (35 cts., $3.60 per doz.) L. O. Emerson and W. F.
Sherwin, both celebrated compilers, composers and leaders, and
the latter well-known as having had charge of the music at many
Chautauqua meetings.

For other good books, please send for lists and catalogues.

For a lovely little book for the young children of a Sunday-school,
look no further than FRESH FLOWERS (25 cts., $2.40 per doz.), Emma
Pitt. Sweet Hymns, Sweet Music, Pretty Pictures.

                     Mailed for Retail Price.

                   OLIVER DITSON & CO., BOSTON.

  C. H. DITSON & CO.,
    867 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         _6%_, _7%_, _8%_.

                      _THE AMERICAN
                              INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

               =7⅔%= CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING
                   =4 Per Ct. Government Bonds=
                   Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

          Write for full information and reference to the
                            Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Hamilton Vocalion Organs

[Illustration]

of 2 manuals and 2 sets of pedals, $750; equalling in beauty,
variety and volume a pipe organ of 600 pipes by the best maker.
Circulars, with testimonials of leading musicians and organists of
the world.

“Without a doubt the Vocalion is at present the nearest approach to
a pipe organ.”—_Clarence Eddy, Organist First Presbyterian Church,
Chicago._

“I have only words of praise in its favor.”—_Henry Eyre Brown,
Organist, Brooklyn Tabernacle._

“Especially valuable for Churches and Concert Rooms.”—_A. H.
Messiter, Organist, Trinity Ch., N.Y._

“A tone so rich and musical must be recognized as valuable for
special and new orchestral effects.”—_Henry Carter, Organist, N.Y._

“Your Vocalion has a magnificent future.”—_Sir Arthur Sullivan._

“A rare combination of power and sweetness.”—_Adelina Patti._

                                                Catalogue sent free.

            WAREROOMS, 28 EAST 23d ST., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S

                            STEEL PENS

                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.

                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  Dr. WARNER’S Health Underwear,

                      MADE OF TWO QUALITIES,

                    Selected CAMEL’S HAIR and
                        Pure NATURAL WOOL.

[Illustration]

          Five Reasons for Wearing the Health Underwear.

1st. Camel’s Hair and Wool are twice as warm as the same weight of
Cotton or Linen.

2d. They protect the body against excessive heat and against drafts
and sudden changes of temperature.

3d. They are an important protection against colds, catarrh,
consumption, neuralgia, rheumatism and malaria.

4th. They cannot crock, fade or poison the skin, as they are
_natural colors_ and contain no dyes.

5th. The Camel’s Hair is warranted to wash without shrinking.

Manufactured in all styles of Gentlemen’s, Ladies’ and Children’s
Underwear and Night Shirts.

                  FOR SALE BY LEADING MERCHANTS.

            Catalogue with Prices sent on application.

                 WARNER BROS., 359 Broadway, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Clinton H. Meneely

                           BELL COMPANY

                            Troy, N.Y.,

                       MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR

                         Church, Chime and
                            Peal Bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1850      Thirty-Seventh Year.      1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                          =OF NEW YORK=,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                       _11,155,000_
  Surplus, by New York standard,      _2,254,000_

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._


                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.
      J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
            H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                  H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                        S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ham and bacon

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”]


                 *       *       *       *       *


    THE NEW HYMN BOOK, by Rev. Drs. Hitchcock. Eddy and Mudge.

Rev. J. S. DICKSON, Pastor Woodland Presbyterian Church,
Philadelphia, and a rare musician and singer, says: “I have just
gone over the ‘Carmina Sanctorum,’ by Rev. Drs. Hitchcock, Eddy and
Mudge, and find that it is by all odds the best hymnal I have ever
seen.”

Rev. THOS. B. McLEOD, Clinton Avenue Church, Brooklyn. N.Y.—“It
satisfies me beyond anything of the kind I have ever seen. Of
course, the names of the editors warranted high reputation. But
considering the progress made in the direction, and the number of
fine Hymn Books recently published, I was not prepared to see a
work so eclipsing as this.”

EDWARD H. MERRILL, Pres’t Ripon College.—“The ‘Carmina Sanctorum’
is a superb book in all ways. I advise Churches about to change
books to examine this one.”

Rev. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D.—“It is a model collection.”

Rev. P. T. FARWELL, Stockbridge, Mass.—“The book is a thorough
delight.”

E. C. EVANS, St. Paul, Minn.—“It has already contributed not a
little to the enriching of the devotional part of our services.”

CONGREGATIONALIST.—“One of the most practically serviceable hymnals
which we have seen.”

                   _Hymns and Songs for Social
                   and Sabbath Worship._ 75 cts.

                      “Hits the Golden Mean.”

                       FOR PRAYER & PRAISE
                             MEETINGS.

SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES, PHILADELPHIA.—“It is a book of great merit, as
might be expected from the character and experience of its editors.”

INDEPENDENT, NEW YORK.—“Any congregation that likes to have its
hymnal represent careful thought and full culture, would do well to
examine this collection of Carmina Sanctorum.”

EVANGELIST, NEW YORK.—“The hymns are only the choicest, and they
have been carefully edited by that accomplished authority in
hymnody, Dr. Hitchcock. As the American Churches have grown in
taste and capacity for musical expression in worship, this book
seems to meet their wants completely, giving them plenty of tunes
they can and will sing, and at the same time educating their taste
and improving their public worship.”

[Illustration: Carmina Sanctorum

The Newest Church Hymn Book, and the Best.

“The nearest to perfection.”

               _The Christian Union._]

PRICE LIST.—_Carmina Sanctorum_ Hymns and Tunes, $1.20. Hymns and
Tunes with Scripture Readings, $1.40. Hymns only (Pew Edition),
75c. Hymns only (Pocket Edition), 45c. Chapel Edition, 75c. Chapel
Edition, with Scripture Readings, 90c, Scripture Readings (alone)
75c.

                     EDITIONS FOR EVERY WANT.

          Returnable Examination copies sent to Pastors
                   and Committees upon request.

  A. S. BARNES & CO., Nos. 111 and 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


           CHARMING STORIES.       INSTRUCTIVE READING.

                            APPLETONS’
                    INSTRUCTIVE READING BOOKS.


                   _THE NATURAL HISTORY SERIES_,
                        By JAMES JOHONNOT.


  No. 1. =Book of Cats and Dogs, and Other Friends.= For Little
           Folks. Price, 20 cents.

  No. 2. =Friends in Feathers and Fur, and other Neighbors.= For
           Young Folks. Price, 35 cents.

         {=Neighbors with Wings and Fins, and some others.= For
  No. 3. {  Boys and Girls. Price, 47 cents.
         {=Some Curious Flyers, Creepers and Swimmers.=
         {  (Intermediate.) Price, 47 cents.

  No. 4. =Neighbors with Claws and Hoofs, and their Kin.= For
           Young People. Price, 63 cents.

  No. 5. =Glimpses of the Animate World: Science and Literature
           of Natural History.= For School or Home. Price, $1.20.

The publication of this series marks a distinct and important
advance in the adaptation of special knowledge and general
literature to the intelligent comprehension of pupils of all
grades of attainment. While in no wise tending to do away with the
regular school-readers, the “Instructive Reading-Books” introduce
suggestive and valuable information and specific knowledge,
covering many of the subjects which will eventually be more
minutely investigated by the maturing of the pupil’s mind. Sent
postpaid on receipt of price. Special terms made on class supplies.

                  D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,
  NEW YORK.    BOSTON.    CHICAGO.    ATLANTA.    SAN FRANCISCO.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL MEETING

OF THE

AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

WILL BE HELD AT

PORTLAND, ME., OCT. 25–27.


Rev. A. J. F. Behrends, D.D., of Brooklyn, will preach the sermon.

The Meeting will be held in the Second Church, of which Rev. C.
H. Daniels is Pastor. The friends in Portland have already begun
preparations for the reception of the Association.

Life Members and Delegates chosen by contributing churches, Local
Conferences, and State Associations, constitute the Annual Meeting.


SPECIAL RAILROAD AND STEAMBOAT RATES.

  Boston & Maine R.R. will make the rate from Boston to Portland
  and return, $3.00, and 1½c., per mile for such other stations
  as desired.

  The Maine Central, Portland & Ogdensburg, Portland & Rochester
  and Knox & Lincoln roads will return passengers free on the
  vouchers of the Secretary of the Association.

  The Maine Steamship Line—New York to Portland, and
  International Steamship Line—Boston to Portland, Eastport and
  St. John, will return passengers free on the vouchers of the
  Secretary.

  Boston steamers will return passengers for half fare on
  vouchers of the Secretary.

  The rate from New York to Portland, via Fall River steamers,
  $4.50.

  Delegates from the West can best arrange through the “Central
  Traffic Association,” Geo. H. Daniels, Vice Chairman, Chicago.


SPECIAL HOTEL RATES.

  Falmouth & Preble, $2.00 per day. City and United States, $1.75
  per day. St. Julian, $1.50 per day. Durant, $1.00 per day.
  These hotels are all recommended.

So far as possible, the Portland churches will entertain those who
attend. Those purposing to be present and wishing entertainment are
requested to write to Rev. C. H. Daniels, Chairman of the Committee
of Entertainment, or Rev. S. K. Perkins, Secretary, Portland, Me.

Application must be made before Oct. 1st. Special rates have been
arranged at hotels (see above) for those who desire to pay their
own way.

                 *       *       *       *       *


         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119–121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions have been
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation is retained due to the
multiplicity of authors.

"Imperiun" changed to "Imperium" on page 300. (Imperium in
imperio)

“RECIVED” changed to “RECEIVED” on page 304. (CLOTHING, ETC.,
RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE)

On the first page of advertisements, “aseortment” changed to
“assortment” in the James McCreery & Co. advertisement.

Missing “d” in “had” replaced in the Ditson advertisement on the
third page of advertisements.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.