Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: NOVEMBER, 1887.

The American Missionary

VOL. XLI.

No. 11.]




[Illustration: CONTENTS]

       *       *       *       *       *


  EDITORIAL.

    FREE FROM DEBT!                                             307
    DEATH OF PRESIDENT WASHBURN,                                308
    NEGRO “AUNT” AND “UNCLE,”                                   309
    YOUNG MEN IN THE SOUTH,                                     310

       *       *       *       *       *

    FRED DOUGLASS AT THE GOWDEN GATE,                           311
    PARAGRAPHS,                                                 311
    THE USE OF A LIFE,                                          312


  GENERAL SURVEY.

    FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE,       313


  THE CHINESE.

    REVIEW OF THE YEAR,                                         324


  RECEIPTS,                                                     326


                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK:

         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
                              matter.




American Missionary Association.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  [A]PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.

    _For Three Years._

      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.

    _For Two Years._

      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

    _For One Year._

      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    Secretary, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields,
to Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters
for “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may
be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] Deceased.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XLI.       NOVEMBER, 1887.       No. 11.

                 *       *       *       *       *




AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                 *       *       *       *       *


FREE!

With gratitude and thanksgiving to God and our friends, we are
permitted to announce that our treasurer has closed his books with
the balance on the right side. The receipts of the year cover
all the expenses of the year, wipe out the debt of $5,000 with
which the year began, and leave $2,193.80 with which to start out
on the coming year. For this glorious result we are especially
indebted to the magnificent rally of our friends in the month of
September. The falling off in our receipts last February of about
$9,000 as compared with the same month of the preceding year, and
the heavy deficit of July, in which we ran $17,000 behind, made
the outlook very dark indeed; but it has proved that it was the
deepening darkness before the light. As we are able to see it now,
our friends settled down to the determination that the year would
end right. They have done it. There was no excitement about it.
They just kept on quietly planning and working and giving until
they rolled up what was needed, and more. Not without sacrifice
in many instances. Our eyes have moistened, oftentimes, as we
read the words accompanying the gifts. Indeed, in some instances
gladly would we have returned the contributions could we have done
it without offending the givers. We mention one instance, that of
a home missionary in the West, whose wife, by self-denial, had
saved five dollars to have some long-needed work done. The person
who did the work, probably knowing the needy circumstances of the
family, refused to keep the compensation, and returned it. There
was only a single dollar in the possession of the home missionary
when the five dollars were returned, and seventy-five cents of that
were to be paid for a necessary bill in a day or two. Those five
dollars were sent to our treasury. The letter that brought the gift
was full of thanksgiving that the sender was able to aid us. Even
this does not tell the story of the noble spirit that lay behind
it all; for there came with the money the request that it should
be credited to the Congregational Church! This is only a single
example. We could refer to a great many such. Large and small, the
contributions have been sent, from churches and individuals, from
rich and poor, from young and old, bearing the evidence of interest
and sacrifice and work; and the result is, we have closed the year
free from debt.

By this outcome we are again impressed with the strong hold that
the American Missionary Association has upon the churches and the
Christian public. They believe in it; they love it, and they mean
to stand by it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is right, in this connection, that our friends should know that
the Executive Officers of the Association have very earnestly
co-operated with them to secure this happy result. Appropriations
have been made after the most careful scrutiny. Economy has been
practiced at every possible point. The knife has been applied
until, in numerous instances, the quick has signaled its pain. New
work, urgently inviting, has been refused. Regret and perplexity
have been experienced because of inability to meet what seemed to
be absolute necessities. We trust that during the coming year,
while continuing to be no less careful than we have been, we may
be able to do some of the things that during the past year we were
obliged to leave undone. But we must beg our friends to remember
that this can be only as our receipts are increased. The small
balance with which we set out is not much to build upon. It will be
quickly swallowed up in meeting claims that have been postponed.
The outcome calls upon the friends of the Association to prepare
for a year of more extended work and more liberal benefactions than
ever before. The standard raised by the National Council in Chicago
should be kept steadily in view—$350,000 from the churches for the
prosecution of our work!

       *       *       *       *       *


It is with profound sorrow that we record the death of our honored
President, Hon. Wm. B. Washburn. He was born in Winchendon,
Mass., in 1820, and died in Springfield, Mass., Oct. 5. He was
attending the annual meeting of the American Board, of which he
was a corporate member. While sitting on the platform of the City
Hall, in which the meeting was held, he quietly and suddenly and
unexpectedly fell asleep in death. “He was not, for God took him.”

Mr. Washburn’s life was a most successful and honored one. He
graduated from Yale College in 1844 with the Christian ministry
in view, but being called to straighten out some entanglements
in a business firm that had become badly involved, he revealed
such business capacity that his continued services were deemed
indispensable. He settled in Greenfield, Mass., and built up a
large business in the manufacture of wooden-ware. He took an
active interest in everything that pertained to the welfare and
prosperity of the town in which he lived. He became director of the
leading bank in Greenfield and afterwards its President. He was
a director of the Connecticut Valley Railroad and several other
local corporations. Early in the war he was elected United States
Representative, being complimented with the _entire_ vote of his
district. He was so popular no one was put in nomination against
him. Five times he was sent to Congress by successive reëlection.
Massachusetts elected him its Governor in 1871 by 27,000 majority
over John Quincy Adams. He resigned his seat in Congress to be
inaugurated Governor in January, 1872. He was reëlected Governor
for two more terms and resigned his Governorship to fill out the
unexpired term in the U.S. Senate caused by the death of Charles
Sumner in March, 1884.

In 1881 he was elected President of the American Missionary
Association. His valuable services as presiding officer at the
annual meetings, his wise counsels and wide influence, greatly
advanced the interests of the Association.

His funeral, which was private, took place Saturday, Oct. 8th, at
his residence in Greenfield. The Association was represented by
Secretary Powell and Treasurer Hubbard, and Charles L. Mead, Esq.,
of the Executive Committee. A life full of honors worthily and
modestly borne is ended here, but it still lives in the works that
do follow and in the immortal life beyond the grave.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEGRO “AUNT” AND “UNCLE.”

A correspondent of the Atlanta _Constitution_, who signs himself or
herself “Georgia,” asks:

  _Editors Constitution_: Why is it that so many of the
  respectable white people of this country claim blood affinity
  with the Negro race by condescending to call them “aunt” and
  “uncle”? An “aunt” is a father’s or mother’s sister, an “uncle”
  is a father’s or mother’s brother. Now, why should a Negro be
  made to believe that he is a blood relation of white families
  by calling them “aunt” and “uncle,” terms of the highest family
  respect? Is there any wonder that some Negroes think they are
  as good as a white man, when they are called by these endearing
  names? The Negro is an imitator of the white man, and if we are
  to keep the races apart, let no such example be set for the
  Negro’s imitation.

What absurdity this is, and withal how insulting to the colored
people. Not unlikely the person who wrote it was brought up by
a colored nurse. The genuine affection with which many of the
Southern white people speak of the old colored uncle and aunty is
often very touching. They belong, however, to the “Old South.”
The “New South” is speaking another kind of language. When Mr.
Grady in his speech at the New England Society’s dinner in New
York informed his auditors that the New South recognized fully the
Negro’s rights, it must have been in grim sarcasm. Did he mean by
the New South the white people of Georgia? That interpretation of
his language would save the other Southern States from the censure
of his misrepresentation. But Georgia, by the recent conduct of its
Legislature in the discussion and manipulation of the Glenn bill,
contradicts nearly everything Mr. Grady said in that speech on that
subject. The right to be legislated against, to be branded with
essential and eternal inferiority as a race, to be insulted, to be
abused, to be discriminated against at every point,—this is what
the white people of Georgia believe if the voice and conduct of
their legislators mean anything. We presume Mr. Grady did not know
this when he made that speech. If he did know it, he violated the
hospitality that honored him as its guest.

But the colored people will have their rights. The time is not yet,
but it is coming. Hostile legislation and violence cannot prevent
it. Christian education will solve the problem.

       *       *       *       *       *


YOUNG MEN IN THE SOUTH.

  The friends of the South look to the young men for
  regeneration, and yet the situation is complicated by a
  peculiarly unfortunate circumstance. A Southern boy that
  was six years old in 1860 was allowed to run the streets,
  boss the slaves, and do anything but study. It can be stated
  as a general proposition that the Southern-born men in the
  prime of life in the South to-day—that is from 30 to 35 or
  38—are uneducated. A man with gentle blood in his veins and
  a patch of weeds in his head, so to speak, is no ornament to
  any community, and the chances are that he will be a danger
  to it. If one would understand the full application of this
  fact let him run over the lists of the Southern Legislatures
  and note the ages of the members that make the most trouble.
  Again, the migration of young men is a cause of disquietude.
  Through the low country from the Carolinas to Louisiana, where
  agriculture is at a low ebb in consequence mainly of the credit
  system, the young men are continually becoming dissatisfied
  and leaving. Our Northwest is full of these ambitious Southern
  men. Certain Southern States are for various reasons putting
  premiums unwittingly upon emigration. Kentucky has been almost
  swept as with a broom, the better class of young men having
  been carried across the Ohio River. This is not the case with
  Tennessee, which is twenty-five years ahead of Kentucky in
  civilization. Tennessee seems destined to become one of the
  most important educational centers of the South, and it is in a
  fair way of holding its young men. Texas is another State which
  is holding its young men. This is a matter that the law-makers
  of the South will do well to consider. A commonwealth that
  cannot hold its young men cannot hold its own in the race for
  supremacy.—_Springfield (Mass.) Republican._

A partial confirmation of the above views is furnished in the
action of the Georgia Legislature respecting the co-education of
the races. Mr. Glenn is a young man. His wild followers are in
the main young men. Just now these youth are in the saddle and
they are not backward to show the world what kind of men they
are. In our opinion, there have been greater and wiser statesmen.
It is something of an explanation, however, to know that in all
probability they are men of no education. The works of ignorance
are very apt to be works of darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *


FRED DOUGLASS AT THE GOWDEN[A] GATE.

BY REV. J. E. RANKIN, D.D.

    Fred Douglass, doffed this mortal state,
    Stood waitin’ at the Gowden Gate,
            Inquirin’ for St. Peter:
    He heard within that gran’ auld hymn,
    Like distant waters, breakin’ dim,
            Old Hundred, in Long Meter.

    He knocked, and knocked, and waitin’ stood
    While white folks, a great multitude,
            Went in, without cessation:
    He thought he heard in undertone:
    “This is the white folks’ gate, alone!”
            Distract, in consternation.

    They hurried through, without a glance—
    He was to them na circumstance—
            Upon the very canter:
    He saw their backs were maistly labeled,
    For places in advance they’d cabled,
            And hailed doon from Atlanta.

    At length, there came one martyr, Glenn,
    And pointed to an auld slave-pen,
            Fitted for nigger-quarters:
    It stood against the city-walls,
    Arranged within with auld-time stalls,
            Just as before they fought us.

    “Your name, I think, is Douglass, Sir,
    An’ nigger poisons in you stir,
            O hell itsel’ th’ infection!
    Ten thousand æons you must wait,
    Till you are purged withoot the gate;—
            Submit, then, to inspection.

    “For, Heaven no place, as well as earth,
    Can find for those o’ nigger birth,
            For Master or for Madam:
    You married, too, on earth a white;—
    And that deserves a deeper night,
            Than first befell auld Adam!”

    And sae the Gowden Gate was slammed,
    And in yon pen was Douglass crammed,
            For doom sae unrelaxin’:
    Till he had passed from state to state,
    Been bleached all white, from heel to pate,
            An’ made an Anglo-Saxon!

FOOTNOTE:

[A] Golden

       *       *       *       *       *


Mr. L. Maxwell, a graduate of Atlanta University, a member of the
Hartford Theo. Sem., and who during the summer has had charge of
our Congregational Church in Savannah, Ga., went with a friend a
few weeks ago by railway to McIntosh. They paid for first-class
tickets and went into the so-called “white car.” The conductor
merely intimated to them that they were in the wrong car. This did
not suit the white passengers, who, to the number of twenty-five,
insisted that they should leave. They found the conductor and
appealed to him. To his credit be it said, he came and informed
the passengers that as conductor he was compelled to protect the
colored men, and hinted that they better not interfere with them.
This settled it. The boys took their first-class seats in the
white people’s car and rode unmolested to their destination. This
is certainly a report of progress. All that is needed is a little
backbone on the part of railroad officials at the South, and the
colored people will have their rights in railway travel.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kentucky Conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church
convened recently in Louisville. Bishop Miles having called the
meeting to order, before proceeding to business startled the
Conference by saying:

“I have received complaints against a great many of you preachers
who do not pay your debts. You are liable to be arrested, and I
fear I shall have to call a private session to consider the matter.
If you don’t receive enough money for preaching, you had better
quit and go to work at something where you can make more money. You
need not say a word. I know you, and I’ll just give you until next
Friday to get square with your creditors. I hope you’ll do this,
because I don’t want to expose you, but if you don’t come up and
do right the public will know it, and you will be left without an
appointment.”

It is certainly a sad condition of things when a Bishop has thus to
reprove ministers, and so many of them. It is no surprise to those
who know the kind of men who are ministering to the colored people.
There is no greater need among the colored people than that of a
morally and intellectually competent ministry; but it is gratifying
to know that there are such men in positions of influence and power
as Bishop Miles. It is in the speedy multiplication of such men
that the colored people’s future, under God, depends.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our thanks are due and cheerfully rendered to Rev. and Mrs. John
P. Cowles, of Ipswich, Mass., for one hundred copies of a book
entitled “The Use of a Life.” These volumes are to be distributed
among our missionaries. The life whose use these pages trace was
that of Mrs. Z. P. G. Bannister, whose work as a Christian educator
and missionary supporter has entered into the life of the nation
and the work of the world’s evangelization. The inspiration of her
work at Derry, where she was associated with Mary Lyon, and at
Ipswich, in the education of young ladies, spread westward until
from the Atlantic to the Pacific it has been felt. Mrs. Bannister
was a most remarkable woman. She was rich in her intellectual
endowments; rich in her knowledge of the Scriptures; rich in
the strength of her consecrated life to magnify the kingdom of
Christ and thereby make all her scholars the friends of missions.
Scholarship, thorough and severe, she believed in, but it must be
consecrated to Christ and used for the extension of his kingdom.
The story of this book is an inspiring one, and its perusal is
especially commended to Christian young women who are asking the
question, “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?”

       *       *       *       *       *

Of late there has been an effort made to revive the spirit
of patriotism among us by organizations and by recalling war
incidents. But we need a re-laying or re-enforcing of first
principles. American patriotism must be a Christian patriotism.

And while on this theme, we can hardly help referring to the false
patriotism prevailing in a portion of our country where the colored
people are still so generally proscribed. Were they not the loyal
ones in the civil war? And yet they have few rights. This is their
native land, yet they are denied suffrage. They are manfully trying
for an education, but little encouragement do they get from those
around them.

Among the truest patriots to-day in our land are those teachers
and preachers who have gone among this race to help elevate them,
but they are still, as for these two decades past, ostracised by
the whites, some of whom are altogether their inferiors, and who,
if they themselves are to be elevated, it must, it would seem,
be accomplished largely through the elevation of these colored
citizens, by these same despised Northern teachers!

No! A true American patriotism must not ignore these six millions
for whose condition the whole people are, and have been,
responsible. And if the Government cannot be induced in some form
to give federal aid towards educating those needy millions, then
surely the true patriot of to-day, whether North or South, will
individually contribute to support such organizations as the
American Missionary Association, whose object it is to help the
poor and oppressed now among us, whether they be the freedmen, the
Indians or the Chinese.

            FROM A SERMON BY REV. E. N. ANDREWS, HARTFORD, WIS.

       *       *       *       *       *




FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

GENERAL SURVEY.

THE SOUTH.


Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, gave evidence of a keen and
just appreciation of the needs of a race just escaping from
centuries of bondage, when he said to his son-in-law: “Thou shalt
teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt show them the way wherein
they must walk and the work they must do.”—Ex. xviii, 20. These
freed slaves, under the leadership of Moses, needed instruction
in reference to religious duties, the conduct of their lives, and
the larger work that opened to them as _free_ men. This counsel
of the old Midian Priest applies equally in its principles to the
problem the A. M. A. is helping to solve among the freed men of the
South to-day. This work must be fundamentally that of instruction.
No revival excitements, no moral shocks, will effect the cure of
superstitious ignorance which the social, political and religious
forces of the past have united to make most dense. Slow and patient
methods of instruction only can dispel this darkness. This fact
emphasizes the importance of the


EDUCATIONAL WORK

in the South. The total number of schools planted in the Southern
States is fifty-four. Six of these are chartered institutions,
fairly entitled to the rank of Colleges. Sixteen are Normal
and Training Schools. Thirty-two are common schools, scattered
throughout nine different States. In these schools are 246
instructors and 8,616 pupils.

In analyzing these figures, we find not a few encouraging facts.
One school has been added to the total number under the care of
the Association during the last year. Two new schools stand in the
list of Normal Institutes. Normal work was begun by the A. M. A. in
1866; now we have sixteen well furnished schools, one great purpose
of which is to instruct instructors.

Large additions have been made to the accommodations of our schools
during this year. Three school buildings, and two buildings used
for industrial training, have been erected. Tougaloo rejoices
in the completion of the two Ballard buildings, one used for
class rooms and the other for industrial training. These two
buildings were erected by the students, under the direction of the
Superintendent of Mechanical Training, who was also the architect.
The saving in expense of building was not less than $3,000, and the
Industrial classes were thus given the best instruction in this
department.

The Girls’ Industrial School at Thomasville, Ga., has just entered
its new and commodious home. This building accommodates forty
boarding pupils, and contains furnished rooms for teachers, two
offices, dining-room, reception room, kitchen and laundry, and all
the appointments of a complete boarding school.

The Academy at Pleasant Hill, Tenn., a school established for the
mountain people, has just dedicated a new and commodious building,
to be used both for school and church purposes.

At Williamsburg, Ky., we have added an Industrial Department to
the course of study, and an unused factory has been purchased and
fitted up for the accommodation of the classes. These mountain
boys who become skillful in the use of carpenter’s tools in this
school will scarcely be satisfied to occupy the poor log cabins in
which their fathers and grandfathers have lived for generations.
Missionary influences radiate from a carpenter’s shop now as in
our Lord’s day. At Grand View, Tenn., the people themselves have
rented an additional building for school purposes. The enrollment
had already outgrown the accommodations of the old quarters. At
Straight University, New Orleans, a neat Industrial building has
been erected. In addition to these new buildings which have been
put up this year, the Cassedy school building at Talladega has been
materially enlarged, to meet the growing needs of this department.
At Avery Institute, Charleston, S.C., the damage wrought by the
earthquake has been repaired. There was serious interruption of the
school work here, as the Institute could not be opened for months,
and it was difficult even then to gather the usual number of
pupils, on account of financial losses and the intense excitement
of the public mind incident to the earthquake. The enrollment shows
an attendance of ninety-two less than last year.

Notwithstanding these extensive enlargements, pupils have been
turned away from several of our institutions because of lack in
school accommodations and in teaching force. In one school the
Principal tells us of a boy who applied for admission to the
school. He could not take him. In a few days a leading business
man of the city called to intercede in the boy’s behalf, but every
corner of the school was full. “If there is a case of sickness or
removal for any cause, will you not promise to let that boy have
the first chance?” pleaded his earnest friend. But this boy was
only one of many such boys and girls. At another Institution the
Principal reported at one time during the year that there were
twenty-five families who were waiting for an opening in the school,
that they might send one or more pupils there.

In a school-room fitted to accommodate fifty-two pupils if every
desk were full, I counted ninety-six, and the teacher reported
shortly afterwards that one hundred and eight were present. It goes
without saying that it is impossible to do the best sort of school
work under such circumstances as these, and the A. M. A. seeks to
do only the best work.

One of three things is evidently true in reference to the
educational work of the Association: We must either sacrifice the
character of the work, or reduce the amount of work done, or have
more money. Which shall it be?

Industrial training holds a still more important place than ever
in the course of instruction in our schools. The new Industrial
buildings at Williamsburg, Tougaloo and Straight are already
occupied with interested classes.

There are now taught at Tougaloo, in industrial branches: Farming,
Tinning, Blacksmithing, Wagon-making, Carpentering, Painting, the
use of Steam Power in Sawing and otherwise. The boy who completes
a course of instruction in the wagon-making department can build,
iron, paint and prepare for market, wagons or carriages, beginning
with iron in the bar and timber in the rough.

The Industrial training for girls shows similar advancement.
The work has been better systematized, and regular grades in
housekeeping and sewing have been established. Kitchen gardening,
which is the æsthetic name for all sorts of unæsthetic household
work, has been introduced into several of our schools. In one
instance the A. M. A. missionary has been invited to organize
classes for Industrial training in the white public schools of the
city, on account of her superior skill in teaching in this line.

The Connecticut Industrial School for Girls, already mentioned,
which began its existence under the baptism of a fiery persecution
at Quitman, rejoices in the great enlargement of its facilities for
industrial training. Unlike the prophet’s experience, we can say
that “the Lord was in the fire.”

Let us turn a moment now to note the record of the year’s work in
our six chartered institutions.

ATLANTA UNIVERSITY has wrought throughout the year, under various
embarrassments. No one has yet been found to take up the large
responsibilities of the Presidency so successfully borne by the
lamented President Ware. The schools of the prophets and the
various fields of labor have been diligently scanned, but no Elisha
has been found upon whom her Elijah’s mantle should fall.

The iniquitous Glenn Bill disturbed the quiet of the scholastic
life of the University. It is not necessary to refer at length to
the barbarous propositions of this bill. It failed to pass; but
the bitter agitation, the obtrusive visits of politicians and the
excited state of public feeling, have been a terrible tax upon the
strength of those who were already burdened with the regular work
of the University. Notwithstanding these discouragements, Atlanta
University has increased the enrollment of pupils from 291 of last
year to 413. “The wrath of men shall praise Him,” is a truth that
is always true.

FISK UNIVERSITY has enjoyed a year of marked prosperity. The
character of the work done here is of a high order. A scholarly
French prelate of the Romish Church, who had visited many
institutions in this country, recently found his way to Fisk
University. He took in hand the classes in Latin and Greek, and put
them through an exacting and exhaustive examination. He afterwards
said to a friend that the work done in the class rooms at Fisk
University was as good as that of any American school which he
had visited. This is unsought testimony of high value. Fisk is
constantly broadening and deepening her work. Here, too, the
enrollment shows a decided increase over that of last year. The
names in the catalogue number 437, as against 384 last year—a gain
of 53. During the year there has been a quiet work of grace among
the students, both hopeful and helpful.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE.—Among those who took the title of B. D. upon
examinations at Talladega’s last commencement was a young clergyman
who, during several years of successful ministerial labor in a
large church, carried on systematic study and prepared himself
for these examinations. Talladega College lays great emphasis
upon thorough scholarship. The course of study includes Normal
Training, College Preparatory, College and Theological Departments.
The Intermediate and Primary grades of the Normal department
have outgrown their accommodations, and the building has been
enlarged to accommodate them. The industrial departments are an
important feature of the school work at Talladega. The Winsted
farm offers fine advantages for agricultural training, and the
large Slater shop furnishes the students with opportunity for
thorough knowledge of mechanical industries. The President writes:
“Talladega aims at thoroughness and seeks to cultivate the hand,
head and heart.” The enrollment in this college shows a slight
increase over that of last year.

STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, at New Orleans, gathers among its students
many from that bright and interesting people known as Creoles,
who have so often furnished characters for song and story. The
Romish influence is very strong at New Orleans, but during an
interesting revival with which the school was blessed this year,
not a few children of these Catholic homes professed Christ. One
of these desired to join the University Church. Her parents gladly
consented, saying that if their child could live a better Christian
life in that church than in their own, they were rejoiced that she
should take this step. The religious interest in the school this
year has been deep and genuine.

The regular course of training at Straight includes Normal
instruction, and teachers educated here are found in many Southern
cities. At Vicksburg, Miss., the Superintendent of the colored
public schools, having eleven teachers under his direction, is
a graduate of Straight and is an honor to his Alma Mater. The
year just closed showed an enrollment of 518 pupils in this
school. Industrial classes have been organized as a part of the
regular school work. In the Law Department at Straight we have
the remarkable phenomenon of white and colored students sitting
down side by side in the same classes. The whites come from the
best Southern families, and are there because the instruction in
the Straight Law Department is so excellent. A diploma from this
department admits a student to the practice of law in the State,
without examination.

TOUGALOO, MISS., is situated only eight miles from the capital
of the State. There has been added to the former course of study
at Tougaloo a department of Biblical instruction during the
year. The purpose of this department is to fit the students for
more efficient and intelligent Christian work. The industrial
departments of Tougaloo are especially complete and have been
already mentioned. The appropriation of $3,000 from the State was
almost the only one in the whole list of appropriations voted by
the Legislature for school purposes which was not reduced this
year. This fact is remarkable testimony to the value of the school
by those who see its immediate results. Rev. G. S. Pope, who has
been connected with Tougaloo as its President for many years, has
been transferred to the general missionary work in the Tennessee
mountains. His services as President of Tougaloo have been
characterized by great energy and faithfulness.

TILLOTSON INSTITUTE, at Austin, Texas, is the only important
school we have in that great empire of the Southwest. This is the
youngest child among the chartered institutions of the Association,
but even this child is crying out for enlarged accommodations.
The enrollment of the school shows a considerable increase over
that of last year, and the promise for the year now opening is
still larger. One building only answers all the purposes of this
institution. Here are the school rooms, the teachers rooms, the
President’s residence and office, dormitories, rooms for industrial
training of girls, library, chapel, dining room, kitchen and
laundry, and it is not a large building either. Are not these facts
potent arguments for a new building? An industrial department has
been added to the Tillotson this year and a Superintendent of
Mechanical Training has been appointed.

In addition to this goodly list of large institutions we point with
pride to Berea and Hampton, planted by the Association. Howard
University also receives support in its department of Theology.

Such is the brief record of the educational work in the South
during the year. Thoreau paid a splendid tribute to John Brown
when he said of him in reference to his neglect of the schools:
“He let his Greek accent slant in the wrong way in order to set
upright human souls.” But these heroic teachers of the A. M. A.
are straightening Greek accents, solving mathematical problems,
and teaching the spelling book and the alphabet, for the same
grand purpose, that they may set upright human souls. Salvation is
the guiding purpose of this educational work. This purpose is not
forgotten amid the rush and fret of school cares and duties.


CHURCH WORK.

  Number of Churches                   127
  Number of Missionaries               103
  Number of Church members           7,896
  Added during the year              1,197
  Scholars in our Sunday-schools    15,109

These statistics show a substantial gain over last year. Seven new
churches have been organized during the year. These are situated
as follows: Decatur and Riverside Plantation, Ala.; Hammond, La.;
University Church at New Orleans; Petty, Texas; Combs, Ky.; and
Andersonville, Ga. The hills and valleys of the old prison pen at
Andersonville doubtless sometimes echo with the songs, and with the
prayers of these Negro disciples, loyal to the heart’s core to New
England Congregationalism.

Five churches have been dropped from the list this year, as changed
conditions of communities made it unwise to continue them.

There has been during the year a quiet Christian work throughout
the South, which has borne gratifying fruits, over 1,000 having
confessed Christ for the first time. The Sunday-school enrollment
has increased by nearly 2,000. The contributions of these churches
also show a healthful increase. They contributed this year for
benevolence, outside of their own work, $2,322.51, and for
their own church purposes, $16,014.50, making a grand total of
$18,337.01. This was an increase over the previous year of $610.96
in their benevolences, and $3,075.61 in the total. This is an
average contribution of $2.32 per member for every man, woman and
child in these churches. The average membership of these churches,
planted among a humble people who have no Congregational trend nor
training, stands at the encouraging number of 62 for each church,
while the average membership for each Congregational Church west of
the Mississippi is only 43. And these people in the South are loyal
Congregationalists. Although “a wild olive tree and graffed in
among the branches, they already partake of the root and fatness of
the olive tree.” The old argument urged by their Baptist brethren
that the Bible tells of John the Baptist, but no where of John
the Congregationalist, has lost its power to shake their faith in
the church of Paul and John Robinson. An old black man recently
arose in a prayer-meeting and most solemnly, with eager voice and
emphatic gesticulation, exclaimed: “I am a Congregational, and I
mean to continue a Congregational till I get up yonder,

    ‘Where congregations ne’er break up,
    And Sabbaths never end.’”

They have found Congregationalism in their old hymn book, which is
the next thing to their Bible.

At the annual meeting in Cleveland in 1882, in the report of
the Committee on Church Work, is found the following: “The rate
of progress during the last seventeen years has been uniformly
constant, about five churches per year. * * The question now
comes, whether it is not quite time to change the rate by doubling
it; at least to quicken the pace.” Do the facts show that this
suggestion has been followed? Since 1882 fifty-five churches have
been organized, an average of eleven per year for the five years
since 1882—more than double the old rate of five per year; another
illustration of our Lord’s words, “Be it unto you according to
your faith.” In 1882, 709 were added to the churches; in 1887,
1,197 were added. But the advancement in the Sunday-school work
in our churches is still more remarkable. The total Sunday-school
enrollment, as it appears in the annual report of 1882, was 7,835,
but we are able to report this year an enrollment of 15,109, an
increase in these five years of 7,274, or nearly 100 per cent.

These years have witnessed marvelous progress in systematic care
for the children and youth by the churches of the Association.

The year just closing has been a year of building activity in the
church work. Five new meeting houses have been erected; four of
these are among the mountain people and one among the freedmen. One
new feature in our church work is the organization of two churches
composed principally of Congregationalists from the North, who
have taken up their residence in the South. They needed help and
organized under the care of the Association. Although we have no
great Pentecostal baptism to record this year, we reverently speak
our thanks “that the Lord has added to the church almost daily,
such as are being saved.”


MOUNTAIN WORK.

When the Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association
“decided to offer these mountain people the aid of our system,”
probably even this far-seeing committee did not fully realize the
magnitude of the work, nor the grand possibilities of the field.
The few feeble churches that then existed are scarcely recognized
now in the larger work that has grown up independently of them and
miles away. Indeed, in entering this region in 1882 we were only
putting the plow into the field, which had been already turned by
pioneer laborers of the American Missionary Association. Before
the war a brave man had pushed his way back into these mountain
fastnesses in Christ’s name. He went under commission from this
Association. He opened a school; his work was successful. Into
his school he put a library for the use of his pupils. In this
library there was a volume of Wesley’s sermons and, among these,
one against the sin of slavery. This book got into the hands of
a pro-slavery family. It was told that the preacher was teaching
anti-slavery doctrine. Excitement in this back mountain region was
intense. A mob was organized. They seized this missionary, bound
him, beat him, and took him some two miles over the mountains and
threw him into a cabin, and left two men as guards at the doors,
while they, with their habitual delay, went to their homes for
their dinner. They intended to return and inflict sorer punishment
and perhaps hang him. Two mountain lads, brothers, heard of this
outrage. They were pupils of this godly school-master and loved
him. Each one, unknown to the other, went by a different path to
the cabin with his rifle on his shoulder. They took out their
teacher, cut the cords that bound him, and while he and his
terrified wife at his side climbed the mountain, pushing their way
to the Ohio river, these stalwart mountain lads kept back the mob
with the threatening use of their unerring rifles. This missionary
and his heroic wife finally reached the river and escaped. Now for
the wonderful climax to that history. We have recently organized a
Congregational Church where these thrilling scenes occurred. Among
the original members who united in the bonds of freedom-loving
Congregationalism were these two men who when boys defended this
teacher at the risk of their own lives. A neat little church stands
near this prison cabin of the past, and the bell that hangs in its
belfry, whose tones fall now upon no slave’s ear, was contributed
by the wife of this first missionary to this mountain region. Such
was the heroic beginning of the Association’s work among these
mountains. God had not forgotten during the years that passed, the
tears and blood and prayers of these brave sufferers for Christ’s
sake.

This mountain work now is divided into two well-defined fields,
both important. The field in Kentucky has for its base the
Louisville and Nashville Railroad, which has been built since our
present missionary force began their work in this region. The
central point of this work is Williamsburg. Here we have a large
and prosperous academy and church. Eleven whole counties are
easily reached from this center and only one of these has as yet
been occupied. In addition to the work at Williamsburg, there are
two primary schools and five organized churches and constantly
increasing numbers of missionary stations in this field. Chapels
have been erected in S. Williamsburg and Woodbine and are used
for public service. A pastor has been settled over the church at
Williamsburg and has taken up the work with great efficiency. The
General Missionary has been relieved from the pastoral duties
which he has borne before, and has larger opportunity for outside
work which is pressing upon him. “Can we not have at least one
pastor for each county?” is the painfully urgent plea of one of the
faithful workers in this field.

The other field of mountain work lies along the Cumberland
Mountains in Tennessee. Its base is the Cincinnati Southern
Railroad, and the work extends far back into the mountains.
Twenty-two counties are here accessible to our pastors and
teachers. We have in this field two flourishing schools, one at
Grand View and the other away up on the Cumberland plateau, at
Pleasant Hill. Besides these schools, there are also churches
at Grand View, Pleasant Hill, Pomona, Robbins, Slick Rock and
Helenwood. Last year a new school was taken under the care of the
Association at Sherwood, Tenn. We have thus surrounded this vast
mountain region with our missionary forces. A General Missionary
has been put into this field during the past year and the work
opens upon him with constantly increasing magnitude. These people
are Americans in every sense of the word, ninety-eight per cent
of the population of some counties having been born where they
still live. Those who come into the region from other parts of the
same State they call foreigners. A missionary in writing recently
from this field says: “I asked how many of them in the meeting had
Bibles in their homes, and out of fifteen or eighteen families
represented only two of them had Bibles.” Another missionary asked
a girl seventeen years old if they had a book in her house. “A
book, what is a book?” was the astonishing question. A book was
described to her. “Oh! yes,” she said, “I believe there was one in
the cabin before grandmam died, but it was lost so long ago I plumb
forgot how it looked.”

This is _our_ work. Only the edges of this great field have been
gleaned. Will you not let us send our harvesters right into the
heart of this ripening grain to gather in the name of our God?


INDIAN WORK.

The Indian work is chiefly in Nebraska and Dakota. The following is
the summary for the year:

  Churches                      5
  Church members              370
  Added during the year        43
  Schools                      18
  Pupils in Schools           608
  Missionaries and Teachers    61

The report shows an encouraging increase in church membership. This
means the redemption of souls from heathenism.

The three principal stations in the North are Santee, Oahe, and
Fort Berthold. The work has been strengthened in each of these
stations during the year. The Santee Normal School celebrated its
seventeenth birthday during the past year. It was the first school
of its kind established among this nation and its fruitful history
abundantly proves the wisdom of its planting. Superior normal
training is given the students in this school. The enrollment this
year was 195. Twenty-six students were gathered in the theological
department, many of whom will doubtless become missionaries to
their own people. Pilgrim Church at Santee has enjoyed a year of
prosperity. Eighteen have been added to the membership, eleven on
the confession of their faith.

At Rosebud Agency three villages, including about 8,000 Indians,
are open to missionary influence, and the work is being pushed
with increased vigor. Jacob Good Dog, a converted Indian, was the
Boniface in this field.

Among the Ponca Indians, in Nebraska, the work had been carried on
with about the usual results.

OAHE.—This mission includes a training school and eleven
out-stations on the Cheyenne and Grand rivers. Nineteen have been
added to the Oahe church, on confession of their faith, during the
year. A young man has been ordained as missionary to the Indians,
and enters this field on Grand river for his life work. He has
caught the spirit of Edwards, and Eliot and Brainard.

FORT BERTHOLD has passed a year of prosperity. New work is opening
in this field. I quote from a recent letter: “Since my last letter
we have had very interesting and serious developments. The Gros
Ventres and Mandan tribes, situated 20 and 40 miles from us, have
little or no religious instruction, only as they come to us. These
two tribes we are hoping some of our young men who are away at
school will be ready soon to work with.”

S’KOKOMISH AGENCY lies 1,000 miles to the west of Fort Berthold, in
Washington Territory. The church here has also been blessed during
the year with revival influences and four have united with it on
confession of faith.

These Indian missions have been visited personally during the year
by two of the Secretaries of the Association, and the work has been
carefully inspected.

SANTA FE, New Mexico, still receives a fixed appropriation from
the Association for the Indian department of its University, the
Principal and teachers being appointed by the Association. Fourteen
Apache girls have been among the pupils during the year—the first
Apaches that have ever been gathered in our schools. They prove to
be bright and docile pupils.


CHINESE WORK.

  Missions                 17
  Missionaries             28
  Pupils enrolled       1,044
  Hopeful conversions     150
  Given up idolatry       211

The report of the Superintendent is both joyful and sad. The
numbers of those who have given up idol worship and those hopefully
converted are the largest it has ever been our privilege to report;
but the work has labored under great embarrassment in the serious
diminution of funds. The resources for the current work were
necessarily reduced by more than $3,000. New doors are opening
in this Chinese work. The Japanese are now ripe for schools and
churches, and a small beginning has been made in this direction.
This work is open to us, and the command to enter is written in the
imperative.


WOMAN’S BUREAU.

Only four years have passed since the Woman’s Bureau became a
recognized department of our work, although it existed in reality
for many years before. These years have abundantly proven its
efficiency. It is useful especially along three lines: First, in
assisting the women who are engaged as teachers to understand and
grasp their work; again, in reaching the mothers and sisters of
the pupils with purifying Christian influences, as they could not
be reached in any other way; and also, in bringing information
to the benevolent women of the North in regard to the special
needs of their degraded and helpless sisters in the South. The
shocking story of their degradation can be told only by women to
women. Along all these lines of service the Woman’s Bureau has
been especially successful during the past year. Its usefulness
is greatly increased because it is an organic part of a larger
Association, and thus gains a wider field of vision. The range of
its operations is constantly enlarging.


FINANCES.

RECEIPTS.

  From Churches, Sabbath-schools, Missionary
      Societies and individuals                       $189,483.39
  From Estates and Legacies                             52,266.73
  From Income, Sundry Funds                             10,561.07
  From Tuition and Public Funds                         28,964.81
  From Rents                                               478.10
  From United States Government for Education of
      Indians                                           17,357.21
  From Slater Fund, paid to Institutions                 7,650.00
                                                      ———————————
                                                      $306,761.31

The total disbursements for the year have been $298,783.80, a
decrease in the expenditures of last year of $13,467. We entered
this year with a debt of $5,783. The problem that taxed our skill
and energies was this: How can we do the work which the Lord has
put upon us, and at the same time not increase this debt? It
looked, at times, as if it would prove impossible. For the month of
February the receipts were $9,000 less than last year for the same
month, and even so late as July there was a falling off of $17,000
for the month. The magnificent rally in September brought into the
treasury a splendid sum, and the problem was solved.

Through carefully studied economy in the expenditures, by
persistent efforts in the collecting field, and by the large
and generous benevolences of the churches, all under God’s good
providence, this has been accomplished.

The current expenses of the year are all paid; the debt with which
we began the year is all cancelled, and we enter this new year with
the good sum of $2,193.80 on the credit side of the ledger. But
this will provide for the current expenses of the Association only
about two days.

This has been a perilous experiment. The work has suffered,
although none of it has been given up. The total number of
missionaries has been reduced. Teachers and pastors have been
overworked. New fields, “white to the harvest,” have been
ungathered and left to possible blight. We praise God for this
deliverance, but earnestly pray that we may not again need the
chastening discipline of a like experience.

Such is the record of another year in the life of the A. M. A.,
as we read it from our human standpoint. The full significance of
these simple facts as they stand related to the Divine plan for the
redemption of the world, we cannot trace, nor need we. “What is
written, is written.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIEW OF THE YEAR.

The fiscal year of “The California Chinese Mission”—the
representative and agent of the A. M. A. in its work among the
Chinese—closed August 31st. I devote the space accorded me, this
month, in the MISSIONARY, to a brief review of the year’s service.
Statistics ought not to be dry when they set forth succinctly a
gospel work and a record of souls saved. Each unit in each number
stands for a story that angels stop to read—a gift, a labor, or a
turning of the heart of God, that has to do with the eternal life.

Our missions have numbered 17; of these, 11 have been sustained
during the entire year, and two others for eleven months. We have
no vacation in our schools, unless forced to it by lack of funds,
or by other causes which we cannot control.

The number of workers has varied from 23 to 28; the aggregate
number of months of service being 309. Of these 91 are to be
credited to our Chinese missionary helpers, and 218 to Americans.
The total number of pupils enrolled is 1,044. The average
enrollment month by month has been 461; the average attendance,
247. These numbers are smaller than those of last year, or of
any preceding year for a great while; which comes of a serious
diminution in another quarter which it has been out of our power
to avert. Our resources for current work have been less than in
previous years by more than $3,000—last year, $12,341.80; this
year, $8,989.30. This statement is to date; I trust the amount
will be increased somewhat before the books are finally closed. It
was impossible to maintain the larger work with the smaller sum. I
think that we can truly say: We have done what we could. The most
serious loss is in the employment of Chinese missionary helpers;
we ought to have had twice as many in the field as we were able to
employ.

The expenditures on account of current work have been as follows:
For salaries of superintendent, teachers and helpers, $6,222.80;
for rents of mission houses, $2,103; for incidentals, $634.15;
total, $8,959.95. The contributions made directly to the treasury
of this Auxiliary amount, at this writing, to $2,989.30, of which
about $250 were given expressly for permanent property.

While we note with sadness these diminutions, we record with
gladness an increase at the point of largest interest, the point
towards which all our endeavors tend. We find in our statistical
columns, under the head of “Profess to have ceased from idol
worship,” an aggregate of 211; under that of “Giving evidence of
Christian character,” 150. These are larger numbers than we have
ever before been privileged to place at the foot of these columns;
and among those who give evidence of Christian character are many
who a year ago either walked in utter darkness, or were refusing to
let in on their hearts the dawning light of Christ. I cannot as yet
state exactly the number who seem during this year to have accepted
Christ, but I think it cannot be much less than fifty. If so, then
the total number of whom this hope has been cherished since our
work began, cannot be much less than 650.

These encouragements are due, under God, very largely to some
tentative evangelistic work which we have undertaken. The results
are such as lead us to pray for the privilege of enlarging this
branch of our service and prosecuting it with greater vigor. We are
praying—and I think with faith and unity—that God would raise up
among us some one on whom we can bestow this special gift. I _look
for_ an answer. I _expect_ that during this new fiscal year, upon
which we have entered, the providence of God will open the way, and
the Spirit of God will beckon us on to a system of evangelization
which will reach to all our missions and will pass beyond them,
making the wilderness to blossom as the rose.

Among the “new departures” of the year is the beginning of work
among the Japanese. The first attempt to Christianize the Japanese
in California was made in connection with the First Cong. Church
in this city. The first Japanese baptized were received to that
church; but the work was suffered to lapse, and other denominations
have supplied our mortifying lack of service. A beginning has
again been made, this time in Oakland. Mr. N. Kusaki, a young
Japanese who was graduated last summer from the Pacific Theological
Seminary, led off in the undertaking. He still assists in it,
though it has now been placed in the hands of an American lady as
the principal teacher. It is an experiment at present, but gives
good promise of success.

Another interesting development, which, however, dates back
a little more than a year, is the Foreign Missionary Society
organized by our Chinese brethren. This movement was spontaneous;
no urgency or even suggestion from me occasioned it. It was put
into almost complete working order before I was made aware of
it. Its primary object is to sustain missionary operations in
South China, the provinces from which our brethren came. But its
watchword is nothing less than “China for Christ.” They have
already gathered nearly $250, contributed not from an abundance,
but out of deep poverty.

Another point of interest is the marked change in the spiritual
atmosphere of some of our missions—notably those at Stockton,
Petaluma and Oroville. It seems to foretoken a “wide and effectual
door” soon to open before us, which God grant that we may have the
men and the means to enter for a campaign aggressive and victorious.

                                                  WM. C. POND.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR SEPTEMBER, 1887.


  MAINE, $774.00.

    Bangor. Cen. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 100.; Sab.
      Sch. of First Parish, 13.26                           $113.26
    Bath. Members of Winter St. Ch.                          100.00
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10;
      “Response to Appeal,” 10                                20.00
    Blanchard. Dea. Jacob Blanchard                            2.00
    Brewer. M. Hardy, to const. PETER MCLEOD L. M.            50.00
    Bridgton. Mrs. Julia P. Hale                               2.00
    Brownfield. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Calais. First Cong. Ch.                                   34.00
    Eastport. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch.                   5.00
    Farmington Falls. Cong. Ch.                                4.52
    Foxcroft and Dover. Cong. Ch.                             11.33
    Hampden. Chas. E. Hicks                                    2.00
    Kittery Point. First Cong. Ch.                            17.00
    Litchfield Corners. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    12.00
    Machias. Centre St. Cong. Ch.                             19.19
    Madison. Cong. Ch.                                        22.00
    New Sharon. Cong. Ch.                                      4.00
    North Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         3.25
    North Yarmouth. Cong. Ch.                                  6.39
    Otisfield. Cong. Ch.                                      11.11
    Phillips. “Glad Helpers,” by Miss C. T. Crosby             6.00
    Portland. Second Parish Ch., 210; “One
      interested in the work of A. M. A.” 25                 235.00
    Pownal. “Friends,” by P. Chapin                           10.00
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00
    Searsport. First Cong. Ch.                                10.80
    Waterford. First Cong. Ch., 4; Sab. Sch. 10               14.00
    West Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch.                            6.50
    Willard. Rev. Amasa Loring                                 2.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Ch.                                        4.40
    Wiscasset. Cong. Ch.                                       4.25
    Yarmouth. First Parish Ch.                                30.00
    —— “Friend in Maine,” _for Williamsburg, Ky._              2.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $2,127.81.

    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                12.40
    Bath. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   7.31
    Boscawen. Sab. Sch. Convention                            10.57
    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               6.00
    Campton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.00
    Colebrook. “E. and C.”                                     2.00
    Concord. West Cong. Ch., 16.35; North Cong.
      Ch., 11.08; “Friend,” 5                                 32.43
    East Derry. First Ch. and Soc.                            21.64
    Fitzwilliam. Mrs. Fanny Hancock                            5.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Ch. adl. to const. DAVID
      GRANT and JOSEPH S. THOMPSON, L. M’s.                    2.00
    Gorham. “Guests of the Glen House and Cong.
      Ch.”                                                     6.50
    Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             40.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               18.40
    Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Hanover. Dartmouth College Cong. Ch.                      33.85
    Hollis. Cong. Ch.                                         19.00
    Hooksett. Cong. Ch.                                       19.95
    Jaffrey. East Cong. Ch.                                   30.00
    Keene. Cong. Union Meeting                                33.10
    Keene. Sab. Sch. Class, Second Cong. Ch. _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           20.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             7.00
    Lisbon. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.86
    Manchester. Mrs. Mary E. Hidden, 10; Francis
      B. Eaton. 5; E. L. Bryant, 2; A. H. Daniels,
      2; Mrs. C. W. Wallace, 5                                24.00
    Milford. D. S. Burnham                                    10.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    Nashua. First Ch.                                        100.00
    Northwood Centre. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   12.30
    Orford. West Cong. Ch., 11; John Pratt, 10                21.00
    Seabrook and Hampton Falls. First Evan. Cong.
      Ch.                                                      8.00
    South Newmarket. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Temple. Mrs. R. R. Goodyear, 5; Mrs. Lucy W.
      C. Keyes, 1.50                                           6.50
    Walpole. Cong. Ch.                                        19.00
    West Lebanon. Miss’y Soc., Box of C., _for
      Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._
    ——. “A Friend in N.B.”                                    35.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $627.81

    LEGACY.

    Amherst. Estate of Luther Melendy, by A. A.
      Rotch, Admr.                                         1,000.00
    Candia. Estate of Jona. Martin, by J. C. Smith
      and N. M. Smith, Ex’s.                                 500.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,127.81


  VERMONT, $512.36.

    Barnet. Y. P. S. of C. E., _for Marie Adlof
      Fund_                                                    2.00
    Bennington. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.                 11.62
    Cambridge. Madison Safford. 10; S. M. Safford,
      5                                                       15.00
    Chester. J. L. Fisher                                     10.00
    Coventry. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.40
    East Berkshire. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00
    Enosburg. First Cong. Ch.                                 22.00
    Glover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                22.50
    Granby. “Friends”                                          1.00
    Guilford. Miss S. Maria Tyler, by Mrs. Ellen
      D. Wild                                                  2.00
    Jericho Center. “A Friend”                                12.00
    Manchester. Emma A. Brown                                  1.00
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                                     29.27
    Middlebury. Mrs. Stewart, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                      8.00
    Newbury. Mrs. Edward P. Keyes, to const. MARY
      L. JEWETT L. M.                                         30.00
    Post Mills. “A Friend,” by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks            5.00
    Royalston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 22.72; A.
      W. Kenney 30., to const. MRS. ABBIE T.
      DANFORTH L. M.                                          52.72
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch.                            122.23
    Sharon. Y. P. S. C. E. of Cong. Ch.                        5.00
    South Burlington. Eldridge Mission Sab. Sch.,
      _for Indian M._                                          8.00
    Swanton. Cong. Ch., 10.65; C. C. Long, 10                 20.65
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch.                                       9.30
    West Brattleboro. Cong. Ch.                               17.56
    West Brattleboro. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., and 3 _for freight, for McIntosh, Ga._               3.00
    Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.00
    West Townshend. Cong. Ch.                                  5.51
    Williamstown. Cong. Ch.                                   11.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 24; Gilbert A.
      Davis, 10                                               34.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $12,422.79.

    Abington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        19.12
    Acton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        13.00
    Alford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.03
    Amherst. Amherst College Ch., 203.56; First
      Cong. Ch., 25; Rev. G. S. Dickerman, 25                253.56
    Andover. South Ch. and Soc., 50; West Parish
      Ch. and Soc., 50                                       100.00
    Ashfield. Henry Taylor                                     8.50
    Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         48.75
    Boston. Park St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.        1,000.00
      Boston. J. Q. Adams, 100; E. L.
          Pickard, 25; C. S. Roberts, 25;
          Geo. M. Fiske, 25; Wm. Lloyd
          Garrison, 10, _for Atlanta U._         185.00
      Boston. Sab. Sch. of Park St. Ch.
          _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._           50.00
      Boston. Shawmut Cong. Ch.                  180.00
      Boston. “A Friend”                          50.00
      Boston. Sab. Sch. of Old So. Ch.,
          _for Student Aid, Fisk U._              40.00
      Boston. Rev. E. B. Palmer                   10.00
      Boston. Mrs. M. L. Houston                  10.00
      Boston. Rev. R. B. Howard                    5.00
      Boston. “A Friend”                           2.50
      Brighton. Mrs. Elizabeth Bicknell            5.00
      Charleston. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.           68.86
      Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch., (5 of
          which from Miss Grace Wilder,
          _for Indian M._)                       139.12
      Dorchester. Sab. Sch. of Second
          Cong. Ch.                               18.36
      Dorchester. Mrs. R. W. Prouty                5.00
      Roxbury. John G. Cary, 15; Harriet
          C. Cary, 15, to const. REBECCA
          B. CARY L. M.                           30.00
                                                 ——————    1,798.84
    Boxford. First Cong. Ch. 64.33, to const. MISS
      MARY L. SAWYER and JAMES P. CLEVELAND L.
      M’s., “M. N. Z.” 5                                      69.33
    Braintree. First Ch. and Soc.                             20.34
    Brimfield. Benev. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                       34.00
    Brockton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      WALTER B. LEWIS, RUFUS E. TILTON and MISS
      LUCY H. FULLER L. M’s.                                  91.65
    Brookline. Mrs. Wm. B. Strong                             10.00
    Buckland. Cong. Ch.                                       25.57
    Cambridge. North Ave. Cong. Ch. adl.                     100.00
    Cambridge. Sab. Sch., Class of Miss M. E. C.
      Smith, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                     5.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch., 440.18; Pilgrim
      Ch., 32.19                                             472.37
    Cambridgeport. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim Ch., _for
      Kreutzer Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund, for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U., 50., for Student Aid,
      Straight U., 50_                                       100.00
    Canton. Elijah A. Morse, 100; Evan. Cong. Ch.,
      19.50                                                  119.50
    Centerville. Rev. Wm. Leonard                              5.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         30.00
    Clinton. Girls’ Mission Circle, by Annie L.
      Hitchcock, _for Indian Sch’p_                           27.11
    Coleraine. Mrs. P. B. Smith                                5.00
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                  31.47
    Conway. Cong. Ch.                                         12.00
    Dalton. John H. Smith, 10; Mrs. John H. Smith,
      5; Llewellyn H. Andrews, 5; _for Mountain
      White Work_                                             20.00
    Danvers. First Cong. Ch.                                 105.02
    Deerfield. Ortho. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      10.00
    Dracut. First Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch.                         25.63
    East Brookfield. “A Friend”                                2.00
    East Cambridge. Miss Mary F. Aiken                        10.00
    East Charlemont. Mrs. A. P. Leavitt, to const.
      MRS. H. J. STONE, MRS. CALEB DICKINSON and
      MRS. M. M. HILLMAN L. M’s.                             100.00
    East Milton. Mrs. Susanna Beale, _for Straight
      U._                                                      5.00
    East Taunton. Cong. Ch.                                    6.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch.                                         8.00
    Fitchburg. Rollstone Cong. Ch., 89.09; C. S.
      Tolman, 15; Rev. and Mrs. J. M. Eaton, 10;
      Geo. Cook, 5                                           119.09
    Foxboro. Ortho. Cong. Ch.                                 45.00
    Gardner. First Cong. Ch.                                  20.00
    Gloucester. Nancy E. Brooks                               20.00
    Granville. O. S. Dickinson, to const. MRS.
      MARILLA ALDERMAN L. M.                                  30.00
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               146.58
    Great Barrington. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch. 343.55; C. C.
      Phillips, 2                                            345.55
    Groton. Ortho. Cong. Sab. Sch.                            25.00
    Harvard. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           14.00
    Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, 200; “C” 10              210.00
    Haverhill. Algernon P. Nichols, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                          100.00
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. 8; Sab. Sch. of Cong.
      Ch., to const. JOHN HALL JONES L. M., 30;
      Wilbur M. Purrington, 5                                 43.00
    Hingham. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                              10.00
    Holbrook. Winthrop Ch. (100. of which from
      Miss Sarah J. Holbrook, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._), 210.45; Mrs. B. J. Holbrook, 2           212.45
    Holden. “Friends”                                         10.00
    Holliston. “Bible of Christians of District
      No. 4.”                                                 30.00
    Housatonic. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                        15.00
    Hubbardston. “A Friend”                                   20.00
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.00
    Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. Ch.                               8.67
    Kingston. Mayflower Ch.                                   14.00
    Lakeville and Taunton Precinct. Sab. Sch.                  7.30
    Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       39.10
    Lawrence. Trinity Cong. Ch. 18.52; United
      Cong. Ch. 6.22                                          24.74
    Lee. First Cong. Ch. 110, and Sab. Sch. 125              235.00
    Lincoln. By Frank W. Smith, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              5.00
    Lowell. Pawtucket Ch. and Soc.                            23.13
    Lynn. J. Porter Woodbury, 4.50; Chestnut St.
      Ch., 6                                                  10.50
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          39.00
    Malden. Cong. Ch., _for Straight U._                      20.33
    Massachusetts. “B”                                        12.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch.                                96.99
    Melrose Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 15;
      Mrs. F. W. Lewis, 50c.                                  15.50
    Middleboro. Central Cong. Ch.                             50.85
    Middlefield. Cong. Ch.                                    31.00
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.47
    Milford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           25.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 102.73,
      to const. HARRY N. ROGERS, GEORGE E. PERRY
      and MRS. MARIA H. AIKEN L. M’s.; M. D.
      Garfield and Daughter, 10                              112.73
    Nantucket. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s
      Work_                                                    2.55
    Natick. “Friend”                                           5.00
    New Bedford. Mrs. I. E. Jenney                             5.00
    New Boston. Cong. Soc.                                     6.00
    New Salem. Cong. Ch.                                       6.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch.                                         90.00
    Newton Centre. F. A. Gardner                               2.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                         5.23
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch., 292.84; Jared
      Clark, 25                                              317.84
    North Brookfield. James Miller, 20; Mrs. F.
      Walker, 5; Albert Spooner, 4; D. W. Knight,
      1.50; J. E. Miller 1., to const. JAMES E.
      MILLER L. M.; Union Cong. Ch., 31, to const.
      ROBERT MORSE L. M.; “Mrs. H. M. N. of First
      Ch.” 5                                                  67.50
    North Chelmsford. Second Cong. Ch., to const.
      MISS IDA A. KNOWLES, L. M.                              36.79
    North Chelmsford. “A Friend,” _for Chinese M._             5.00
    North Concord. “The Little Christian Workers,”
      by Sadie E. Parsons                                      5.00
    Northfield. Rev. J. P. Humphrey and Wife, 5,
      ea.; Rev. M. H. Wells and Miss A. T. Wells,
      5, ea.                                                  20.00
    North Leominster. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., to
      const. MYRA L. MERRIAM L. M.                            36.00
    North Middleboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     136.00
    Phillipston. D. and L. Mixter                              2.00
    Pittsfield. Individuals, So. Cong. Ch., _for
      Pleasant Hill, Tenn._                                   10.00
    Pittsfield. Mrs. H. M. Hurd                                2.00
    Princeton. Ladies, by Mrs. A. H. Whitteker,
      _for Woman’s Work_                                      12.00
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Randolph. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 141.10,
      and Sab. Sch., 15                                      156.10
    Reading. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Revere. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                      6.00
    Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                        6.42
    Rockland. Elijah Shaw                                     50.00
    Saundersville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Scotland. Mrs. Jane N. Leonard, _for freight_              1.00
    Scotland. Mrs E. Alden                                     0.25
    Shelburne Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.
      Classes, No. 4, 1.75; No. 5, 1; No. 12,
      35c.; No. 13, 3.50, _for Tougaloo U._                    6.60
    Shelburne Falls. Mrs. J. A. Richmond                       5.00
    Shrewsbury. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Indian M._                                              50.00
    Shrewsbury. Cong. Ch.                                     35.52
    Somerville. MRS MARY C. SAWYER, to const.
      herself and MISS MAIZIE BLAIKIE L. M’s.                 60.00
    Southboro. Pilgrim Ch.                                    23.43
    South Braintree. South Cong. Ch.                          14.00
    South Dartmouth. Ladies, by Mrs. Smith.                    0.50
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.               173.53
    South Hadley Falls. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.,
      _for Santee Indian M._                                  15.64
    South Natick. John Eliot Ch.                              18.69
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 67.00
    South Weymouth. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch. of
      Second Cong. Ch. _for two little boys,
      Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                              10.00
    Spencer. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               86.26
    Springfield. Mrs. James D. Litchfield                      1.00
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, _for Santee
      Indian M._                                              30.00
    Sturbridge. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                        20.00
    Sunderland. “A Friend”                                     1.50
    Taunton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 200;
      Winslow Ch. and Soc., 90, to const., REV.
      GEORGE H. REED, DEA. ANDREW S. BRIGGS and
      DWELLY T. SMITH L. M.’s; Union Ch., 29.90              319.90
    Taunton. Young People’s Union of Broadway
      Cong. Ch., _for Santee Indian M._                       50.00
    Upton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           61.15
    Uxbridge. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                 28.00
    Waltham. Sab. Sch. Class, by Mrs. Ella J.
      Lawrence, _for Student Aid, Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            6.00
    Warren. “A Friend,”                                        5.00
    Watertown. “Friends,”                                      3.50
    Webster. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    Wellesley. M. A. Stevens                                   5.00
    Wellfleet. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       24.14
    Wendell. Dea. N. C. Williams                               1.00
    Westboro. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 129.37; “Two
      Lovers of the cause,” 20                               149.37
    West Boylston. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., 10;
      Chas. T. White, 5                                       15.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch., 21; “Friend,” 40;
      “H. E. W.” 1                                            62.00
    Westfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                50.00
    Westfield. First and Second Cong. Chs., _for
      Straight U._                                            14.50
    Westford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Indian M._             10.75
    West Gardner. Mrs. M. B. Knowlton                         20.00
    Westhampton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                26.00
    West Newbury. First Parish Cong. Ch., _for
      Santee Indian M._                                        7.50
    West Newton. “Pax,”                                        5.00
    West Springfield. Mrs. Lucy M. Bagg, 200; Mrs.
      C. E. Beardslee, 1                                     201.00
    West Stockbridge Center. Cong. Ch.                         1.52
    Weymouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        26.75
    Whitinsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., (30 of
      which _for Indian M._)                                  60.00
    Whitman. Miss C. H. Whitman. 100; Cong. Ch.
      and Soc., 53                                           153.00
    Winchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., (12.10
      of which _for Indian M._)                               54.70
    Woburn. Daniel Richardson                                500.00
    Wollaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.75
    Wollaston. Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C. Val.,
      34.37, _for Wilmington, N.C._, 1 _for
      Freight_                                                 1.00
    Woods Holl. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
    Worcester. Plym. Cong. Ch., 266.34; “J. W.,”
      270; Union Ch., 182.52; Sab. Sch. of Union
      Ch., 46.21; Hiram Smith and family, 50; “A.
      N. X.” 50; Salem St. Ch., 40.53; “A Friend,”
      25; Mrs. S. A. Howard and nephew, 10                   920.60
    Wrentham. First Cong. Ch.                                 17.22
    —— “A Friend,”                                           100.00
    —— ——                                                     10.00
    ——. “To go with the dear little girl’s dime,”               0.10
    By Chas. Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass’n.:
      Blandford.                                  23.58
      Holyoke. First                              16.22
      Holyoke. Second                             60.51
      Longmeadow. Gent’s Benev. Soc.              16.45
      Monson.                                     30.00
      Springfield. Olivet                         34.00
      Springfield. First                          20.00
      Springfield. Hope                           44.06
      Springfield. Hope, _for Hampton
          Inst._                                  22.04
                                                 ——————      266.86
                                                         ——————————
                                                         $10,897.79

    LEGACIES.

    Enfield. Estate of J. B. Woods, by Rev. R. M.
      Woods, Trustee                                          50.00
    Northampton. Estate of Mrs. Emma Graves, by C.
      H. Dickinson, Ex.                                      450.00
    Stoughton. Estate of Mrs. Betsey E. Capen                 25.00
    Woburn. Estate of Mrs. Mary J. Keyes, by Miss
      Ruth M. Leathe, Ex’s.                                1,000.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                         $12,422.79


  RHODE ISLAND, $1,719.97.

    Little Compton. Mrs. A. Pierce                             5.00
    Providence. Geo. H. Corliss                            1,000.00
    Providence. Central Cong. Ch.                            714.97


  CONNECTICUT, $6,857.30.

    Andover. Ladies of Cong. Ch.                               6.00
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch., 134.01; J. Tomlinson, 15          149.01
    Bolton. “A Friend,”                                        5.00
    Bozrah. Cong. Ch., 7; Miss Hannah Mapes, 5                12.00
    Bridgeport. Second Cong. Ch., 79.80; Sab. Sch.
      of Second Cong. Ch., 50                                129.80
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., 114.36; Sab. Sch. Class,
      J. J. Jennings, Teacher, 10; L. P. Judd, 3;
      E. B. Ives, 1, _for Indian M._                         128.36
    Brooklyn. First Trin. Ch. and Cong. to const.
      EUGENE H. FULLER L. M.                                  47.25
    Buckingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             3.14
    Canterbury. Rev. E. C. Haynes                              5.00
    Central Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       14.50
    Cheshire. “A Friend,”                                     30.00
    Colchester. Mrs. Mary E. Gillette                          1.00
    Collinsville. John D. Andrews, 10; Mrs. Milo
      Chidsey, 5; A. F. Alderman, 5; J. B. Flint,
      5; Cong. Ch., 20                                        45.00
    Cornwall Hollow. “Thanksgiving Workers,” True
      Blue Card, _for Thomasville, Ga._                        5.00
    Coventry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        36.43
    Danbury. Edwin Blackman                                    1.00
    Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.              65.00
    East Hartford. H. L. Goodwin, 100; First Ch.,
      30; South Cong. Ch. (5 of which from Mrs. E.
      M. Roberts), 29.69; Mrs. Susan F. Elmer, 10;
      Mrs. R. G. Spencer, 5                                  174.69
    East Hartford. First Ch. (10 of which _for
      Mountain White Work_)                                   20.00
    East Hartford. “Friends,” _for Indian M._                 15.00
    Ekonk. Cong. Ch. and Soc. of Voluntown and
      Sterling                                                19.00
    Ellington. Cong. Ch. (30 of which to const.
      REV. WILLIAM T. HUTCHINS L. M.)                        135.05
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. (200 of which from Dea.
      Henry D. Hawley)                                       268.43
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       10.00
    Greeneville. Cong. Ch.                                    22.00
    Griswold. Cong. Ch.                                       45.00
    Hampton. “Three Friends in Cong. Ch.” 6.50;
      “Friend in Cong. Ch.,” 2                                 8.50
    Hartford. Roland Mather, 500; “Response to
      Appeal,” 1                                             501.00
    Manchester. Second Cong. Ch. (29.50 of which
      _for Mountain White Work_)                              91.59
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch.                               20.15
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch. (50 of which _for
      Indian M._) to const. MRS. E. J. SCOVILLE,
      LILLIE D. AUGUR, H. W. LEIP, N. OLDS, and
      EDWIN S. MAY L. Ms.                                    325.00
    Millington. Cong. Ch., 4; “A Friend,” 2                    6.00
    Monroe. Cong. Ch., 18.60; “A Friend,” 10                  28.60
    Moodus. Miss Mary E. Dyer                                  5.00
    Mount Carmel. Mrs. J. M. Swift                            10.00
    New Haven. Humphrey St. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.          176.16
    Newington. Cong. Ch.                                      81.44
    New London. First Cong. Ch., 49.42; Mrs. B. P.
      McEwen, 24                                              73.42
    New Milford. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Sch’p Hampton Inst._                               70.00
    New Milford. John S. Turrill                              15.00
    New Preston. “E.”                                          1.00
    Norfolk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Santee
      Indian M._                                              20.00
    Norfolk. R. Battell, _for Austin, Tex._                   25.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                      21.00
    North Guilford. A. E. Bartlett                            25.00
    North Haven. F. C. Bradley                                10.00
    North Stamford. Cong. Soc., by Mrs. A. B.
      Davenport                                                5.00
    North Stonington. Dudley R. Wheeler                       20.00
    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch.                                1,241.89
    Norwich. First Cong. Ch., 110; Miss Sarah M.
      Lee, 25; Othniel Gager, 24                             159.00
    Old Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                   38.07
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch., 80; Geo. Langdon, 50                130.00
    Putnam. Mrs. Mary A. Keith                                 1.00
    Redding. Cong. Ch. add’l                                   2.00
    Ridgefield. Cong. Ch.                                     24.29
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch. (6.24 of which
      _for Indian M._)                                        68.34
    Rockville. G. L. Grant                                     5.00
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch., 22.23, and Sab. Sch., 8               30.23
    Simsbury. Mr. Simonds, _for Straight U._                   1.00
    South Coventry. Mrs. Mary J. Bennett, _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                      20.00
    South Norwalk. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., 50 _for
      Santee Indian M._; 50 _for Oakes, N.C._                100.00
    Southport. Cong. Ch., to const. EDWARD M.
      GOULDEN, HENRY W. BANKS, ELIZA A. BULKLEY,
      MARIA G. PERRY and MRS. C. M. GILMAN L. M’s.           164.89
    Stafford. Mrs. Thomas H. Thresher                          5.00
    Stanwich. David Banks, 10; Mrs. Charles Brush,
      5; John Brush, 5; Mrs. M. A. Lockwood, 2;
      Mr. Parsons, 50c.; Cong. Ch., 5                         27.50
    Terryville. N. T. Baldwin                                 20.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch., 21.80; Eagle Rock Cong.
      Ch., 6.02                                               27.82
    Thomaston. Mission Soc.; _for Straight U._                20.00
    Thompsonville. Fred. A. King, 5; Mrs. Jane C.
      Simpson, 5; _for Straight U._                           10.00
    Tolland. Mrs. L. L. Clough                                 5.00
    Torringford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           19.00
    Torrington. L. Wetmore                                   150.00
    Watertown. E. L. DeForest, _for Talladega C._            500.00
    West Cheshire. Cong. Ch.                                  23.00
    West Hartford. “Friends,” _for Woman’s Work_              40.00
    West Hartford. “X”                                         5.00
    West Haven. Mrs. Emeline Smith                            10.00
    Williamsville. Cong. Ch.                                   2.75
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Winchester. “Ten Times One Circle,” by Miss
      Mary A. Goodenough, Sec., _for Indian M._               30.00
    Winchester. “A Friend”                                     5.00
    Windsor. “A Friend,” to const. MISS ANNA M.
      SILL and MISS MARY E. SILL L. M’s.                      60.00
    Winsted. Dea. David Strong, 100; Henry Gay,
      50; Mrs. M. A. Mitchell, 15; “Friend,” 10;
      L. M. Blake, 10; Mrs. J. A. Strong, 10; Mrs.
      Jane C. Blake, 5; Misses Emoline and
      Sophronia Catlin, 10                                   210.00
    ——. “A Friend in Connecticut”                             50.00
    ——. “Connecticut”                                         25.00
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union of Conn., by Mrs. S.
      M. Hotchkiss, Sec’y, _for Conn. Ind’l Sch.
      Ga._
      Chaplin. Ladies M. Soc.                     15.00
      Kent. Ladies M. Soc., _for Mountain
          White Work_.                            20.00
                                                 ——————       35.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $6,207.30

    LEGACIES.

    Bethlehem. Estate of Mrs. John N. Crane, by
      Ralph Munson, Ex.                                       50.00
    New London. Trust Estate of H. P. Haven, 300
      _for Talladega C._, 300 _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                          600.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $6,857.30


  NEW YORK, $2,495.37.

    Batavia. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Big Hollow. Nelson Hitchcock                               5.00
    Binghamton. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Brooklyn. GEO. H. SHIRLEY, to const. himself
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Brooklyn. E. D. New England Cong. Ch., and
      Sab. Sch. to const. JOHN M. STEARNS L. M.               30.00
    Cambridge. Ladies Miss’y Soc., by Miss F. A.
      Wells                                                    5.50
    Copenhagen. Cong. Ch.                                     17.71
    Coventry. S. A. Beardslee                                 10.00
    Danby. Cong. Ch. bal. to const. LENNA M. BROCK
      L. M.                                                   15.28
    Dansville. ——                                              1.00
    Eden. Miss A. H. Ames, 3; Mrs. McNult, 2                   5.00
    Fairport. J. E. Howard                                    50.00
    Flatbush. Mrs. S. K. Thurston, 2; Mrs. D. B.
      Harris, 1                                                3.00
    Gerry. Mrs. M. A. Sears                                  178.36
    Ithaca. E. P. Gilbert                                     10.00
    Jamaica. “A Friend”                                        0.10
    Jamestown. First Cong. Ch., 52, and Sab. Sch.,
      7.47, to const. REV. HENRY FRANK L. M.                  59.47
    Kelloggsville. Miss Carrie L. Taylor                      25.00
    Kinderhook. Rev. W. Ingalls                                1.00
    Lebanon. Coll. A. M. A. Concert, 5.41; Marvin
      Day, 5; Thomas Hitchcock, 5; Alfred Seymour,
      5; Mrs. Servilia G. Childs, 3; J. H.
      Wagoner, 3.59; G. G. Grovenor, 1; E. M.
      Lamb, 1; H. Seymour, 50c.; J. Fisk, 50c., to
      const. JOSIAH H. WAGONER L. M.                          30.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         25.00
    Mexico. E. Wheeler, Cath. Wheeler and Mrs. H.
      C. Gould, 50c. ea., Millie Gould, 10c.                   1.60
    Millers Place. Mrs. E. M. Pierson                          5.00
    Millville. Mrs. Tripp, Mrs. Colburn, Mrs.
      Waldron and Mrs. Linsley, 50c. ea.                       2.00
    Morristown. Cong. Ch.                                      3.20
    Mount Vernon. Sab. Sch. of Reformed Ch., _for
      Mountain White Work_                                    51.15
    New York. E. F. Browning, 100; John Gibb, 25;
      S. Wilde’s Sons, 5., _for Talladega C._                130.00
    New York. Z. Stiles Ely, 100, “A Friend,” 100,
      “H. W. H.” 100., to const. ETHEL MAY
      HUBBARD, MRS. LOUISA S. ROYCE and REV. C. W.
      SHELTON L. M’s., “D. E. E.” 25; Homer N.
      Lockwood, 25; Rev. Stephen Angell, 10; C. A.
      Smith, 2                                               362.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.51
    Norwich. “A Friend,” _for Memphis, Tenn._                 20.00
    Nunda. “A Friend”                                         15.00
    Ogdensburg. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Oneida. Edward Loomis                                      5.00
    Owego. Cong. Ch. (20.17 of which _for Indian
      M._)                                                    30.17
    Owasco. Miss Anice Stewart                                 2.00
    Patchogue. Rev. Otis D. Crawford                           2.00
    Pekin. Miss Abigail Peck                                  25.00
    Rensselaer Falls. Cong. Ch.                                3.00
    Rochester. Gen’l A. W. Riley, 50; South Cong.
      Ch., 10                                                 60.00
    Rutland. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                     12.00
    Shelter Island. Hannah M. Overton                         10.00
    Silver Creek. W. Chapin                                   12.00
    Syracuse. Abner Bates                                      1.00
    Troy. “A Friend”                                          25.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                 5.00
    Utica. Plym. Cong. Ch.                                     7.00
    Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge, _for Mountain
      White Work_                                              5.00
    Walton. Little Helpers Miss’y Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Williamsburg, Ky._                            20.00
    West Carthage. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._               7.32
    White Plains. Dr. N. F. Curtis                            10.00
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union of N.Y., by Mrs. L.
      H. Cobb, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Copenhagen. Ladies Aux., to const.
          MISS ELLA WOOLWORTH, L. M.              50.00
      Walton. Aux.                                25.00
                                                 ——————       75.00
    ——. “A Lady in Essex Co.”                                 30.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,495.37

    LEGACY.

    Albany. Estate of Mrs. Joanna T. D. Carner, T.
      J. Van Alstyne, Ex.                                  1,000.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $2,495.37


  NEW JERSEY, $327.64.

    Arlington. Mrs. G. Overacre, Bbl. of C., _2
      for freight, for Tougaloo U._                            2.00
    Bound Brook. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of
      Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                              15.00
    Bound Brook. Mrs. Wm. W. Jordon, _for Indian
      M._                                                      5.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch., 17.33, and Sab. Sch., 5.31            22.64
    Jersey City Heights. Mrs. Caroline L. Ames                 2.00
    Passaic. Mrs. P. S. Pruden                                 1.00
    Seabright. Gen. Clinton B. Fisk, _for Fisk U._           200.00
    Summit. Central Presb. Ch., to const. CHARLES
      T. GOODRICH L. M.                                       30.00
    Trenton. S. T. Sherman                                    25.00
    ——. “A Friend,”                                           25.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $1,600.01.

    Cambridgeboro. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch.           10.00
    Easton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Lansford. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                  6.50
    Philadelphia. Dr. James F. Stone                           5.00
    Pittsburg. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              9.03
    Scranton. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                               5.50
    Shire Oaks. Miss Jane Wilson                               2.00
    Washington. Mrs. Mary H. McFarland                        10.00
                                                           ————————
                                                             $83.03

    LEGACY.

    Pittsburg. Estate of Charles Avery                     1,516.98
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,600.01


  OHIO, $1,818.13.

    Ashtabula. Second Cong. Ch. (of which 1.29
      from Willie and Hellen McCreery, proceeds of
      garden)                                                 10.12
    Bellevue. Cong. Ch.                                       25.55
    Chagrin Falls. First Cong. Ch.                            24.25
    Chagrin Falls. Miss Florence Sperry, _for
      Straight U._                                             6.00
    Cincinnati. Central Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Cincinnati. Columbia Cong. Ch.                             6.10
    Claridon. EMMA E. STEBBINS, to const. herself
      L. M., 35; “The Penny Savers.” 4                        39.00
    Cleveland. “Macedonian Circle,” _for Indian M._           35.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. H. B. Spelman, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Cleveland. Jennings Av. Cong. Ch., 30.51;
      First Cong. Ch., 44.55; Sab. Sch. of Frankin
      Av. Cong. Ch., 26.43; Madison Av. Cong. Ch.,
      10; Mrs. A. Scott, 10; Mrs. C. A. Garlick, 2           123.49
    Columbus. Rev. Benjamin Talbot                             1.00
    Dover. Second Cong. Ch.                                   30.16
    Edinburg. Cong. Ch.                                       17.00
    Elyria. Rev. E. E. Williams                                1.50
    Garrettsville. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Geneva. Mrs. S. Kingsbury                                 10.10
    Greenfield. Cong. Ch.                                      3.80
    Gustavus. Cong. Ch.                                        6.50
    Hampden. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Hartford. Mrs. E. R. Rexford, 5; Cong. Ch.,
      3.85                                                     8.85
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         12.08
    Ironton. Cong. Ch.                                        16.00
    Jefferson. Cong. Ch.                                       3.50
    Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                100.00
    Lafayette. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Lorain. Cong. Co. (10 of which bal. to const.
      WILLIAM AMZI DICK L. M.)                                44.00
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch., 25; Mrs. L. H.
      Roe. 25; Mrs. E. A. Crocker, 5; Mr. and Mrs.
      R. S. Wilcox, 5; Mrs. Eliza Strong, 5                   65.00
    Medina. Cong. Ch., to const. MAY WOODWARD,
      HERBERT ROSS, JOHN P. CALVERT and JOHN
      DANNLEY L. M.’s, 140.71; J. Donnaly’s Sab.
      Sch. Class, 5                                          145.71
    North Kingsville. Rev E. J. Comings                       10.00
    North Ridgeville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. _for
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                       3.00
    Norwalk. “T. H.”                                           5.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., 161.75; First Cong.
      Ch., 63; Miss Mary L. Matthews, 5                      229.75
    Painsville. Cong. Ch., 3.02; Miss L. Smith, 1              4.02
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch., 15.44; Rev. G. H.
      Peeke, 2                                                17.44
    Tallmadge. First Cong. Ch.                                 4.50
    Toledo. Washington St. Cong. Ch., 31.42; “A
      Friend of H. and F. Missions,” 5                        36.42
    Wakeman. Second Cong. Ch.                                  8.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch.                                         10.60
    York. Cong. Ch.                                           24.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Ohio, by Mrs.
      Ella J. Mahony, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Akron. L. M. S., First Cong. Ch.            20.00
      Burton. H. M. S.                            20.00
      Claridon. H. M. S.                          10.00
      Cleveland. Girls’ Mission Band,
          Bethlehem Welsh Ch.                      5.00
      Cleveland. W. H. M. S., First Cong.
          Ch.                                      2.84
      Cleveland. Y. P. S. C. E., First
          Cong. Ch.                                7.40
      Garrettsville. Aux.                          5.00
      Harmer. Oak Grove Mission Band              10.00
      Harmer. L. H. M. S.                          7.35
      Hudson. L. H. M. S.                          1.75
      Litchfield. H. M. S.                         5.00
      North Bloomfield. H. M. S.                   5.00
      Oberlin. H. M. S. of Second Cong.
          Ch.                                    107.00
      Oberlin. Woman’s Aid Soc. of First
          Cong. Ch.                               75.50
      Randolph. H. M. S.                           5.00
                                                 ——————      286.84
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,467.28

    LEGACY.

    Madison. Estate of Mrs. H. B. Fraser, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                             200.00
    Oberlin. Estate of Alonzo Bailey                         150.85
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,818.13


  INDIANA, $11.00.

    Liber. Thomas Towle                                        1.00
    New Corydon. Geo. Stolz                                   10.00


  ILLINOIS, $1,337.61.

    Atkinson. Cong. Ch.                                        7.09
    Aurora. N. L. Janes                                       10.00
    Avon. Cong. Ch.                                           13.68
    Beecher. Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
    Earlville. “J. A. D.”                                     50.00
    Chicago. New Eng. Cong. Ch., 25.24; Lake View
      Cong. Ch., 10; Union Park Cong. Ch., adl.,
      5; “H. E. D.,” 3; “Cash,” 2.56; “Cash,” 50c.            46.30
    Clinton. Franklin C. King                                  1.00
    Delavan. R. Hoghton                                       10.00
    Dover. By Rev. I. Brown                                    5.80
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         10.92
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                          98.90
    Emington. Cong. Ch.                                        5.25
    Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                                80.00
    Glencoe. Ch. of Christ                                    52.35
    Granville. Y. P. M. Soc. of Cong. Ch., 20; “A
      Friend,” 5                                              25.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                      6.00
    Gridley. Cong. Ch.                                        13.50
    Jacksonville. James M. Longley                             5.00
    Joy Prairie. Cong. Ch., to const. JAMES W.
      TUPPER L. M.                                            45.55
    Lacon. “Dorcas”                                           25.00
    La Salle. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Marseilles. Cong. Ch.                                     33.55
    Mattoon. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Millburn. Cong. Ch.                                       17.00
    Moline. First Cong. Ch.                                   72.41
    Oak Park. Young Men’s Miss’y Soc., by Willis
      L. Herrick, Pres., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           50.00
    Oak Park. Y. L. M. S. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Orange. H. Rowles                                          5.00
    Paxton. Mrs. J. B. Shaw                                   20.00
    Payson. J. K. Scarborough                                100.00
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                     10.25
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss, 25; Cong. Ch.,
      12.30; Mrs. S. C. Clapp, 10; Rev. F. Bascom,
      10                                                      57.30
    Rochelle. C. F. Holcomb                                   20.00
    Roscoe. “A Friend”                                         5.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch.                                       9.13
    Sandwich. Cong. Ch.                                       35.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch.                                      30.62
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                41.40
    Toulon. Cong. Ch., to const. EDWARD B.
      STARRETT L. M.                                          35.62
    Waukegan. Cong. Ch., 9.75; Y. P. M. Soc. of
      Cong. Ch., 12                                           21.75
    Wauponsee Grove. Cong. Ch.                                14.37
    Wheaton. Mrs E. H. D. French                               0.50
    Winnebago. N. F. Parsons, 15; Mrs. O. T.
      Holcomb, 2                                              17.00
    Yorkville. Mrs. Sarah J. Wheeler, 5; Mrs.
      Elvira H. Colton, 5                                     10.00
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. B. F.
      Leavitt, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Atkinson. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.             5.00
      Chicago. Ladies’ M. Soc., Leavitt
          St. Ch.                                  1.82
      Illini. “Thank Offering”                     8.00
      Moline. To const. Mrs. W. W. BEARBY
          L. M.                                   30.00
      New Windsor                                  5.00
      Oak Park. Ladies’ Benev. Soc.               31.75
      Rockford. H. M. Soc. of Second Ch.          32.60
      Rockford. W. H. M. Soc. of First Ch.        20.65
      Rockford. Ladies’ M. Soc. of First
          Ch.                                      9.20
      Thawville. L. H. and For. M. Soc.            1.90
      Toulon. Ladies                               3.45
                                                 ——————      149.37


  MICHIGAN, $961.17.

    Addison. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00
    Almont. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    Ann Arbor. “A Friend,” 30, to const. ERNEST
      PERRY L. M.; Mrs. Maria Wood, 2.50                      32.50
    Benzonia. ——                                               5.00
    Birmingham. Mrs. A. D. Stickney                            1.00
    Calumet. “Mission Band,” by Miss Gertrude
      Colton, _for Marie Adlof Sch’p Fund_                    25.00
    Covert. Albert Packard, _for Talladega C._                10.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch., 210.60; Arthur H.
      Bigg. M. D., to const. MRS. ADALINE E. W.
      BIGG L. M., 30                                         240.60
    East Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
    Edwardsburg. S. C. Olmsted                                 5.00
    Grand Rapids. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Woman’s Work_                                      25.00
    Hancock. Cong. Ch.                                        91.00
    Hancock. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           12.00
    Homestead. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          4.00
    Jackson. Mrs. L. C. Nash and daughter                      5.00
    Kalamazoo. Cong. Ch., 96.11; Sarah M. Sleeper,
      5                                                      101.11
    Lansing. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. LUCY
      WHEELER L. M.                                           30.50
    Manistee. Y. L. M. Soc., by Miss A. E. Lewis,
      Treas., _for Oahe Ind’l Sch._                           50.00
    Memphis. Cong. Ch.                                         6.00
    Olivet. W. B. Palmer, 50; Morning Star Mission
      Band, 10, _for Talladega C._                            60.00
    Pontiac. Cong. Ch.                                         6.05
    Portland. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Saginaw City. Mrs A. M. Spencer                            2.00
    Standish. First Cong. Ch.                                  2.00
    Summit. Cong. Ch.                                         14.00
    Three Rivers. E. B. Linsley                                2.00
    Traverse City. First Cong. Ch.                            29.18
    Union City. Cong. Ch., 35; “A Friend,” 50                 85.00
    Watervliet. Cong. Ch.                                     10.81
    Wayne. Cong. Ch.                                           8.00
    West Adrian. First Cong. Ch.                              15.42
    Ypsilanti. Cong. Ch.                                      11.00
    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union, by Mrs. E. F.
      Grabill, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Allendale. W. H. and F. M. Soc.              6.00
      Ypsilanti. Cheerful Helpers                  5.00
      Ypsilanti. Women of the Ch.                  5.00
                                                   ————       16.00


  WISCONSIN, $850.82.

    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., 27; Mrs. Sanford
      Richardson, 5                                           32.00
    Berlin. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Boscobel. Cong. Ch., _for Woman’s Work_                   10.00
    Columbus. C. Baker                                         5.00
    Darlington. Cong. Ch.                                      7.05
    Fox Lake. M. Jarvis                                        5.00
    Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                       13.00
    Lake Geneva. Mrs. Geo. Allen                               5.00
    Lancaster. Cong. Ch.                                      58.10
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., 39.26; “A. E. H. D.,” 1         40.26
    Madison. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                10.00
    Menasha. E. D. Smith                                      50.00
    Milwaukee. Win. Dawes, 40; Tab. Welsh Cong.
      Ch., 3                                                  43.00
    Monroe. Miss Frances A. Locke                              5.00
    Pewaukee. Cong. Ch.                                        5.80
    Racine. Mrs. M. B. Erskine                                50.00
    River Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              40.00
    Shawano. Chas. Upham, _for Talladega C._                  10.00
    Sheboygan. Dea. D. Brown                                   1.00
    Sparta. First Cong. Ch., 17.59, and Sab. Sch.,
      17.25                                                   34.84
    Whitewater. Geo. S. Marsh, “In Memoriam of
      Fred. B. Marsh,” 200; “Tithe Fund,” 5                  205.00
    By Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Wisconsin,
      _for Woman’s Work_:
      Arena. W. H. M. S.                           3.25
      Barneweld. W. H. M. S.                       5.00
      Beloit. L. M. S. of First Cong. Ch.         10.60
      Boscobel. W. H. M. S.                        5.00
      Brandon. W. H. M. S.                         4.00
      Columbus. Ladies of Olivet Cong. Ch.        35.00
      Eau Claire. L. H. M. S. of First
          Cong. Ch.                               11.70
      Fond du Lac. L. H. M. S.                    10.00
      Milton. L. H. M. S.                          4.00
      Oshkosh. L. H. M. S.                        10.00
      Stoughton. S. S. Birthday Box                0.47
      Wauwatosa.  L. M. S.                         9.25
      Stoughton. “A Friend,” 3; “A
          Friend,” 2; Rainbow Soc., 1              6.00
    —— “A Friend,” by Mrs. Jeremiah Porter        70.00
                                                 ——————      184.27
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union, by Mrs. C. C.
      Keeler, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Arena. W. M. Soc.                            5.00
      Mazomanie. W. H. M. S.                       2.00
      Milton                                       6.00
      Stoughton                                    3.00
                                                 ——————       16.00


  IOWA, $197.43.

    Algona. Mrs. Mary H. Carter                                5.00
    Ames. Cong. Ch.                                           20.00
    Bear Grove. Union Sab. Sch. Infant Class, _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                       1.25
    Cedar Falls. Cong. Ch. (10 of which from Mrs.
      A. G. Thompson)                                         20.00
    Cherokee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           5.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 13.37
    Creston. Cong. Ch.                                        23.00
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                        3.15
    Davenport. Edwards Cong. Ch.                              17.00
    Denmark. Cong. Ch.                                        20.00
    Des Moines. North Park Cong. Ch., 5.05;
      “Traveler,” 1                                            6.05
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                         13.20
    Dubuque. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. M. J.
      NICHOSON L. M.                                          54.37
    Eldon. Cong. Ch.                                           9.30
    Greene. Rudolph Landes                                     4.00
    Iowa City. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          4.08
    Keokuk. Cong. Ch.                                         20.70
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         16.09
    Newton. Cong. Ch.                                         12.61
    Postville. Cong. Ch.                                      16.43
    Rockford. Cong. Ch.                                       12.15
    Tabor. Cong. Ch.                                          66.47
    University Place. “A Friend”                              15.00
    Waterloo. Cong. Ch., 20; Rev. Moses K. Cross, 10          30.00
    By Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Iowa, _for
      Woman’s Work_:
      Anamosa. Freedman’s Soc.                    18.00
      Council Bluffs                              20.00
      Dubuque. Y. L. Ben. Soc.                    22.55
      Eldon. Mrs. M. B. Holyoke                    1.00
      Emmetsburg. W. H. M. U.                     10.00
      Genoa Bluffs. Ladies                         1.30
      Harlan. Ladies                               1.70
      Rockford. Ladies                             1.86
      Sheldon. Ladies                              1.00
      Waterloo. Ladies                            11.80
                                                 ——————       89.21


  MINNESOTA, $753.51.

    Alexandria. Ladies’ Home Miss’y Soc., _for
      Woman’s Work_                                           20.00
    Amiret. Mrs. L. H. Dwinnell                                2.00
    Austin. Cong. Union Ch., 42.66; Mrs. S. C.
      Bacon, 10                                               52.66
    Brownsville. Mrs. S. M. McHose                             5.00
    Clearwater. Cong. Ch. “Birthday Box”                       2.82
    Edina. Mission Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                      2.00
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                      13.72
    Glyndon. Church at Glyndon, 8.91, and Sab.
      Sch., 70c.                                               9.61
    Hopkins. Mission Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                    4.50
    Lake City. Cong. Ch.                                       6.72
    Litchfield. Miss’y Band, by Mrs. Hattie
      Greenleaf, _for Student Aid, Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                           20.00
    Mankato. “Missionary Garden,” by Emma Hegeman,
      Treas.                                                  14.08
    Mankato. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., by H. Pierson,
      Sec., _for Woman’s Work_                                12.00
    Mazeppa. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Wilmington, N.C._      10.00
    Mazeppa. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            3.00
    Minneapolis. Miss Mary T. Hale, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 19; Mrs. D. C. Bell,
      5; Vine Cong. Ch., 12.70; Union Ch., 5.59               42.29
    Rochester. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Freight_           1.30
    Waseca. Cong. Ch.                                          8.50
    Worthington. Sab. Sch. Union Cong. Ch.                     5.08




    Woman’s Home Miss’y Union, by Mrs. J. N.
      Cross, Treas., _for Woman’s Work_:
      Austin. W. M. S.                            23.13
      Cottage Grove. W. M. S.                      8.50
      Excelsior. Aux.                              2.47
      Granite Falls. W. M. S.                      3.94
      Glyndon. W. M. S.                           10.00
      Minneapolis. Plym. W. H. M. S., to
          const. MRS. ELIZABETH C. GALE
          and MRS. ORPHA P. SMITH L. M’s          99.00
      Minneapolis. Second. Ch. W. M. S.           12.50
      Minneapolis. First Ch. W. M. S.             30.00
      Minneapolis. Plym. Y. L. M. S.              22.50
      Minneapolis. East-side Mission
          Bible Class and Sew. Sch.                5.00
      Owatonna. W. M. S.                          15.00
      Saint Paul. Plym. W. H. M. S.               25.00
      Saint Paul. Mrs. Dr. Higbee                 25.00
      Waseca. W. M. S.                             4.52
                                                ———————      286.56
    By Rev. T. L. Riggs, _for Oahe Ind’l Sch_:
      Lake City. J. Manning                        5.00
      Lake City. ——                                0.70
      Litchfield. First Presb. Ch. and
          “Friends”                               22.00
      Ottumwa. ——                                  8.00
      Minneapolis. Vine Cong. Ch.                 19.01
      Minneapolis. Second Cong. Ch.               10.41
      Minneapolis. “Friends”                       6.00
      Minneapolis. Miss C. King                    5.00
      Minneapolis. “Pilg’m Friends”                2.40
      Minneapolis. Mrs. J. H. Butters              2.00
      Minneapolis. Mrs. W. Butters                 2.00
      Minneapolis. R. L. Prodt                     1.00
      Rochester. Cong. Ch.                        20.29
      Saint Paul. Sab. Sch. Plym. Ch.             75.00
      Waseca. Cong. Ch.                           13.25
      Waseca. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.               4.47
      Winona. Rev. J. H. Crum                      2.00
      Winona. —— Hubbard                           5.00
      Worthington. “Friends”                       3.22
                                                 ———————     206.75


  MISSOURI, $31.00.

    Laclede. Mr. and Mrs. E. D. Seward                         5.00
    Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                 26.00


  KANSAS, $2,257.67.

    Brookville. Rev. S. G. Wright                              2.00
    Burlingame. Mrs. Mary S. Leonard                           0.50
    Chapman. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Council Grove. Cong. Ch.                                  15.00
    Emporia. First Cong. Ch.                                  47.71
    Lawrence. Cong. Ch., 10; Pilgrim Ch., 1                   11.00
    Manhattan. “Friends,”                                     16.00
    Meriden. J. Rutty                                         10.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                         2.30
    Osawatomie. Cong. Ch., 5; Rev. S. L. Adair, 5             10.00
    Topeka. First Cong. Ch.                                  108.14
    Valley Falls. Cong. Ch.                                   15.25
    Wyandotte. Cong. Ch.                                      14.77
                                                           ————————
                                                            $257.67

    LEGACY.

    Olathe. Estate of Miss Fanny A. Beckwith by
      Watts Beckwith (1,000 of which _for Chinese
      M._ and 30 to const. REV. B. F. WORRELL L. M.)       2,000.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $2,257.67


  DAKOTA, $96.55.

    Chamberlin. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Oahe
      Ind’l Sch._                                              2.60
    Fort Berthold. Cong. Ch.                                  15.00
    Harwood. Cong. Ch.                                         1.00
    Henry. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Ipswich. Cong. Ch.                                         6.25
    Jamestown. Mrs. M. S. Wells                                5.00
    Lake Henry. Cong. Ch.                                      8.60
    Lake Preston. By Mrs. Sue Fifield, Terr.
      Treas. H. M. S.                                          4.46
    Volga. Cong. Ch.                                           1.57
    Wahpeton. First Cong. Ch.                                  6.07
    Yankton. Cong. Ch.                                        41.00


  COLORADO, $39.00.

    Denver. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for Oahe
      Ind’l Sch._                                             35.00
    Fort Lewis. Mrs. J. B. Irvine                              4.00


  NEBRASKA, $115.36.

    Arborville. Cong. Ch.                                      9.00
    Camp Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     18.25
    Crete. Mrs. A. B. Pratt                                    2.00
    Exeter. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., by Mrs. D. B.
      Perry                                                    5.00
    Lincoln. Cong. Ch.                                        27.85
    Omaha. Saint Mary’s Av. Cong. Ch.                         38.51
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                        3.50
    Red Cloud. Cong. Ch.                                       2.00
    Santee Agency. Indian pupils—Charles Hoffman,
      2; Frank Redstone, 2; Arthur Tibbetts, 1;
      Alfred Mandan, 1; David Livingston, 1; James
      Milbourne, 1; Edward Wanstall, 75c.; Grover
      Cleveland, 50c.                                          9.25


  CALIFORNIA, $5.00.

    Los Angeles. Mrs. Milo Whiting                             5.00


  OREGON, $45.00.

    Oregon City. Cong. Ch.                                    13.50
    Salem. Cong. Ch.                                          17.50
    The Dalles. First Cong. Ch.                               14.00


  MONTANA, $7.00.

    Helena. First Cong. Ch.                                    7.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $33.00.

    Medical Lake. First. Cong. Ch.                            10.00
    Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                      17.75
    Tacoma. Mrs. Eliza Taylor                                  5.25


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $17,400.21.

    Washington. U.S. Government, _for Indian M._          17,357.21
    Washington. First Cong. Ch., 24; Lincoln
      Mission, 10; Lincoln Memorial Ch., 4;
      Tabernacle Ch., 5                                       43.00


  VIRGINIA, $6.57.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         6.57


  KENTUCKY, $64.70.

    Williamsburg. Cong. Ch.                                   57.45
    Williamsburg. Rent                                         7.25


  TENNESSEE, $2,700.55.

    Jonesboro. Cong. Ch., 25.14; Miss’y Soc.,
      6.90, and Sab. Sch., 4.25                               36.29
    Memphis. Slater Fund                                   1,000.00
    Nashville. Slater Fund                                 1,650.00
    Nashville. Union Cong. Ch.                                12.50
    Nashville. Coll’s at Sab. Sch. in Fisk U. held
      by three children of the Faculty during
      vacation                                                 1.76


  NORTH CAROLINA, $16.40.

    Oakes. “Friends,” by Miss E. W. Douglass                   3.15
    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                            0.50
    Wilmington. Tuition, 7.75; “Thank offering,” 5            12.75


  GEORGIA, $526.00.

    Atlanta. Rev. J. B. Hawthorne, D.D., 5; Wm. A.
      Haygood, 5; J. G. Thrower, 5; “A Friend,” 5,
      _for Atlanta U._                                        20.00
    Macon. Slater Fund                                       500.00
    Marietta. Cong. Ch., 3, and Sab Sch., 2                    5.00
    Savannah. Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke, for
      Student Aid, Hampton Inst.                               1.00


  ALABAMA, $1,424.65.

    Florence. First Cong. Ch.                                  3.00
    Talladega. Slater Fund                                 1,400.00
    Talladega. Rev. H. S. DeForest, 11.25; M. H.
      Clary, _for Talladega C._, 8.40; Tuition, 2             21.65


  FLORIDA, $6.00.

    Daytona. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Orange City. “From one who loves the Lord,”                1.00


  LOUISIANA, $1,003.00.

    Haasville. Mrs. F. D. Blood                                3.00
    New Orleans. Slater Fund                               1,000.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $1,515.00.

    Homewood. W. H. Thomas                                     1.00
    Tougaloo. Slater Fund                                  1,500.00
    Tougaloo. W. D. Hitchcock, 10; Rent, 4.                   14.00


  TEXAS, $631.20.

    Austin. Slater Fund                                      600.00
    Helena. Cong. Ch.                                         31.20


  INCOMES, $1,685.00.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             1,555.00
    Belden Sch’p Fund, _for Talladega C._                     30.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00


  CHINA, $25.00.

    Faiku. Mr. and Mrs. D. H. Clapp, of Shansi
      Mission, North China                                    25.00
                                                         ==========
    Donations                                            $29,453.99
    Legacies                                               8,542.83
    Incomes                                                1,685.00
    Rents                                                     11.25
    U.S. Government, _for Indians_                        17,357.21
    Slater Fund                                            7,650.00
                                                          —————————
      Total for September                                $64,700.28
      Total from Oct. 1 to Sept. 30                      306,761.31
                                                         ==========

       *       *       *       *       *


  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions for September                              $48.59
    Previously acknowledged                                  996.22
                                                          —————————
      Total                                               $1,044.81
                                                          =========


  THEOLOGICAL ENDOWMENT FUND.

    North Bloomfield, Ohio. “A Friend,” _for
      Talladega C._                                         $709.25
                                                          =========

                               H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                               56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                          Literary Notes.

THE LINCOLN history in _The Century_, by the private secretaries
of Mr. Lincoln, Messrs. Nicolay and Hay, will deal during the
coming year with the political and military history of the early
period of the war. New light will be thrown upon certain events
of that period by the publication of correspondence and other
documents never before printed, and unknown to but a small circle.
The historians now enter upon a more important and personal part
of their narrative. The publication of this history has brought an
increase of 25,000 subscribers to _The Century_.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT will contribute a short serial to the
coming volume of _St. Nicholas for Young Folks_, which is said
to be a worthy successor of that author’s famous “Little Lord
Fauntleroy,” which appeared in _St. Nicholas_ a year ago. Joel
Chandler Harris, John Burroughs, Frank R. Stockton, H. H. Boyesen,
J. T. Trowbridge, Col. Richard M. Johnstone, and Louisa M. Alcott
are among the many distinguished writers who will contribute serial
and short stories to this famous magazine for young people.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDWARD EGGLESTON author of “The Hoosier Schoolmaster,” will furnish
an illustrated novel to _The Century_ for 1887-8. It is a story of
pioneer life in Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE W. CABLE will contribute a novelette to early numbers of
_The Century_, and Frank R. Stockton has written a three-part
story, “The Dusantes,” for the same magazine. Mr. Stockton’s new
novel, “The Hundredth Man,” has just been issued.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SIBERIAN PAPERS, by George Kennan, will be a great feature of
_The Century_ for the coming year. Mr. Kennan has just returned
from a journey of 15,000 miles through European and Asiatic Russia,
undertaken at the request of the editor of _The Century_. By means
of a circular letter from the Russian Minister of the Interior, Mr.
Kennan was enabled to visit nearly every important prison and mine
in Siberia.

       *       *       *       *       *

SONGS OF WORSHIP, the new Sunday-School hymn and tune-book, edited
by Waldo S. Pratt, of the Hartford Theological Seminary, is just
ready. It contains tunes by the best American as well as English
and German composers, and is arranged in the most available manner.
Every hymn and tune it is believed will prove of helpful service.
Sample copies sent for 35 cents.


THE CENTURY CO., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         Fall Dress Goods

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.

offer among their large assortment of Fall Dress Goods, the
following Special Lines:

Two lines Stripe and Check Cheviots, 44 inches wide, at 60 cents;
worth $1.00.

Also, Three lines Check and Stripe Suitings, 54 inches wide, at 75
cents; well worth $1.25.


                        “FURLEY & BUTTRUM”

Merino Underwear for men, women and children. Superior to any brand
manufactured.

Orders by mail from any part of the country will receive careful
and prompt attention.

                       JAMES McCREERY & CO.
                     BROADWAY and ELEVENTH ST,
                             NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        MENEELY & COMPANY,
                      WEST TROY, N.Y., BELLS,

[Illustration]

For Churches, Schools, etc., also Chimes and Peals. For more than
half a century noted for superiority over all others.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    YOU CAN MAKE YOUR OWN INK!
                   Send =25= cts for a bottle of
                        WALPOLE INK POWDERS

            BLACK       RED        VIOLET        GREEN

which will make several quarts of the best ink. Will not corrode
the pen. Name color. Circular giving full information free on
application. Address

       Walpole Dye & Chemical Works, 44 Oliver St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Reliable Carpenter Organs
                                FOR
                          =CHURCH= _and_
                             =CHAPEL=.

[Illustration]

The Carpenter Organs contain the celebrated CARPENTER ORGAN ACTION.
They are pure in tone, perfect in construction, in exact accord
with the voice, and full of patented improvements. More than 50
different styles, ranging in price from $20 up. “Mr. Carpenter
builds most emphatically AN HONEST ORGAN.”—_Youth’s Companion._
All organs of our manufacture warranted for 8 years. Special
inducements to ministers and churches. Catalogue free. E. P.
CARPENTER CO., Brattleboro, Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Clinton H. Meneely

                           BELL COMPANY

                            Troy, N.Y.,

                       MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR

                         Church, Chime and
                            Peal Bells.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              Liquid

                          Cottage Colors.

The best =MIXED PAINTS= manufactured. Guaranteed to give perfect
satisfaction if properly applied. They are _heavy bodied_, and for
work that does not require an extra heavy coat, they can be thinned
(with our Old Fashioned Kettle-boiled Linseed Oil) and still cover
better than most of the mixed paints sold in the market, many of
which have so little stock in them that they will not give a good
solid coat.

Some manufacturers of mixed paints direct NOT to rub out the paint,
but to FLOW it on; the reason being that if such stuff were rubbed
out there would be but little left to cover, would be transparent.
Our Cottage Colors have great strength or body, and, like any good
paint, should be worked out well under the brush. The covering
property of this paint is so excellent as to allow this to be done.

Put up for shipment as follows: In 3-gal. and 5-gal. bailed
buckets, also barrels; in cans of ⅛, ¼, ½, 1-gal. and 2-gal. each.

Sample Cards of Colors, Testimonials and prices sent on application
to

                   Chicago White Lead & Oil Co.,

                   Cor. Green & Fulton Streets,
                           CHICAGO, ILL.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         _6%_, _7%_, _8%_.

                   _THE AMERICAN INVESTMENT CO._

                       OF EMMETTSBURG, IOWA,

with a PAID-UP CAPITAL of $600,000, SURPLUS $75,000, offers First
Mortgage Loans drawing SEVEN per cent., both Principal and Interest
FULLY GUARANTEED. Also 6 per cent. ten-year Debenture Bonds,
secured by 105 per cent. of First Mortgage Loans held in trust by
the MERCANTILE TRUST COMPANY, New York. 5 per cent. certificates of
deposit for periods under one year.

                 =7⅔%= CAN BE REALIZED BY CHANGING
                    4 Per Ct. Government Bonds
                   Into 6 Per Cent. Debentures.

          Write for full information and reference to the
                            Company at

                   150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

          A. L. ORMSBY, Vice-President and Gen. Manager.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             INDELIBLE

Mark your Clothing! Clear Record of half a Century.

[Illustration]

“Most Reliable and Simplest for plain or decorative marking.”

Use a common pen.

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers,

News and Fancy Goods dealers.


                             PAYSON’S

                          Indelible Ink!


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  Dr. WARNER’S Health Underwear,

                      MADE OF TWO QUALITIES,

                    Selected CAMEL’S HAIR and
                        Pure NATURAL WOOL.

[Illustration]

Five Reasons for Wearing the Health Underwear.

1st. Camel’s Hair and Wool are twice as warm as the same weight of
Cotton or Linen.

2d. They protect the body against excessive heat and against drafts
and sudden changes of temperature.

3d. They are an important protection against colds, catarrh,
consumption, neuralgia, rheumatism and malaria.

4th. They cannot crock, fade or poison the skin, as they are
_natural colors_ and contain no dyes.

5th. The Camel’s Hair is warranted to wash without shrinking.

Manufactured in all styles of Gentlemen’s, Ladies’ and Children’s
Underwear and Night Shirts.

                  FOR SALE BY LEADING MERCHANTS.

            Catalogue with Prices sent on application.
                 WARNER BROS., 359 Broadway, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     Hamilton Vocalion Organs

[Illustration]

of 2 manuals and 2 sets of pedals, $750; equalling in beauty,
variety and volume a pipe organ of 600 pipes by the best maker.
Circulars, with testimonials of leading musicians and organists of
the world.

“Without a doubt the Vocalion is at present the nearest approach to
a pipe organ.”—_Clarence Eddy, Organist First Presbyterian Church,
Chicago._

“I have only words of praise in its favor.”—_Henry Eyre Brown,
Organist, Brooklyn Tabernacle._

“Especially valuable for Churches and Concert Rooms.”—_A. H.
Messiter, Organist, Trinity Ch., N.Y._

“A tone so rich and musical must be recognized as valuable for
special and new orchestral effects.”—_Henry Carter, Organist, N.Y._

“Your Vocalion has a magnificent future.”—_Sir Arthur Sullivan._

“A rare combination of power and sweetness.”—_Adelina Patti._

                                           Catalogue sent free.

            WAREROOMS, 28 EAST 23d ST., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         JOSEPH GILLOTT’S
                            STEEL PENS
                 GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION—1878.
                     THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        A. H. ANDREWS & CO.

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                    School, Church, Chapel and
                      Sunday-School Seating.

DOVETAILED SCHOOL-DESKS, GLOBES, MAPS, CHARTS, BLACK-BOARDS, &C.

[Illustration]

CHURCH CHAIRS, PEWS, PULPITS, COMMUNION TABLES, COLLECTION PLATES,
&C., &C.

[Illustration]

IMPROVED METHODS OF SEATING WITH SETTEES AND TAYLOR PATENT CHAIRS.

Catalogues free on application.

                       A. H. ANDREWS & CO.,
                   686 Broadway, New York City.
                    195 Wabash Avenue, Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Novelties in Music.

                New Music Books of Unusual Beauty.

  =UNITED VOICES.= A New School Song Book. L. O. Emerson has
    again made a success in a collection of songs for the girls and
    boys. It cannot fail to be popular. =50 cts. $4.80 per doz.=

  =CHILDREN’S DIADEM.= Abbey & Munger. A true children’s book,
    containing new and very sweet music and words for the SUNDAY
    SCHOOL. =30 cts. $3.00 per doz.=

  =EMANUEL.= An Oratorio in 3 parts. 1.—The Nativity.
    2.—Crucifixion. 3.—Resurrection. By J. E. Trowbridge. Not
    difficult. Commended to choirs and societies. =$1.00. $9.00 per
    doz.=

  =JEHOVAH’S PRAISE.= A New Church Music Book by L. O. Emerson.
    Singing School Course. Good secular music for practice. Glees
    and Part Songs, Hymn Tunes, Anthems, for Choirs, Singing
    Classes and Conventions. =$1.00. $9.00 per doz.=

  =GOOD OLD SONGS WE USED TO SING.= A most attractive collection
    of 115 popular songs, with Piano or Organ accompaniment.
    =Price, $1.00.=

  =Construction, Tuning and Care of the Pianoforte.= E. Q.
    Norton. A most useful book to all piano owners. =Price, 60 cts.=

                     MAILED FOR RETAIL PRICE.
                    OLIVER DITSON & CO., BOSTON
            C. H. DITSON & CO., 867 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


    THE NEW HYMN BOOK, by Rev. Drs. Hitchcock, Eddy and Mudge.

Rev. J. S. DICKSON, Pastor Woodland Presbyterian Church,
Philadelphia, and a rare musician and singer, says: “I have just
gone over the ‘Carmina Sanctorum,’ by Rev. Drs. Hitchcock, Eddy and
Mudge, and find that it is by all odds the best hymnal I have ever
seen.”

Rev. THOS. B. McLEOD, Clinton Avenue Church, Brooklyn. N.Y.—“It
satisfies me beyond anything of the kind I have ever seen. Of
course, the names of the editors warranted high reputation. But
considering the progress made in the direction and the number of
fine Hymn Books recently published, I was not prepared to see a
work so eclipsing as this.”

EDWARD H. MERRILL, Pres’t Ripon College.—“The ‘Carmina Sanctorum’
is a superb book in all ways. I advise Churches about to change
books to examine this one.”

Rev. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D.—“It is a model collection.”

Rev. P. T. FARWELL, Stockbridge, Mass.—“The book is a thorough
delight.”

E. C. EVANS, St. Paul, Minn.—“It has already contributed not a
little to the enriching of the devotional part of our services.”

CONGREGATIONALIST.—“One of the most practically serviceable hymnals
which we have seen.”

     _Hymns and Songs for Social and Sabbath Worship._ 75 cts.

                      “Hits the Golden Mean.”

                   FOR PRAYER & PRAISE MEETINGS.

SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES, PHILADELPHIA.—“It is a book of great merit, as
might be expected from the character and experience of its editors.”

INDEPENDENT, NEW YORK.—“Any congregation that likes to have its
hymnal represent careful thought and full culture, would do well to
examine this collection of Carmina Sanctorum.”

EVANGELIST, NEW YORK.—“The hymns are only the choicest, and they
have been carefully edited by that accomplished authority in
hymnody, Dr. Hitchcock. As the American Churches have grown in
taste and capacity for musical expression in worship, this book
seems to meet their wants completely, giving them plenty of tunes
they can and will sing, and at the same time educating their taste
and improving their public worship.”

[Illustration: Carmina

The Newest Church Hymn Book, and the Best.

“The nearest to perfection.”

  _The Christian Union._

Sanctorum]

PRICE LIST.—_Carmina Sanctorum_ Hymns and Tunes, $1.20. Hymns and
Tunes with Scripture Readings, $1.40. Hymns only (Pew Edition),
75c. Hymns only (Pocket Edition), 45c. Chapel Edition, 75c. Chapel
Edition, with Scripture Readings, 90c. Scripture Readings (alone)
75c.

                     EDITIONS FOR EVERY WANT.

              Returnable Examination copies sent to
               Pastors and Committees upon request.

  A. S. BARNES & CO., Nos. 111 and 113 William Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            WILL PLAY
                             200 Tunes

                        ONLY $7 WITH MUSIC

[Illustration]

                         THE NEW AMERICAN
                           ROLLER ORGAN

                     PERFECTION IN MECHANICAL
                   MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS ATTAINED
                             AT LAST.

=PLAYS ANY TUNE= arranged for it, from a lively waltz to the
slowest church music, with =perfect tunes and concert time=. Gives
better satisfaction than a =Hundred Dollar Parlor Organ= and
will give ten times more pleasure. =Plays Two Hundred Different
Tunes= in a superb manner and charms every listener. Beyond a
doubt the grandest and most marvellous Musical instrument ever
presented to the great music loving public of America. This is a
new instrument never before offered and should not be confounded
with the cheap Automatic instruments. It is as much superior to
them as the Silver Tongued Cornet is to the ear piercing Fish Horn.
No perforated strips of paper to bother the player and require
frequent replacing. =THE NEW AMERICAN ROLLER ORGAN= is operated
upon a somewhat similar plan as the =FINEST FIVE HUNDRED DOLLAR
FRENCH MUSIC BOXES=, from a roller with metal pins; the pins
operate upon valved keys, made of finely tempered steel, the roller
being connected with the gearing which also works the bellows. The
working parts of this magnificent instrument are made of solid
metal, are easily taken apart or examined. No better workmanship is
found in the most expensive musical machinery. The instrument is
thoroughly made and yet so simple a child can operate it without
fear of injuring it in any way. The rollers are made of light wood
and the bearings and pins which are made of metal, =WILL NEVER WEAR
OUT=. This instrument is the Perfection of Musical ingenuity and
=PLAYS MARCHES=, =WALTZES=, =POLKAS=, =JIGS=, Reels, Sacred music,
selections from Operas, Popular Songs, etc., and is peculiarly
arranged for playing =DANCE MUSIC= in perfect time. If you have
purchased any other style of an Automatic Musical Instrument and
have found it a disappointment and a nuisance =YOU SHOULD SEND FOR
ONE= of the above described instruments. Nothing grander, more
reasonable in price or combining so many desirable features can
be found in French or Swiss Music Boxes. For a short time these
instruments will be offered for =Seven Dollars= in =BEAUTIFULLY
CARVED CASES= with Music. Send for one and take our word for it,
it will fill you with astonishment and delight. Send money by Post
Office order, Registered letter or by Express. Address all Orders
to =World M’f’g Co., 122 Nassau Street, New York=


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      THE BAKER & TAYLOR CO.

announce as now ready the _eighty-fifth thousand_ of

  _=Our Country=_: ITS POSSIBLE FUTURE AND PRESENT CRISIS. By
  Rev. Josiah Strong, D.D. 12mo; paper, 25 cents; cloth, 50 cents.

“It seems to me the most important book which has been issued in
this decade”.—_Rev. Charles F. Deems, D.D._

  =_Evangelistic Work_=, IN PRINCIPLE AND PRACTICE. By Rev.
  Arthur T. Pierson, D.D. 16mo; cloth, $1.25.

This book will sooner or later find its way into the hands of every
clergyman in the country.

  =_Modern Cities_=, AND THEIR RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS. By Rev. Samuel
  Lane Loomis. 12mo; cloth, $1.00.

An important and practical work on that most important subject—city
evangelization.

The above books will be sent postpaid on receipt of the price by

                THE BAKER & TAYLOR CO., Publishers,

                     9 Bond Street, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


             1850      Thirty-Seventh Year.      1887


                          Manhattan Life

                           INSURANCE CO.

                           OF NEW YORK,

                       156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as
Agents, in localities where this company is not now represented.
Liberal arrangements will be made with men who would like to
undertake the business. The requirements are, a good reputation
for honesty and integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and
perseverance. With these qualities any man can succeed; if he can
add enthusiasm he can command great success. Send references as to
ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                       _11,155,000_
  Surplus, by New York standard,      _2,254,000_

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._

                    JAMES M. McLEAN, President.
          J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
                 H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                           H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                                 S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            STATEMENT.


                     PHENIX INSURANCE COMPANY

                         OF BROOKLYN, N.Y.


                        JANUARY 1st, 1887.


  CASH CAPITAL                          $1,000,000 00
  GROSS SURPLUS                          4,383,171 68
                                        —————————————
                 Gross Assets           $5,383,171 68
                                        =============
                        ASSETS.

  United States Bonds, market value     $1,104,250 00
  Other Stocks and Bonds                 1,502,858 90
  Loans on Bond and Mortgage               294,900 00
  Loans on Call                             80,758 76
  Cash in Bank and Office                  495,135 83
  Real Estate                            1,082,787 53
  Premiums in Course of Collection         667,231 88
  Interest Accrued                          11,716 42
  Bills Receivable for Marine Premiums     140,284 55
  Rents Due and Accrued                      3,247 81
                                        —————————————
                                        $5,383,171 68
                                        =============
                     LIABILITIES.

  CASH CAPITAL                          $1,000,000 00
  Reserve for Unearned Premiums          3,466,886 97
  Reserve for Unpaid Losses                353,759 83
  All Other Liabilities                      5,438 10
  NET SURPLUS                              557,086 78
                                        —————————————
                                        $5,383,171 68
                                        =============

  STEPHEN CROWELL, President,      GEO. H. FISKE,     }
  WM. R. CROWELL, Vice-President,  CHAS. C. LITTLE,   } Ass’t Sec’s.
  PHILANDER SHAW, Secretary.       JOHN H. DOUGHERTY, }


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  USE

  “Our constant
  aim is to make them
  the Finest in the World.”
]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           _Horsford’s_

                          ACID PHOSPHATE,

                             [LIQUID]

A preparation of the phosphates that is readily assimilated by the
system.

=Especially recommended for Dyspepsia, Mental and Physical
Exhaustion, Indigestion, Headache, Nervousness, Wakefulness,
Impaired Vitality, Etc.=

Prescribed and endorsed by physicians of all schools.

It combines well with such stimulants as are necessary to take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

             RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS, PROVIDENCE, R.I.

For sale by all druggists. Pamphlet free. =_Beware of Imitations._=


                 *       *       *       *       *


         PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions have been
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation is retained due to the
multiplicity of authors. Ditto marks have been replaced by the text
they represent in order to facilitate eBook alignment.

“Assocition” changed to “Association” on page 319. (under the care
of the Association)

On page 324, “rallyin” changed to “rally in”. (magnificent rally in
September)

On the fourth page of advertisements, “magnificient” changed to
“magnificent”. (this magnificent instrument)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.