Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

VOL. XXXVI.     JANUARY 1882       NO. 1

THE

American Missionary


“THEY ARE RISING
ALL ARE RISING,
THE BLACK AND
WHITE TOGETHER”


NEW YORK:
PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.]

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
matter.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  EDITORIAL.

    SALUTATION, 1882                                         1
    PARAGRAPHS—A GOOD WAY TO DO IT                           2
    JOHN BROWN MEMORIAL STEAMER (with cut)                   3
    BENEFACTIONS                                             4
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                     5
    INDIAN GIRLS AT HAMPTON (with cuts)                      6
    GENERAL NOTES—Indians, Africa, Chinese                   7
    TRAINING GIRLS FOR HOME LIFE: By Miss M. L. Sawyer      10
    RELATION OF THE FAMILY TO THE NATION’S WELFARE:
      by Miss E. B. Emery                                   12


  FREEDMEN.

    TENNESSEE—Interesting Exercises in Fisk University,
      Nashville                                             14
    GEORGIA—Storrs School, Atlanta                          15
    MISSISSIPPI—Dedication of Strieby Hall, Tougaloo        15
    WORK IN THE SOUTH                                       16


  AFRICA.

    EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL OF REV. H. M. LADD                18
    CUT OF CAIRO                                            19


  THE CHINESE.

    CALIFORNIA AND CHINA: By Rev. W. C. Pond                21


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    HOW A STRAIN OF MUSIC CALLED A WANDERER HOME            23
    MISSIONARY VEGETABLES                                   24


  RECEIPTS                                                  25

  CONSTITUTION                                              29

  AIM, STATISTICS, WANTS, ETC.                              30

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXVI.      JANUARY, 1882.        NO. 1.

                 *       *       *       *       *


1882.

We welcome the advent of the new year with praise and thanksgiving.
The toils and burdens of 1881 are past. The husbandman has garnered
his sheaves. The sower has cast in his seed, and awaits the spring
time. We greet our friends with hope and gladness. The prosperity
of the past is significant. We have a fuller experience, enlarged
facilities for work, and a place in the confidence and esteem of
the church and the nation that brings with it not only cheer and
courage but an added weight of responsibility.

We are, doubtless, on the eve of great events in the world of
missions. He who has taught all Christendom of every sect and every
age to pray, “Thy kingdom come,” has never decreed such immense
strides in the material world as our eyes have seen, without a
purpose to overmatch them all by spiritual achievements.

The current of events does not tarry; it rushes on more mightily
than ever. We may pray expectantly. We may accustom ourselves
to meditate upon vast plans for enlarged work in fields already
occupied, and for new and fruitful enterprises in regions beyond.
Such gifts from the living as have been bestowed by Mrs. Stone and
Mr. Seney, such legacies for missions as were left by Mr. Otis,
reveal to us what floods may come when all things are ready, while
such revival waves as have swept over Madagascar and the Telagoo
people in India are earnests of the power of the Holy Spirit to
subdue speedily islands and continents to Himself.

Girt with the promises, and armed with all prayer and faith, we
shall go forth to conquer. The day is dawning, the morning star
is piercing the twilight, and dark night will shortly be rolled
away. Over the continents, over the islands, over the seas, victory
is watching and waiting to come; but tarry it will, tarry it
must, till we, or such as we ought to be, win the battle in God’s
appointed way.

Heaven grant that the day of its coming be hastened gloriously, as
never before, by the efforts and events of 1882.

OUR Annual Report for 1881 will soon be off the press and ready for
distribution. We shall be happy to forward it to any of our friends
who will send us their name and address, signifying their wish to
have it.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE are happy to give our readers in this number of the MISSIONARY
copious extracts from the Journal of Superintendent Ladd, who,
at last reports, was at Cairo, Egypt, in company with Dr. Snow,
awaiting passage to Souakim, on the Red Sea. The reception they
received in Egypt was very encouraging.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE _Gospel in All Lands_ is to be published as a weekly,
commencing with January, 1882. It will contain one-third of its
present number of pages, but will undergo no other change. The
appearance of an illustrated missionary weekly, relying upon
its subscription list for support, will mark a new and cheering
departure in the missionary literature of the times. We bid the
enterprise Godspeed.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR annual meeting discouraged, for the present at least, a
movement for the establishment of a mission in China, under the
auspices of this Association, and in this it accorded with the
recommendations of the Executive Committee. But something may
ultimately be done in this direction, and that our friends may know
more at length the facts in the case we publish in this MISSIONARY,
Brother Pond’s earnest plea in its behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GOOD WAY TO DO IT.

A few months since, the cause of this Association was presented
to a church in Central New York, after which the minister in
charge addressed the congregation substantially as follows: “Every
family belonging to this church must wish to give, according to
its ability, to the cause which has been so clearly and ably
presented. In order that this may be brought about, I have placed
a slip of paper in each pew, and desire that each family present
subscribe the amount it will give, and state when the money will
be ready. At the close of the service I will gather the slips,
and compare them with the church-roll. If any families have not
responded, I will take a carriage, if need be, and, before the
close of the week, call on those whose names have not been handed
in, so no one shall fail to have an opportunity for assisting in
the great work of advancing the Redeemer’s Kingdom.” The result
was a cheerful and liberal donation, made up probably from all the
families in the church. The clergyman who adopted this thorough and
self-denying plan was a pastor from Nebraska, on an exchange for a
few months with an Eastern brother. It fell out that he had trained
his Western church in the method described above, until all its
members cheerfully rejoiced in it, and put it into practice on all
occasions when money was to be raised for either home or foreign
objects. So that, although his church numbered but eighty-five,
its contributions to benevolent objects exceeded those of any
other Congregational church in the State. Moreover, this was not
brought about by neglect of things needful at home. A new organ was
purchased at a cost of $1,000, the money being raised by the same
method. The blessing of Heaven was not withheld; seasons of revival
strengthened the church, and its membership at present is over
a hundred. The perseverance and fidelity of the pastor were not
overlooked. Where every one was schooled to give, it was an easy
matter to gather what was wanted to purchase a beautiful gold watch
as a Christmas present for the minister. The appreciation of pastor
and people was mutual—so much so that the church was able to retain
its minister, though he was repeatedly called to other places,
where a larger salary was offered.

We commend the example of this clergyman and his people to the
large number of devoted pastors who are always prayerfully seeking
for—“A good way to do it.”

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN BROWN MEMORIAL STEAMER.

[Illustration]

We call attention once more to the John Brown steamer. Scarcely a
day passes that we do not receive contributions for it, and yet, as
the sums are small, it will require much more to furnish the amount
needed. As to the value of the steamer we give below a letter from
the Rev. Geo. Thompson. No man in the world is a better judge than
he of its necessity for the use of the mission. He was for many
years a missionary at the Mendi Mission, was indefatigable in his
labors, made wide explorations in the regions round-about, exerted
a vast and wholesome influence over the people, exposed himself
to the dangers of the climate, and only gave up the work on which
his heart was so much set after the failure of the health of his
family. His gift, so large in his circumstances, for the John Brown
steamer is as strong an attestation of his appreciation of its
worth, as his earnest and eloquent words. Read his letter and help
us to complete the amount.

  DEAR BRO.—I notice the intention to build a steamer for the
  Mendi Mission; Glory to God! My heart rejoices. This, more
  than almost any other human means, will help the mission. I
  well know the need of such a craft, having been back and forth
  so many times in canoes, sometimes old, leaky ones, and my wife
  and many others have suffered greatly in those long and rough
  canoe voyages from and to Sierra Leone, often terrible and
  dangerous. Speed the steamer, and may the blessing of the Lord
  rest upon the enterprise.

  My heart leaps for joy at the prospect. I hasten to send my
  first earned money (by hard labor) since reading the last
  MISSIONARY, to help build this John Brown memorial steamer. I
  send it with joy and thanksgiving.

In order that old and young may have a part in this work, we have
arranged to issue four grades of shares, as follows: First Grade,
$100; Second Grade, $10; Third Grade, $5; Fourth Grade, $1.

All donations for this purpose should be forwarded to H. W.
Hubbard, Treasurer of the American Missionary Association, 56 Reade
St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

—The late George G. Fogg bequeathed $5,000 to Dartmouth College.

—Mr. Reed, of Boston, has given $10,000 to Hampton Normal and
Agricultural Institute.

—The will of John Amory Lowell contains bequests to Harvard College
amounting to $40,000.

—William Bicknell, of Philadelphia, has given $50,000 to the
University at Lewisburg, Pa.

—Wells College, Aurora, N.Y., receives a bequest of $100,000 from
the estate of Col. E. B. Morgan.

—Mrs. Jennie McGraw Fiske has left to Cornell University $290,000
for library fund, building and other purposes.

—The University of Sydney has received a gift of $25,000 for the
endowment of scholarships.

—Hon. John Evans, Ex-Governor of Colorado, has given $40,000 to the
University of Denver since the beginning of the enterprise.

—Howard University is to receive $5,000 from the estate of Francis
P. Schoals of New York City, which amount is to be paid at the
death of his widow.

—Mrs. Noah Wood, of Bangor, Maine, has left $5,000 to Bowdoin
College to found the Blake scholarship in memory of her son.

—Kenyon College has received $15,000 for scholarships from Mr. H.
B. Curtis, of Mt. Vernon, Ohio.

—Col. Charles H. Northam bequeathed $75,000 to the general fund of
Trinity College, Hartford, Ct., and $50,000 for the endowment of a
professorship.

“_If there is any place in this world where a great deal of
money, wisely used, can work incalculable good, even tested by
the simplest maxims of political economy and cent per cent, the
endowment of the Christian schools for the Freedmen is that
opportunity._”—_A. D. Mayo, D.D._

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

_Orangeburg, S.C._—The people here are rejoicing in a new $50 bell
bought by themselves. They have also put up a bell tower.

_Tuskegee, Ala._—Mr. B. T. Washington writes: “Please allow me
space to express the thanks of this school to the _Smith American
Organ Company_, of Boston, for the donation of one of their
superior cabinet organs. It is a valuable addition to our school.”

_Athens, Ala._—Rev. H. S. Williams writes of a union effort in the
churches at this place, which has proved a success. Twenty-seven
conversions are reported as the result.

_Savannah, Ga._—The Sabbath-school has begun to yield excellent
fruit. Having $30 in the treasury they voted to send one of their
number to Atlanta University for a year. After a spirited contest
on the part of several members of the school to win the prize the
decision was finally favorable to Palmer Lloyd, a boy of about 15
years. He went to Atlanta in time for the opening of the term.
Fifty dollars in all were needed to insure him a year’s study.
To raise the remaining $20 the Sabbath school gave a musical
entertainment and ice-cream supper and were successful in raising
the amount needed.

_First Impressions of a New Teacher._—After nearly two months’
work I feel that I am more interested than when I came, which I
thought would be impossible. The work is more vast and _awful_
in its importance. I do not wonder, as I did at first, at the
careworn faces of the teachers who have been long in the work. The
possibilities for good or ill of the race are to be contemplated
by us only with fear and trembling, unless God works through and
by us. I enjoy the work heartily. It consists, more than I could
before understand, in laying foundations.

_Impressions of a Teacher of Long Experience South._—I am sure,
in our busy and crowded life, most of us teachers especially fail
to realize how broad and comprehensive our work at the South is;
how what we do, well or poorly, is to affect the whole educational
interest at the South where everything is in a transition state.
Should we not, in view of what our work and influence have
accomplished in the past, and in view of our greater and growing
opportunities for the future, should we not be aroused to a sense
of these things that we may make the most of our chances in this
direction?


INDIAN GIRLS AT HAMPTON.

[Illustration: _From Harper’s Monthly._]

The accompanying cuts were published in Harper’s _Monthly_, April,
1881. The improvement made in the appearance of Indian students,
boys and girls, by a three years’ course of study at Hampton has
convinced more than one observer from the Western frontier that
there is something better to do for the red man than to shoot him
on sight. Miss Helen W. Ludlow, one of their teachers, says of
the two older girls that appear in the picture: “They have been
among the farmers of Berkshire County, Mass., working for their
board, sharing the home life and improving in health, English and
general tone; they have won a good report from the families which
have taken them, even better this year than last, and have done
much to increase public sympathy for their race. The Indian girls’
improvement has been as marked as the boys’. Their early inuring
to labor has its compensation in a better physical condition
apparently, and their uplifting may prove the most important of
factors in the salvation of their race.”

[Illustration: _From Harper’s Monthly._]


GENERAL NOTES.


THE INDIANS.

—The Indian Bureau reports that the number of self-supporting
Indians cannot be precisely stated, but gives the following as a
fair estimate: Wholly or almost entirely self-supporting, 105,939;
partially self-supporting, 44,119; wholly dependent on government
rations, 50,882; these figures do not include the five civilized
tribes in the Indian Territory, numbering 59,187. At Crow Creek
Agency, Dakota, 60,000 of the 500,000 acres of reservation land
had been taken up by 235 out of 325 neighboring families, of whom
208 had broken ground, cultivating an average of five acres apiece.
Their title is a certificate from the Secretary of the Interior,
and can be made valid only by an act of Congress.

—Rev. A. J. Biddle, in speaking of the American Indian, gives the
following incident with which he was personally acquainted, as a
typical case: An Indian and his wife left their tribe in the state
of Oregon, came among the white settlers upon an excellent farm,
built their cabin, assumed the garb of civilization, and were
exceedingly earnest in their endeavors to be as their neighbors.
The wife eagerly sought instruction from her white sisters in
housekeeping. The husband was as eager to know how to farm. They
were succeeding nicely, contented and happy in their new home and
new civilization. One day two white men came along, saw this farm;
it was fertile and well improved; they coveted it; asked the Indian
to sell it; he refused. They determined to have it; so, a few days
later, they returned when no white witnesses were present, shot the
Indian in his own door-yard, drove the frightened wife away and
took possession of the property. Nor were they ever molested. No
one saw the crime but the Indian wife. No court would listen to her
story, so the matter ended, with the pleasant home desolated, the
murderers eating the fruit of their crime.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA.

—The whole Bible has been translated into eight African tongues,
and portions of it into 24 others, making 32 in all.

—According to the _Agence Reuter_, M. Roger will set out with the
Belgian expedition and 135 natives to rejoin Stanley upon the Congo.

—Three Roman missionaries, of Ouroundi, have been massacred in
their houses, near Tanganyika. Three others escaped. The last
letters of the missionaries tell of the perils which they run on
the part of the blacks from the calumnies of the Arab merchants in
regard to those who endeavor to abolish the treaty.

—The Livingstonia Central African Company has established a factory
at Inhamissengo, at the mouth of the Zambeze. It found there
already two European companies, one Portuguese and the other French.

—Messrs. Creux and Berthond, of the Swiss mission at the north of
Transvaal, are attempting to open a direct route from Valdezia to
the Delogoa Bay.

—A company has been formed in Transvaal, with a capital of 200,000
livres, to explore the silver mines of Tati.

—The London Missionary Society’s mission on Lake Tanganyika has
been carried on since its commencement, in 1876, at an expense of
$100,000. There have been three deaths, and three have been obliged
to retire on account of ill health. The society proposes to send
out five new men in the Spring to recruit the mission.

—Mr. Adam McCall, leader of the Livingstone inland mission on the
Congo, died at Madeira on November 24.

—Direct communication was to be established by submarine cable
between Calle and Bizerte early in October.

—A scientific French mission at Thebes has discovered recently 36
sarcophagi of kings and queens inclosing mummies, rolls of papyrus,
thousands of jewels and talismans, from which much may be learned
of importance in the history of ancient Egypt.

—M. Ledoux, Consul-General of France at Zanzibar, reports a great
famine in equatorial Africa. The tribes, in despair, have pillaged
the caravans.

—M. Succi, delegate of the Italian Society of Commerce with
Africa, has returned to Milan after a voyage to Madagascar and the
Comores. The sovereign of one of these islands has granted to him a
concession very advantageous for the Italian Society.

—In an exploration of Quango three great cascades have been
discovered, to which the names of the emperors of Germany and
Austria and the king of Portugal have been given.

—The military French administration has placed forty kilometres of
railroading of the Decanville system from Sousse in the direction
of Kaironan.

—After having been dangerously ill of bilious fever, Stanley has
recovered sufficiently to go to Manyanga, and from there to Stanley
Pool.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

—The American Board has rendered good service to the cause of
missions by issuing a large map of China, suitable for use at
monthly concerts and other meetings.

—The Chinese merchants of San Francisco have received from the
Emperor of China an elaborate and beautiful scroll, in recognition
of their liberal gifts for the relief of sufferers from the famine
in China three years ago.

—“I love money first and God second,” was the confession of a
Chinaman in Boston, who was quite ready to argue that his was the
best way, as he was giving an account of his nephew’s preparation
for a public profession of religion.

—The Chinese Sunday-school, held in the chapel of the Mount Vernon
Church, Boston, had an average attendance last year of 48 pupils,
the largest number present at any one time being 71. The total
number of Chinese in Boston is said to be about 300.


TRAINING GIRLS FOR HOME LIFE.

BY MISS MARY L. SAWYER, BOXFORD, MASS.

  At our annual meeting at Worcester, a part of Thursday
  afternoon was devoted to the reading of papers and to the
  delivery of addresses on Women’s Work for Women.

  We gave in our last issue some brief extracts of the addresses
  on that occasion by Rev. A. H. Plumb and Rev. E. N. Packard.
  In this number we publish portions of the papers read by Miss
  Sawyer and Miss Emery, which our readers will find to be
  interesting, pertinent and profitable.

You all know of the degradation of the colored women in the South.
You are ready to believe in their dirty, comfortless huts, yet I
could take you into many a pleasant home among the colored people,
where neatness and order reign supreme, where man’s industry and
woman’s taste have combined with charming result, and where it
would be hard to say which was exerting the greater or better
influence—the earnest Christian man, or his equally earnest wife.
Tasteful pictures on the walls, books of standard authors on the
table, shades at the shining windows, a clean, white bed, a clock,
perhaps a cabinet organ, would meet your wondering gaze. With
keen insight the women and girls recognize the primary cause of
such a home and the influence that has molded its founders. So,
in ever-increasing numbers, ignorant, uncouth girls, apply for
admission to the missionary school, which, in some mysterious way,
is to transform them; and their poverty-stricken mothers give of
their scanty store all that can be spared, and more, and wait with
joyful anticipation for the time when the daughters may become the
teachers from whom they in turn may learn the more excellent way.
To us, then, comes the work of educating them, not out of their
positions in life, but for them; to train them in such habits that
they may look upon uncleanliness, either physical or moral, with
utter loathing, and yet to implant that Christlike spirit which
shall lead them to count no home too repulsive, no work degrading,
if only it is the Lord’s place and work for them.

With such an end in view, school work means much. Not only is
the dormant intellect to be awakened and the knowledge of books
imparted, but also that practical knowledge of every-day life
in which, strange to say, they may be even more deficient. Nor
do they always come with that keen thirst for improvement that
insures success. How can they, when the consciousness of their own
shortcomings has not yet dawned upon them? Their acquaintances are
as ignorant as themselves; their own bare home is as good as their
neighbors’. Not until they have mingled in the school life with
companions far beyond themselves in attainment do they realise
their own need, and begin to climb. Personal neatness is to be
inculcated; dress, deportment, speech, expression, manner, must be
watched and toned by careful teachers. A sense of honor must be
cultivated, and, above all, conscience aroused and trained, that
the end of all our labor may be attained and Christ be found in
them.

Much of their future usefulness depends on the industrial training
which is becoming more and more a feature of our schools. The
difficulty of uniting this branch of instruction with the regular
school duties was long ago recognized by so eminent a teacher
as Mary Lyon; and what was hard in New England is even harder
in Georgia and Alabama. But the need is greater, too; and on
missionary ground the question cannot be, “Is it difficult?” but
only “Is it best?” and, since there could be but one answer,
all over the South, this work in many forms is being carried on
to-day. Due attention is paid both to theory and practice. Lectures
on cooking, for instance, are followed by conversations on the
subject, where questions can be freely asked and difficulties
explained, after which the pupils are required to test their
knowledge by making bread, cooking meals and the like. This
practice is repeated day by day, and the examinations are as rigid
as in any other department. Sewing is as carefully taught, a part
of each day being devoted to it. Darning and patching become an
art, until some specimens of their skill in this line could be
ranked almost as ornamental needlework. Not only sewing, but the
cutting of garments, is taught; and this affords good opportunity
for those wise counsels on economy, simplicity and kindred subjects
which these girls need so much.

Housekeeping in its minutest details receives careful attention,
and here, as everywhere else, precept follows precept and theory is
supplemented by practice.

Another and no less important branch is that of nursing the sick.
The ignorance of the very simplest remedies and of hygienic laws on
the part of many of the colored people is appalling. The treatment
of a cold, or a slight accident, is as much beyond their knowledge
as the most complicated disease would be, while a sudden emergency,
as a case of poisoning, would paralyze them with fear. Medicine
to them is simply medicine, and one kind as good as another. “I
didn’t have no sugar,” said the mother of a sick baby to the
missionary who was attending to its needs, “and so I put a spoonful
of the medicine that didn’t want sweetening into a spoonful of the
medicine that did want sweetening and it seemed to do him good.”
That this ignorance was not unusual may be inferred from the
estimate that in the city where this mother lives the death rate
among the negroes is three times that of the whites.

The method of imparting this knowledge of nursing varies in
different schools. In every case opportunity for practice is
abundant; sometimes in their own homes, sometimes among the poor
of the city or in the women’s wards of the hospital. A prominent
physician of Memphis, noting the examination questions required of
the girls of Le Moyne School, said: “If your girls answered those
questions, they ought not only to make safe nurses, but also fair
physicians.” The object, however, is not to make physicians, but to
give a thorough acquaintance with the details of nursing, including
all those little thoughtful attentions to the sick which Northern
girls learn from the lips and the practice of gentle, efficient
mothers, but of which the colored women seem as ignorant as their
daughters.

You can hardly imagine a more desolate scene than a case of
sickness in a cabin home. There is no isolation—all family work
performed in sight of the patient, the glaring light falling
full on the bed, water either for drinking or bathing seeming an
unknown luxury, and noise everywhere. Into such homes these eager
girls penetrate, adapting their knowledge to the surroundings with
wonderful tact, hanging an old quilt or shawl to give isolation,
shading the light, preparing with neatness and dispatch some
tempting morsel of food, and administering with their own hands
that thorough bathing which is often the most potent medicine.
No wonder that after such treatment one poor old creature should
ejaculate, “Thank the Lord, when we get to Heaven we shall all
get on clean clothes.” Alas, that in so many homes the inmates
seem perfectly content to wait till that time for the delightful
sensation!

Of course cleanliness and other hygienic laws are placed first
in importance, and just here we are finding one answer to the
question so near our hearts, “How can we make the _homes_ better.”
The lessons learned by the daughters at school are duly repeated
to the mothers at home, who are the more ready to receive new
ideas of _house_-keeping from the young teachers who have first
revealed to them the secrets of _health_-keeping. It is idle to
hope to accomplish the greatest good for these girls unless for a
time they are wholly under our control. Evil influences cannot be
forgotten or overcome in a month or a term. They must come into our
boarding-schools for a term of years, and the money to keep them
there must come in part from you. By the industrial system, they
can be helped to some extent and the idle and careless sifted out;
but after all is done, the last hard-earned penny paid over, the
last work tried, there is still need.

But there are so many calls, and you are so busy. Yes, so was one
of old, and you remember, “As thy servant was busy here and there,
he was gone.”

Just so will it be here. The work for these girls must be done
_now_. If we do not help them, there is no help for them, and
instead of life and light there is nothing but blackness of
darkness before them. Their influence will widen and deepen just
the same, only instead of a blessing it will bring a curse, until
the old sentence may be repeated for us, and our lives go for their
lives and our people for their people.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RELATION OF THE FAMILY TO THE NATION’S WELFARE

BY MISS E. B. EMERY, GORHAM, ME.

The materialist boldly tells us that physical law is the only law,
and that there is no sin but the violation of the laws of our
physical being, and that if these were understood and obeyed by
all, there would be no sorrow, suffering or disorder in the world.
But with a deeper insight, we do not need to live long on earth
to learn that violation of moral law for a time will bring into
fearful disorder, and actually subvert, physical law. If any truth
in this world is manifest, it is that a nation is well balanced
and secure just in proportion to the observance of the moral law
respecting the _family_; that a commonwealth is prosperous and
invincible, in its material as well as spiritual interests, exactly
in proportion to the strength and purity of its homes, even to the
humblest. Naught can bring such dire confusion and destruction as
laxity of family relations; what, then, can you expect of those
for whom the family was obliterated, and that by legal statute,
for many generations? The freed people are by no means the only
sufferers, for in obedience to the divine principle just referred
to, precisely to that degree that the colored woman refuses to
recognize marriage and a home, just so far is the whole region
demoralized; and this obliquity over wide extent threatens the
very vitals of our great republic. Educate, Christianize, inspire
the young colored woman, and you save and elevate not only the
entire colored race, but you brace up the white people of the
South to moral standards far from universal now; you save all, in
all their interests, temporal and eternal. The domestic relations
are the deepest in life; they dictate and control all others.
Make the _home_ pure and powerful, and the soil will yield, and
demand and supply will adjust themselves; cities will rise, and
laws will protect, and schools will flourish, and the church will
grow apace, and there is work and education and salvation for all.
This is no idle picture; every one of us knows the reality of it.
And it is because the home is the basis and centre of all earthly
life—and who makes the home? Mainly, it is the woman. Therefore,
save the woman; build her up hour by hour; feed her with wisdom
of every kind; regulate her passion and emotion, discipline her
reason, fortify her will, nerve her with principle, fire her with
enthusiasm, and make her tender with Christ’s own love. In every
mighty movement on earth, woman is at the bottom, and the problem
which more than any other agitates this whole country to-day, is
because of woman. She can wreck this nation, and she can deliver
it. Man fought to save it; woman prays, teaches, suffers and
sacrifices to save it.

One day at the South, while on a solitary walk, I stepped through
the crazy paling, and spoke to a jolly black woman who was getting
dinner in the yard just before the front door. She was about
forty-five, with a superb physique, quite unfettered by fashion,
for she wore but one garment, which did not hang in flounces, but
in strings. The fire, or rather smoke, for I saw no fire, puffed up
from a little heap of sticks, and over this swung a broken kettle,
which, apart from the gourds lying about, was the only dish of the
household. Into this kettle she had put a piece of grimy salt pork,
with a share of bristles remaining on it, making a firm rind, and
with it turnip-tops and cabbage-stumps, and she was then washing
sweet potatoes; and such a nest of children in every stage of dirt
and nakedness and hunger, and every one in densest ignorance and
heathenism! The little hut couldn’t hold them, so they were ranged
inside the paling, all in a row, forming a kind of animated hedge,
their little bare, shining bodies flashing as they whisked in the
sun, their big, round eyes gleaming with curiosity, and every
single body of them poised to turn a somersault or two and ask me
for a penny. The woman made a low courtesy, and a graceful one it
was, and as I greeted the children the whole batch of them squealed
and cackled, stood on their heads and came right side up with the
wildest kind of a grin, in my very face.

“How many children have you,” I asked. “These are not all yours?”

“Yis, ma’am, dey is ebery one mine. I’se got fourteen.”

“Is your husband at home?” I inquired. I thought I spied a man in
the cabin.

“He’s sick mos’ times,” she replied, “a’nt good for not’in’ but
eat; he kin eat mo’n any nigger in all Car’line, though he don’ git
de luck berry offen, dere’s so many ob us,” and she gave a chuckle.

“But how do you take care of so many?” was my question, as the
vision of more than one overworked mother at the North, with her
solitary child, flashed across me.

Such a loud, musical laugh!

“Why, bress yer soul, honey, I don’ car’ ob dem, dey takes car’ ob
demselves,” and she leaned back and again she sang and rippled and
rolled at the absurd idea of a mother’s taking care of her children.

I ask you to-day, what do you expect those children will do and
become? It is for you to say.

Destitution and ignorance like this may be found all through the
South, but just such families have been reached and redeemed by
our missionaries, and if all are not reached, it is simply because
we do not send the missionaries, for allowing every discouragement
that exists the fact still remains that there is no missionary work
on the earth so hopeful and so rich and so rapid in its results as
work among the colored people South.




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


TENNESSEE.

INTERESTING EXERCISE IN FISK UNIVERSITY.

_By Rev. H. S. Bennett, Nashville._

The first Friday night of the term we listened to reports from
those of the students who had taught school during the vacation. It
was expected that those who spoke would give as correct an idea as
possible of the colored people, their interest in education, the
condition of the crops, whether the people were getting possession
of land, and all other items of interest relating to their work.

President Cravath read a letter from a county superintendent in
Mississippi, who bore the strongest testimony to the honesty,
morality and efficiency of the teachers who had gone out from Fisk
University.

Mr. Mitchell, a new student, had taught in one neighborhood for
two years, in De Soto, Miss. He had succeeded in building up a
successful Sunday-school. He had in his school about 150 pupils and
three assistant teachers. The citizens encouraged the education of
the colored people and took great interest in his school.

Miss Murray had taught in Mississippi for five months. The people
were very poor and the children were poorly clad. She taught in the
Sunday-school very successfully; she did not think that the people
had bought much land, but they had stock and wagons.

Geo. McLelland did not wish to exaggerate, but desired to tell the
truth. He taught just above Vicksburg, Miss.; here there is little
civilization. In their homes, the large majority of the people are
virtually slaves; they pay $9 per acre, or 90 pounds of lint cotton
for their lands; they raise nothing but cotton and corn, and often
come out in debt; they buy their goods at the store on account,
on fall time. In most cases last year they came out behind; in
this condition they must give a lien on the next year’s work;
some do better than this, but the majority are in this wretched
condition. Government land is sold at 25 cents per acre, but the
colored people do not buy it to any extent; this year they have
done something of this, and have secured forty acres of good land.
Saturday night the people go to the store and drink up an acre of
government land at the rate of 25 cents a glass.

One church represents all. They worship in a very blind, ignorant,
superstitious way. In the church he attended two out of five could
read a little. One elder, in telling how we were to get to Heaven,
said that after we were dead we must first go to hell and search
all around, and if we did not find our names there we were to go to
Heaven.

D. Donnel taught in southwestern Arkansas. He had much opposition,
but he had, by persevering, found out that there was “a little man
in him.” The people are getting homes and becoming owners of land.
They had never been aroused before. They were all religious, but
they all drank whisky, from the least to the greatest.

The white people did not believe in getting a good teacher from
abroad, because he carried the money out of the country.

Queenie V. Moore taught in Illinois and had high ideas of the
colored people, but she found them not nearly so well off as the
colored people of the South. The young people spent their time near
the taverns, smoking and drinking. She had a model school-house,
which was also used as a church. The people were from all the
Southern States. She tried to inspire the young people with a
higher purpose than to wear fine dresses or smoke cigars, and
succeeded in getting them into Sunday-school. The white people were
very cordial and friendly.

Prof. J. D. Burrus tried to look upon the bright side at
Murfreesboro, where he visited, and was surprised to find the
colored people so prosperous in getting farms, houses and in
educating their children. One man had paid $1,100 for his house and
$1,100 for his shop. Within a radius of a few miles he counted up
30 families that owned their own homesteads.

H. C. Gray taught in Texas; was Superintendent of the
Sunday-school. He had studied the land system of Texas. A man buys
a piece of land and pays a little down and 10 per cent. interest
on the notes. Many of them are in debt. The school law is such
that each child may ask the judge to set aside his pro-rata for
him to go to school upon, so that each child gets his chance to be
educated.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

STORRS SCHOOL.

_By Miss Amy Williams, Atlanta._

During the summer the city of Atlanta erected a beautiful eight
room colored school building not more than sixty rods from the
Storrs School. We all said, surely the number attending our school
will be greatly diminished by this new free school; consequently,
only four teachers were summoned to be on the ground ready for
the opening of school on September 5; but as 280 pupils filed
into the school building, we saw that we had underestimated the
force needed, and our fifth teacher was called in, and before the
expiration of two weeks the sixth one was installed in her old
place, and we are now hard at work with 350 pupils enrolled, and
new ones are being admitted almost every day.

This new colored school, which we can see so plainly from our home,
is a constant inspiration for us to work on with new courage, for
its eight faithful teachers, with one exception, have been first
trained at Storrs School and afterward at Atlanta University.

This good work loses none of its fascination for us; we only mourn
that time and strength are not given us to accomplish more.

Mr. Kent, our new pastor, comes with perfect health, and is
brim-full of enthusiasm and earnest desire to do the people good.
His earnestness, supplemented by the experience and good judgment
of Miss Stevenson, the city missionary, must tell upon the church
and people generally.

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSISSIPPI.

DEDICATION OF STRIEBY HALL.

_By Mrs. M. E. H. Pope, Tougaloo._

  THANKSGIVING DAY, 1881.

One year ago to-day we gathered in the old chapel of Washington
Hall to recount the mercies of the year which God had crowned with
goodness.

How little did we anticipate the changes which one year more would
bring to us. We were trying to make the best of the (dis) comforts
and (in) conveniences of the old building; but it could not hold
half of the young men, and it seemed to us that the old rooms over
the shop and wood-house, and the temporary barracks, had served
their day and generation, and we needed—yes, there was no doubt
of it—we needed a new building. We asked the Lord for one, and
the beginning of the answer to our prayer was the sweeping away
by the flames, in one short hour, of our main school building,
which included chapel and boys’ dormitories. But, though cast
down, we were not destroyed utterly, for we had a large new barn,
out of which we turned the cattle; dubbed it “Ayrshire Hall,” and
moved in. We were sure the Lord Jesus would not forget that His
birthplace was a manger, and would glorify this refuge with His
presence; and so He did.

Our numbers were larger than ever, and it was a wonder to us
sometimes where they were all stowed away; but we were always
able to find a place for “one more,” and so the year went on and
ended. The boarding hall had been enlarged during the last half of
the year by the addition of a wing and another story, so it could
accommodate more than twice as many girls as before. And now
followed a busy summer, during which the boarding hall was finished
off and a substantial three story brick building erected. A good
many buildings have been put up at various places by legacies
and named for the dead, but we thought it right to give honor to
the living as well, and by request of the Faculty, the Executive
Committee voted to name this building after the Association’s
representative man, Dr. M. E. Strieby. And so a tablet over the
main entrance bears the words “Strieby Hall.” The work upon this
building has been entirely done by colored men, except a few days
work by the traditional “plumber.”

To-day we met to keep our Thanksgiving feast and to dedicate this
building to the cause of Christian education. Oh, such gladness and
thankfulness as filled our hearts, and was voiced by the choir in
the opening anthem, “Praise the Lord!” After the opening exercises
voluntary expressions of thanksgiving were called for. Mr.
Hartsfield, our head carpenter, said he could not help comparing
the present with twenty-five years ago, when he little dreamed of
ever participating in such exercises as these, and said his heart
was so full of thankfulness he could not express it. Others spoke
of their gratitude for the blessings of the year and of this day.
Mr. H. W. Hubbard, our genial Treasurer, who was with us, told the
young people where the money to furnish them these advantages comes
from.

An address was then delivered by Rev. B. A. Imes, of Memphis, which
will be long remembered by us all, but especially by our students,
to whom it has already proved a real inspiration. Dr. Roy followed
in a wonderfully appropriate dedicatory prayer.

The day seemed all too short to express the joy and thanksgiving
that filled our hearts. Truly He has brought “the blind by a way
that they knew not.” We finished up the day with a lecture at night
from Dr. Roy, who always has something good for us.

Our new building has, besides chapel and recitation rooms, family
rooms now occupied by Prof. Hatch and wife, who have charge of the
young men, and dormitories for sixty-eight young men.

And what will you say when I tell you that there are seventy-five
here now, with a prospect for a much larger number after the
holidays?

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK IN THE SOUTH.

During my visit North last summer a friend asked: “Haven’t you had
enough of life and work in the South? Aren’t you ready to come
back and take hold of the Home Missionary work again?” The friend
looked so incredulous at my expressions of satisfaction, and even
of desire to get back into the work again as soon as the extreme
heat was over, it occurs to me that a little glimpse of the past
few days of life and labor in this especial corner of the great
field might convince a good many that the work is not only very
hopeful, but also exceedingly interesting. Previous to my restful
vacation North, I had not been able to visit our people in their
homes, but now, with renewed strength, I ventured a long, rough
walk, leaning on my husband’s arm, to the home of one of our women,
who was very sick. Down a steep, long hill, over deep ravines worn
by swift-running brooks, with slender poles thrown over to serve
for bridges, up the long hill beyond, and we had reached the little
house where the sick one lay. We cheered her as best we could with
sympathy and comforting words, spreading out the little delicacies
we had brought to tempt her appetite, admired the new baby, and won
the hearts of the other little people standing shyly back with the
gingersnaps we had brought for their special comfort.

Just as we were leaving we noticed a young girl crouching near the
door. “My sister Mag,” said the sick one. We shook hands cordially,
said a few pleasant words to her, then came back to our home tired,
so very tired, that the rest of that day and the next, which was
the Sabbath, was full of weariness and pain.

Did it pay? Yes, a hundred-fold! Early Monday morning there was
a tap at the door, and there stood “Mag,” neatly dressed, with
a smiling face, and a basket of vegetables for me. It flashed
instantly over my mind what I had heard concerning her. She had
once been a Christian, was still a member of our little church, but
for a long time past had seemed possessed with every evil spirit of
sin and mischief that could possibly find lodgment in her heart.
Nothing could induce her to set her foot inside the church door.
She invariably vanished whenever the minister tried to see her, and
she had long ago been given up as an utterly hopeless case.

With a swift thought of prayer to Heaven for wisdom, I greeted
her most cordially, made her feel quite at ease, then led her on
carefully step by step, until, before she knew it, she was actually
confessing her sins to me, and I was talking kindly but most
faithfully to her. Still she stayed on, with a wistful look in her
eyes, and the thought came: “God surely sent her to me! I’ll do all
I can for her!”

Rising suddenly I closed the door, went directly to her and said,
“Mag, I want to pray with you.” I put my arm around her, drew her
to her knees beside me, and poured out my whole soul in prayer for
that poor child of sin.

When we rose from our knees her eyes were tender and full of tears.
She clasped my hand tightly for a moment and was gone.

I sought out other homes that very day, where God permitted me to
carry little gleams of comfort and strength to sad hearts.

Yesterday was the Sabbath. At four o’clock a white flag was
fluttering at our gate. Five minutes after, fifty young people and
children suddenly appeared, as if by magic, from the lovely grove
near by, and came pouring into my largest room, filling every
chair and bench, finally taking seats on the floor in the small
space left about my chair. They were such a bright, eager looking
company—at least a third of them young men and young ladies,
ranging down to half a dozen little fellows at my feet.

How I blessed the Master for the gift of story-telling when I saw
the eager faces, the almost breathless interest with which every
one, from the oldest down to the least of all, listened to me as
I carefully blended story and lesson with all the grace and power
I possessed, until I had the joy of seeing the bright eyes grow
tender and moist, and knew the dear Saviour was with us, laying
big hands in blessing upon us all. Then all stood with bowed
heads while I commended them to God’s mercy and loving care in an
earnest petition in which all could join. After this, I sat down
to the organ—a poor, wheezy little thing—which is, nevertheless,
a great comfort and help. They gathered close about me while we
sang together a beautiful new song, then went quietly away to their
homes.

To-day the little white flag again fluttered at the gate, and one
by one, or in little groups, the mothers came. I knew how tired
they would be, what effort it must cost them to leave their work
on Monday, to come to a meeting like this; so all day I had been
asking the Lord for some specially helpful, comforting message for
them. It would be simply impossible to describe the tender spirit
that brooded over us. The Saviour was so manifestly with us that
the room seemed the very gate of Heaven.

The Scripture lesson I had chosen grew so, unfolded itself with
such hidden strength and sweetness, it was like a new revelation.
The prayers that followed were wonderful to hear, coming as some of
them did from lips untutored, ignorant in book lore, but wise in
the hidden wisdom taught them by God himself. _Beautiful_ prayers,
full of deep feeling, of humble confession, of earnest pleading.

There were two strangers with us for the first time, who knelt
with us in prayer, and manifested the deepest interest in all that
was said. After the meeting there were hearty handshakings, kindly
greetings to the new comers, who promised to come again; then they
went away with shining faces, with hearts uplifted and strengthened
for their hard, toilsome life.

Alone in the twilight, I returned thanks from a full heart to the
dear Lord, who had honored our little gathering with His presence
and blessing.

Does it pay? Yes, a thousand-fold!

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL OF REV. H. M. LADD.

Thursday, October 20.—Land! Egypt land! The lighthouse was the
first object in sight this morning, then the low coast and the
domes and minarets of the City of Alexandria, and last, but not
least, Pompey’s Pillar. After taking our pilot on board we slowly
rounded the long breakwater on which the lighthouse stands, and
steamed into harbor. Before we had fairly drawn up alongside the
quay a crowd of boatmen were on board.

We selected the Hotel Abbatmen, and were soon off with them in a
small boat. We passed the Customs without the slightest difficulty
and were driven to our hotel. Here we had our lunch, and then, as
we intended to go right on to Cairo by the early morning train, we
improved what little time we had during the afternoon by visiting
Pompey’s Pillar, the gardens of the Khedive, the Rosetta gate, the
Bazaars, etc.

Friday, October 21.—At 8 A.M. we took the cars for Cairo. Arriving
at the station, we found a large omnibus waiting for us, and we
were driven to Shepard’s Hotel, where we have been assigned very
pleasant rooms. This is a very fine hotel for this part of the
world. In front and around it is a garden filled with tropical
trees and shrubs. Two fountains dash their cooling spray high into
the air, and there is a small menagerie, from which the table is
often supplied.

Here, as on the Galata Bridge, in Constantinople, the past and the
present, the east and the west, flow together. The latest fashions
from Paris, and the garb of the time of Abraham, the luxuriance
of Oriental wealth and splendor, and the miserable poverty and
nakedness of the oppressed “fellahin,” all pass before one like the
shifting figures of a kaleidoscope. It is a most interesting and
absorbing scene, to be found nowhere else in the world.

Saturday, October 22.—Called at the American Consulate the first
thing this morning, but found it closed. We were bothered with a
host of dragomans and donkey-boys, but they are finding out that
people who speak Turkish and Greek and French as well as English,
and a few words of other languages, are “one too many” for them!
We took a little walk alone about the European portion of the
city, to get the hang of the place. Some of the residences and
public buildings are very fine. In some places you quite forget
that you are not in Paris. To-day, our Consul-General, Hon. Simon
Wolf, has been formally presented to the Khedive in great pomp.
The Khedive always makes a great display on these occasions, and
presents the new Consul with a fine Arabian horse. We called again
at the Consulate, and were glad to receive our letters from home.
We talked up our contemplated trip with some of the officials, and
gained valuable information.

Sunday, Oct. 23.—Judge Farman, from the United States, called early
this morning. He is very kind, and is doing all in his power to
pave the way for us to the favor of the officials here. As he was
to leave on Monday for Alexandria, he asked us to go with him to
the Consulate, where he told them what he wanted done for us. A
number of Arabic interpreters have been recommended to us for our
trip, but we take our time in the choice of a proper man. We find
that it will be necessary to take an Arabic interpreter and a cook
from here.

[Illustration: CAIRO.]

We attended the Mission Church, under the care of the United
Presbyterians this morning, and greatly enjoyed being among our own
people again. I presented my letter of introduction to Drs. Lansing
and Watson, and found them to be very agreeable gentlemen, and at
once greatly interested in our work.

Monday, October 24.—Called at the Consulate again this morning, and
had an interview with our Consul-General, Mr. Wolf. We found him
to be a very pleasant man, bright and energetic, and anxious to
promote our interests in every way possible. He proposed to present
us to the Khedive and to introduce us to Sir Edward Malet, the
English Consul, to whom we have letters from the British Foreign
Office, and to General Stone, who is in a position where he can
help us greatly.

October 25.—I’m trying to pick up Arabic, but I find a donkey-boy
better help than a book. We tried this method this morning, and
started for the bazaars. I rode “Yankee Doodle,” a very smart
little donkey, and Doctor rode “Champagne Charley.” We went through
the gold and silver bazaars and the Turkish bazaars and the shoe
bazaars, and various other departments. Here I aired my Turkish and
my Greek. Everywhere we went there was a gentle murmur in our ears,
“Bakhshish,” “Bakhshish.” We have got accustomed to it now, and
rather like it; in fact, we feel quite lost without it.

Wednesday, October 26.—We went this morning to call upon Sir Edward
Malet, K. C. B., with our Consul. I presented our letter from the
Foreign Office, and we were very cordially received. He gave us
some good advice and considerable information, and promised to get
us the necessary letters. He also requested us to report to him
the state of the slave trade on our return. We find that we have
to move very cautiously. The slave trade is a touchy question in
some quarters, and proselytism is another. In order to obtain any
favor, we are obliged to emphasize the educational part of the work
proposed.

Thursday, October 27.—Dr. Lansing called again this evening. He
has a man he wants to send with us as far as Khartoum selling the
Scriptures. He also thinks that there are some from among the
tribes we hope to reach in their schools now who will work in with
us in time.

Friday, October 28.—In the P.M. we went with Dr. Lansing and a
party of friends to see, or rather hear, the Howling Dervishes.
It was something unearthly, devilish, and never to be forgotten.
Doctor and I began to calculate our chances if their religious
enthusiasm and fanaticism should lead them to turn upon us. There
has been a great revival of Mohammedanism lately and fanaticism.
After this we went to the old synagogue, where there is a
manuscript of the law written by Ezra. This is actually the case
Dr. Lansing affirms. He intends to examine it more thoroughly some
day, but it is very carefully guarded. Then we visited the old
Roman gates of New Babylon and also attempted another church, but
found it closed; we finished up with a drive on the fine Shubra
avenue. There we saw the Khedive and a vast turnout of handsome
carriages and handsomer occupants.

Sunday, October 30.—Attended the mission church and heard Mr.
Helditch on Psalm cxxxix. 18. Met some Americans there who
expressed great interest in our work. Remained quietly in our rooms
the rest of the day.

Monday, October 31.—Wrote nearly all day. Received our circular
letters from the Government to the authorities in Soudan and the
Equatorial Provinces. Had a very friendly call from Sir Edward
Malet, K. C. B., who offered himself for any further services he
could render.

Tuesday, November 1.—Called at the Consulate. Our baggage, which we
sent overland by express, has not come yet, but we are told to give
it time—everything needs plenty of time. In the afternoon we called
by appointment at the Consul’s residence. Here we met several
gentlemen who knew all about the Soudan; one had been there, and
another was an intimate friend of the Pasha, the Governor-General.
The Consul then took us around and introduced us to Gen. Stone.
In his position of Commander-in-Chief he can do more for us than
any one else, and he knows more than any one else about Soudan
and the Nile. He received us very cordially and seemed eager to
do what he could for us. With maps before us he gave us much
valuable information in regard to positions and healthfulness. He
also put us in the way of transportation across the desert at the
least expense of time and money. He strongly advises us to have
headquarters at Berber, and in establishing our stations not to
stop at the Sobat, but to go on to Fatiko. He is also going to
furnish us letters to the Governors. We dined this afternoon at
the American Mission House with Mr. and Mrs. Harvey, and spent a
very pleasant evening with the teachers. I conducted prayers in
the girls’ department, and saw there several children who had been
brought down as slaves from the very tribes to which we are going.
They seemed to be very bright and intelligent. If we find as good
material as that we shall have no cause to complain.

Wednesday, November 2.—Called at Consulate and received letters.
We had the clerk translate the telegram which General Stone wrote
for us to send to Souakim, with reference to transportation, into
Arabic, and then we were advised to get General Stone’s seal to it.

Thursday, November 3.—We have found and engaged a good interpreter
at a moderate price. We called on General Stone and obtained his
seal to the telegram.

Friday, November 4.—Called at the Consulate. Sent telegram of
General Stone to Marquette, at Souakim. It will take some days to
get an answer from it. We are told to-day that the English steamer
we intended to take down the Red Sea has been delayed for about ten
days. It is better to pass our Quarantine here than at Souakim.
This is our only consolation, for we are very anxious to be off
now, although they all tell us that we are early yet.

Saturday, November 6.—We hope this week to see at least the
beginning of the end of our waiting here. Much will depend on
the answer to our telegram; some will depend on the letters from
General Stone: much more will depend on the movements of that
English steamer on the Red Sea.

It is not always possible to make circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CALIFORNIA AND CHINA.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

The new fiscal year opens most hopefully. It began September 1,
and the statistics for September which I have just compiled show
a larger enrolment and a larger average attendance than was ever
before reported in the whole history of our work. The figures
are these: 15 schools; 661 pupils enrolled; average attendance,
332. Among these pupils are 200 who are reported as having ceased
from idol-worship, and 137 who give evidence of conversion. There
are other hopeful features—a good band of teachers and helpers,
numbering 27, not one among them now whom I would like to have
resign, and a spreading and deepening interest in this work among
our churches, and peace in all our borders. The hoodlum element
is measurably quiet, and we work without molestation, except as
now and then the heathen cousins or uncles of some of our young
converts try what virtue there is in stripes to exorcise from them
the Christian devil. The boldness and the constancy which some who
are still children—scarcely in their teens—have shown, declaring to
their persecutors when dragged before an idol, “I will not worship
it, though you kill me,” remind one of the legends of primitive
Christianity.

But I turn from all points of interest in our work here to press
once more on the members and friends of the Association the
opportunity there is and the need there is for its commencing a

WORK IN CHINA.

I will venture to assume that much of what I myself have written
before about this, and what Jee Gam wrote nearly a year ago,
is still remembered. I am glad to say that in the populous
districts from which our Chinese come there is now one American
missionary—Rev. D.D. Jones—American, though born in Wales. Bro.
Jones as a layman at Cheyenne, Wy. Ter., had his heart stirred
for the Chinese in that place. Commencing a mission among them,
he afterwards went to Chicago to do like work there, and then to
Boston on a similar errand. At length he sought ordination, and
went forth, appointed by no society, to become a self-sustaining
missionary in China. It is a comfort to me to give to each of
our returning Chinese a letter to him, though probably in many
instances the probability of their seeing him is very small.

Is it asked: “What would we do by our mission, if we had it
established?” We would, first of all, give a cordial Christian
greeting at Hong Kong to every Christian Chinese returning from
California: we would bring them off ship into an atmosphere warm
with Christian love; we would bring them into meetings for prayer;
and would then let them go out to their old heathen homes, baptized
with the Holy Ghost. In the same spirit we would meet them as they
come back on their return to California, calling for reports of
their experiences, the temptations they have met, the testimony
they have borne, and the results which have followed their words.
Then, we would make our mission house at Hong Kong a rendezvous
and training school for such of our Chinese as may be fitted or
could become fitted for evangelistic work among their countrymen.
We ought to raise up many such through our work in California. The
wise word, “Africans for Africa,” has double wisdom when you read
it “Chinese for the conquest of China for Christ!” They have the
hard language already; they know from childhood the ways of the
people; they know from personal experience the darkness, the fear,
the soul-hunger and the woe of heathenism. It would not be wise
to send them forth with no American supervision; but evidently
here is a great force at present little used, that, properly
directed, might be wielded for the salvation of multitudes, and the
Christianization of the greatest empire of darkness the world now
knows; perhaps has ever known.

“But isn’t the ground already occupied? How many missionary
societies are already operating in and around Canton? Why add
one more?” I have no statistics at hand, and speaking thus from
general knowledge alone I must keep far within the truth; but I
am surely safe in saying that of competent missionaries, either
Chinese or foreign, there are not in the provinces of South China
one to 100,000 people; I know that I am safe in saying that, in the
districts from which our Chinese come there is not more than one to
350,000. I risk nothing, I think, in affirming that Central Africa
has to-day more missionaries in proportion to its population than
these districts of China to which I have referred. Certainly many
a helper might be added before any society now on the ground could
possibly find itself jostled by neighbors.

Besides, we should have our own special methods and our own
special field, growing naturally out of the relationship between
the mission here and the mission there; such that while we should
largely enter into the labors of brethren who have preceded us;
using the books that they have prepared; availing ourselves of
various conveniences that they have contrived, we should in turn
supplement and extend their work and multiply their joys. We should
be then, not as competitors, but as co-workers—one in spirit and
mutually helpful.

“But wouldn’t it cost too much?” Too much for what? Too much for
the souls that would be saved? More that these souls are worth? Not
one of our readers thinks this. But _this_ is the question: Would
it not cost too much for our treasury to bear, loaded as it already
is with such heavy responsibilities? I reply that it would not be
very costly. Two American missionaries, a little property in Hong
Kong, a rented chapel here and there in the larger villages and
the small stipends of the Chinese evangelists; this would be all.
It would not call for a larger sum unless, in the good providence
and by the dear Spirit of God, it came to be, by virtue of its
own success, a _large work_; and then contributions would flow
in for it, so that by means of it the treasury would be enriched
rather than depleted. I seldom prophesy; but I will venture to say
this, that when the American Missionary Association has once taken
hold of this work, and adopted as one of its mottoes: “China for
Christ,” it will take but a brief period—a very few years—to give
it such a place in all our hearts that we would sooner think of
cutting off our right hands than of relaxing our grasp on that land
as ours to be won for Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW A STRAIN OF MUSIC CALLED A WANDERER HOME.

(Toronto Evening News, October 10.)

They were two young girls, and both were inmates of a gilded palace
of sin in the city. One was hardened in her sin—the other had waded
only ankle deep into the black moat which circles the walls of
perdition. The other night they went to hear the Jubilee Singers,
and sat unnoticed in the gallery. The sweet, tender music, so
touching and true to nature, entered like a limpid stream into the
soul of the younger girl, and filled her whole heart. She leaned
forward and caught every word, with her eyes shining and her red
lips trembling. People turned round and wondered at the fair face,
and watched her soul shining through her great eyes, but they never
suspected who she was or whence she had come. There she sat, still
and immobile, with her small gloved hands tightly clenched, and
every nerve in her little body strung to an almost painful tension.
All was still in the pavilion. The very gas lights held themselves
motionless, as if afraid to make a sound. The great audience was
hushed. And then a note sweet and tender, but full and rich as
moonlight, swelled and rose like a sea, and then, like a shower of
pearls falling through the sounding waters, a woman’s voice sang:

    Bright sparkles in the church-yard,
      Give light unto the tomb;
    Bright summer—spring’s over—
      Sweet flowers in their bloom.

The girl in the gallery gave a great, shuddering sob. The singer
looked up and went on:

    My mother, once—
    My mother, twice—
    In the heaven she’ll rejoice,
    In the heaven once,
    In the heaven twice,
    In the heaven she’ll rejoice.

Again the girl in the gallery uttered a long, shuddering sob, and
hid her white stricken face in her trembling hands. But still the
music fluttered about her like the rustling of an angel’s wings:

    Mother, don’t you love your darling child?
    Oh, rock me in the cradle all the day.

She sat still and heard till the last cadence of the music had
wandered out into the moonlight, where the angels, who wished to
learn it off by heart, caught it up, and bore it in triumph into
Heaven.

“I must go from here,” said the girl hoarsely. “Let me go, don’t
follow me—I will be better soon.”

Her comrade reasoned with her, but she kept saying hoarsely. “Let
me go—I will be better soon.”

She hurried out and fled like a frightened deer. She was mad! Her
eyes were hot and dry—her brain was bursting, and all the while a
wondrous choir was singing in her ears:

    Bright sparkles in the church-yard,
      Give light unto the tomb;
    Bright summer—spring’s ever—
      Sweet flowers in their bloom.

She fled like a hunted thing till the lights of the city were far
behind and she was alone on a country road. She stopped to rest a
moment, but the chorus went onward through the sky and she could
not stop, for the words were beckoning to her:

    “Your mother, once,
    Your mother, twice,
    In the heaven she’ll rejoice.”

Tireless she followed on, on, on, the long, long night. The moon
went down and she got blind and staggered and groped upon her way,
but still she said hoarsely, “I must go on. I’ll be better soon.”

In the morning a farmer threw open his door and saw lying on the
steps the soiled figure of a girl. He picked her up and laid her on
his own bed, and his wife laid the wild, pleading face against her
warm bosom. A stream of music reached the ears of the dying girl.

    “Mother, don’t you love your darling child?
        Then rock me in the cradle all the day.”

She sank back with a weak, pleased smile. “Rock me, mother, that’s
it—oh! how nice—how nice it is. Oh, rock me, rock me—rock me,
mother. I am too tired to say my prayers to-night, mother. Let me
sleep, mother, and kiss me, but let me sleep—sleep—sleep!”

And she closed her eyes and slept, and the choir in Paradise, lest
they might wake her, sang softly:

    “Her mother once—
    Her mother twice—
    In the heaven she’ll rejoice.
    In the heaven once—
    In the heaven twice—
    In the heaven she’ll rejoice.”

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSIONARY VEGETABLES—A GOOD EXAMPLE.

_By C. H. Kellogg._

Last Spring, our Sabbath-school having become greatly interested in
the work of Atlanta University, one of the lady teachers proposed
to the superintendent that the boys in the school be asked to
raise as their own during the season, corn, potatoes, cabbages,
squashes, etc., these to be called “missionary vegetables;” and
the girls were asked to make fancy articles, and in the Fall a
fair held called a harvest festival. The boys and girls entered
heartily into the enterprise, and last week we held the fair, which
resulted in the raising of $80 for Atlanta University; this is to
go toward supporting some worthy student. The money will be placed
at the disposal of Miss Emma Beaman, one of the teachers, who was
instrumental in awakening an interest here by giving us a talk
in regard to her work at Atlanta. Is not this a good example for
_other_ schools to imitate next Summer?

  NORTH AMHERST, Mass., Oct. 17, 1881.




RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $78.72.

    Brewer. First Cong. Ch.                                  $16.72
    East Waterford. S. E. Hersey                               2.00
    Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Hallowell. Hon. H. R. Baker, _for Atlanta U._              5.00
    North Anson. “A Friend”                                    6.00
    Searsport. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       20.00
    Thomaston. “A Friend”                                      2.00
    Thomaston. Bbl. of C.
    Woolwich. John Percy, deceased, by I. Percy                2.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        20.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $310.73.

    Acworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Amherst. L. R. Melendy, $25; Ladies’
      Missionary Soc., $21, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            46.00
    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
    Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         10.71
    Colebrook. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                17.61
    Concord. Ladies of North Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      Bbl. and Box of C.
    Derry. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Washington,
      D.C._
    Exeter. MRS. WOODBRIDGE ODLIN, to const.
      herself L.M.                                            30.00
    Exeter. Hervey Kent, _for Atlanta U._                     25.00
    Goffstown. Mrs. Mary A. Stinson, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Hampstead. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             29.66
    Hancock. E. W.                                             1.00
    Hollis. Cong. Ch.                                          3.20
    Lyme. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown Steamer_           12.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      DEA. HORACE PETTEE, L.M.                                31.05
    Milford. Peter and Cynthia S. Burns                       30.00
    Nashua. J. G. Proctor                                      5.50
    Northhampton. E. Gove                                     10.00
    Pelham. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                          3.00
    Salmon Falls. O. S. Brown, _for Atlanta U._               25.00
    South Newmarket. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      2 Bls. of C., _for Wilmington, N.C._


  VERMONT, $416.96.

    Barnet. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                18.43
    Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         2.00
    Burlington. Winooski Ave. Cong. Sab. Sch., $48
      (incorrectly ack. in Dec. number from Ct.)
    East Dorset. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           21.02
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox                                5.00
    Grafton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.16
    Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.24
    Holland. Cong. Ch.                                         4.33
    Jamaica. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.57
    Jeffersonville. “A Friend,” to const. MISS
      HELEN LUCRETIA MOODY, L.M.                              30.00
    Peacham. Ashley Blodgett                                   5.00
    Saint Johnsbury. “A Young Man,” $5; ——, $1                 6.00
    Saint Johnsbury Centre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 7.00
    Springfield. Mrs. F. Parks                               100.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   11.15
    West Charleston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       23.25
    West Danville. J. M.                                       1.00
    West Derby. Rev. John Fraser                               5.00
    West Randolph. Susan S. Albin, $6; S. J. A.,
      $1; Miss Betsey Nichols, $2                              9.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      REV. JAMES F. BRODIE, DEA. MASON W. LADD,
      DEA. JUSTIN S. MONTAGUE, and CHARLES DANA,
      L. Ms.                                                 143.81


  MASSACHUSETTS, $6,569.96.

    Amherst. Faculty of Agl. College, _for
      repairs, Talladega C._                                  35.00
    Amherst. Zion Chapel Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Andover. South Ch., The Little Gleaners, $27;
      G. W. W. Dove, $100, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                            127.00
    Ashfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc. Bbl. of
      C. and $1 _for freight_                                  1.00
    Ashland. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of
      C.
    Auburn. Cong. Ch.                                         42.82
    Barre. Sab. Sch. of Ev. Cong. Ch.                         48.43
    Belchertown. By Rev. P. W. L., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.25
    Bernardston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            4.00
    Beverly. Dane St. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Washington, D.C._
    Boston. Mrs. Emily P. Eayrs                                5.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      _for Lady Missionaries_                                113.53
    Boston. M. W. Richardson, $25; H. Gardner,
      $25; Edward Atkinson, $20; A. R. Turner,
      Jr., $20, _for Atlanta U._                              90.00
    Boston. Mrs. Thomas Kingsbury, _for
      Charleston, S.C._                                        5.00
    Boylston. Ladies, 2 Bbls. of C.
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Trin. Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., to const. LILIAN FRANCES SIMMONS, L. M.           40.55
    Brockton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $50; Mrs.
      J. R. Perkins, $5                                       55.00
    Buckland. Dea. S. Trowbridge, $5; C. W.
      Thayer, $5; “A Friend,” $5; Dea. F. F., 51c.            15.51
    Cambridgeport. Ladies’ Mission Soc., $30, to
      const. MRS. EDWARD KENDALL, L. M.; G. H. R.,
      50c.                                                    30.50
    Chelsea. Central Ch. and Soc., $19.20; Third
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $11.09                              30.29
    Danvers. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const
      JOHN S. ARMITAGE, ROLLAND B. FRENCH, WALTER
      T. MARTIN and SOPHIA D. TAPLEY, L. Ms                  120.00
    Dedham. First Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   188.86
    Dedham. A. W. Gates, _for John Brown Steamer_             10.00
    Dorchester. Miss E. Pierce                                 5.00
    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $42.02;
      Payson Ch. Sab. Sch., $37.50                            79.52
    East Somerville. Ephraim Stone, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               50.00
    Everett. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                4.77
    Fall River. Wm. H. Jennings, $50; Other
      visitors from Fall River, $312, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                    362.00
    Fiskdale. Mrs. A. S.                                       0.50
    Fitchburgh. Calvinistic Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $176.96; Rollstone Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $166.44, to const. DUANE C. HARRINGTON,
      CHARLES H. DOTEN, EDWIN C. BABBITT, GORDON
      J. BUSHNELL and ANNIE E. FERSON, L. Ms                 343.38
    Fitchburgh. David Boutelle, $50; Miss L.
      Boutelle, $10, _for John Brown Steamer_                 60.00
    Framingham. Young Ladies Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      25.00
    Framingham. George Nourse                                  5.00
    Gardner. J. B. Drury to const. JOSEPH GRIMES,
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Globe Village. Sab. Sch. of Evan. Free Ch.                20.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                             100.00
    Groton. “Mother and Daughter,” _for Freedmen,
      Chinese and Indian M._                                  30.00
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              71.00
    Hinsdale. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                          31.94
    Holliston. “A Young Friend,” $5; “A Friend,”
      $1; other friends, $3, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              9.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.59
    Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          20.00
    Lancaster. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. and Box
      of C. and $2, _for Freight_                              2.00
    Lawrence. F. E. Clarke, _for Atlanta U._                  50.00
    Lawrence. Eliot Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        29.64
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Lowell. J. S. Ludlam, $50; A. G. Cumnock, $50,
      _for Atlanta U._                                       100.00
    Lynn. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            19.78
    Manchester. Mrs. Abby H. Trask                             2.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              30.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      171.00
    Middleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   28.00
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              5.00
    Milford. Geo. Draper, _for Atlanta U._                   100.00
    Monson. Mrs. N. M. Field, $10, _for John Brown
      Steamer_, and 50c. _for Mag._                           10.50
    Newburyport. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Washington, D.C._
    Newton Center. C. L. H.                                    0.51
    North Amherst. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        90.00
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch.                              67.51
    Northborough. Sab. Sch. of First Evan. Cong.
      Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_                           10.00
    North Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           3.00
    North Somerville. “A Friend”                               1.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          19.25
    Palmer. Mrs. E. G. Learned                                 5.00
    Pepperell. Citizens of Pepperell, by C.
      Crosby, Treas. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._               10.75
    Pittsfield. Mrs. H. M. Hurd, Package of
      Bedding, _for Tougaloo U._
    Plymouth. Mrs. C. W. P.                                    0.50
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch.                                       73.40
    Rockport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.94
    Salem. Henry D. Sullivan, _for Atlanta U._                50.00
    Salem. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for Washington,
      D.C._
    Scotland. “E. F. L.”                                       0.50
    South Abington. Miss C. H. Whitman, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Southampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           35.00
    South Boston. Phillips Cong. Ch. and Soc.                122.62
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       18.16
    South Framingham. Mrs. Geo. Cutler, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               4.00
    South Hadley. Mt. Holyoke Sem., “S.”                      15.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $43.75, and Ladies Missionary Soc., $17.25,
      to const. MRS. JULIA A. REED and MISS
      FLORENCE E. DEANE L. Ms.                                61.00
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               1.50
    Stoughton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              5.00
    Templeton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    Tewksbury. W. H. Lathrop, $2 and Bundle of C.              2.00
    Townsend. “A Friend”                                       7.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             57.93
    Westborough. E. N. Forse, _for Wilmington,
      N.C._                                                   10.00
    Westford. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc. Bbl. of
      C., _for Savannah, Ga._
    West Newbury. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      $10; “A Friend,” $5                                     15.00
    Winchendon. First Cong. Sab. Sch., $27.25; “A
      Friend,” $5                                             32.25
    Woburn. “By a Daughter,” in memory of a
      departed Mother and of a S. S. Teacher, to
      const. R. B. RICHARDSON, J. S. WHEELER and
      MRS. E. V. BRIDGHAM, L. Ms.                            100.00
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $140.36; Salem St. Ch., $110; Old South Ch.
      and Soc., $31.30; H. M. Wheeler, $20; Mrs.
      P. E. A., $1; Mrs. K. G. and Mrs. J. B. G.,
      50c. ea.; E. J. R., 50c.                               304.16
    Worcester. “A Friend,” in the Annual Meeting
      at Worcester ($500 _of which for Hampton N.
      & A. Inst._ and $500 _for Berea College_)            2,340.00
    Worcester. “A Father,” in the Annual Meeting
      at Worcester, to const. three daughters Life
      Members                                                 90.00
    —— “A Friend”                                              2.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           6,502.34

    LEGACY.

    Marion. A. J. Hadley, Trustee under the Will
      of John Pitcher                                         67.62
                                                           ————————
                                                           6,569.96


  RHODE ISLAND, $906.63.

    Kingston. Cong. Ch.                                       21.63
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch., $200;
      Pilgrim Cong. Ch. and Soc., $110                       310.00
    Providence. F. W. Carpenter, _for Bell for
      Florence, Ala._                                         50.00
    Woonsocket. Charles Nourse, _for Atlanta U._              25.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             406.63

    LEGACY.

    Coventry. Estate of Mary Lincoln, by Joel M.
      Spencer, Ex.                                           500.00
                                                             ——————
                                                             906.63


  CONNECTICUT, $1,656.23.

    Bristol. “A Friend,” $15; Mrs. P. L. Alcott, $5           20.00
    Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Dayville. Cong. Soc., _for John Brown Steamer_            10.00
    East Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      37.50
    East Woodstock. Bbl. of C. and $2 _for Freight_            2.00
    Elliott. Wm. Osgood                                        2.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     33.10
    Guilford. Daniel Hand                                    100.00
    Hebron. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch.                            104.84
    Hartford. Roland Mather, _for Fisk U._                    50.00
    Kensington. Miss E. Cowles                                 2.00
    Killingly. E. F. Jencks, $5; L. G. Jencks, $5             10.00
    Meriden. Mrs. S. F. S. B.                                  1.00
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            23.52
    Middletown. First Ch., $37.64; “A. B. C.,” $5             42.64
    Milford. Plymouth Ch., $85; First Cong. Ch.,
      $25                                                    110.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Louisa Nichols, $400; First
      Ch. of Christ (ad’l), $30.35; South Cong.
      Ch., $30                                               460.35
    New Hartford. Samuel Couch                                10.00
    New Haven. Mrs. Eunice M. Crane, $10; “A
      Friend,” $6.33; “L. M.” $5                              21.33
    New Haven. F. H. Hart for _Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    New Haven. S. W. Williams, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                20.00
    New London. Mrs. D. H. and Mrs. H. S. C.                   1.00
    Newtown. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    North Haven. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        30.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                      22.00
    Norwalk. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      MRS. JOHN F BENNETT, ALEXANDER JOHNSTON and
      E. C. BISSELL L. Ms.                                   100.00
    Norwich. Broadway Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson C.
      & N. Inst._                                             50.00
    Old Lyme. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Plantsville. L. A.                                         1.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       14.50
    Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          22.00
    Salisbury. “G. B. B.,” _for John Brown Steamer_           10.00
    Stafford Springs. Mrs. S. M. D.                            1.00
    Stanwich. Charles Brush                                  100.00
    Somers. C. B. Pease, _for John Brown Steamer_             10.00
    Somersville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              10.00
    Somersville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 8.00
    Southport. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    South Windsor. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                10.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      28.37
    Waterbury. “A Friend,” _for John Brown Steamer_           10.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Westport. Cong. Ch.                                       27.64
    Whitneyville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                30.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                     13.44
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.00


  NEW YORK, $1,597.20.

    Albany. Sab. Sch. Coll., by W. S. Brower, _for
      Talladega C._                                           16.76
    Angelica. Mrs. F. A. R.                                    0.50
    Arcade. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 3.00
    Brooklyn. Plymouth Church, $264.16; Tompkins
      Ave. Cong. Ch., $125; Miss E. O., 50c.                 389.66
    Brooklyn. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Washington, D.C._
    Brooklyn, E. D. New Eng. Cong. Ch.                        25.47
    Buffalo. “R. W. B.,” First Cong. Ch., to
      const. REV. GEO. B. STEVENS, LEWIS H. BROWN,
      RUSSELL K. STRICKLAND, L. Ms.                          200.00
    Camden. R. H., _for John Brown Steamer_                    1.00
    Clifton Springs. Mrs. Andrew Peirce                       25.00
    Cincinnatus. Coll. Union Thanksgiving Service             15.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. N. U.                                         1.00
    Crown Point. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                10.35
    Crown Point. Miss A. McDonald                              5.00
    Deansville. “L.”                                           5.00
    Durham. Mrs. Hannah Ingraham                               3.00
    Fillmore. L. L. Nourse                                     5.00
    Gaines. M. & B. H.                                         1.00
    Homer. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     18.39
    Livonia. Mrs. Calvert, _for Student Aid,
      Storr’s Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                              5.00
    Ludlowville. Sydney S. Todd                                5.00
    Malone. First Cong. Ch.                                   53.72
    Marcellus. First Cong. Ch.                                 3.32
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         31.79
    New York. A. R. Whitney, $50; Chas. S. Smith,
      $50; John H. Inman, $50; W. H. Caswell, $25,
      _for Atlanta U._                                       175.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $31.12, to const.
      MARY S. THORP, L. M.; Mrs. R. A. Barber, $10            41.12
    Norwich. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                         10.42
    Parma. Mrs. Ezekiel Clark                                  5.00
    Patchogue. Cong. Ch.                                      12.00
    Penn Yan. Chas. C. Sheppard ($10 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                   160.00
    Perry Center. Ichabod Miner                                5.00
    Ransomville. John Powley                                   5.00
    Sherburne. First Cong. Ch.                                76.70
    Utica. Bethesda Welsh Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    West Chazy. Rev. L. Prindle                                2.00
    West Farms. Daniel Mapes, _for Tillotson C. &
      N. Inst._                                              100.00
    Westfield. Mrs. L. S.                                      1.00
    —— “A Friend”                                              5.00
    —— “A. H. C.”                                              5.00
                                                           ————————
                                                           1,447.20

    LEGACY.

    Utica. Estate of Job Parker, by T. & M. M.
      Parker, Executors                                      150.00
                                                            ———————
                                                           1,597.20


  NEW JERSEY, $241.13.

    East Orange. Trinity Cong. Ch.                           155.38
    Newfield. Rev. Chas. Willey                               10.00
    Paterson. Tabernacle Sab. Sch. Concert Coll.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                20.75
    Stanley. Anna M. Samson                                    5.00
    Trenton. Barker Gummere, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                50.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $137.00.

    Carlisle Barracks. C. M. S.                                1.00
    East Smithfield. Rev. C. H. Phelps                         5.00
    Erie. “W.,” _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                 50.00
    North East. C. A. T.                                       1.00
    Philadelphia. R. Garsed, _for Atlanta U._                 50.00
    West Alexander. Thomas McCleery, to const.
      MRS. JENNIE D. SHELLER, L. M.                           30.00


  OHIO, $373.78.

    Bellefontaine. Mrs. John Lindsay, _for
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            5.00
    Bellevue. Elvira Boise, $25; S. W. Boise, $20             45.00
    Circleville. Harness Renick, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Claridon. L. T. Wilmot, bal. to const. MRS.
      ALICE N. KELLOGG, L. M.                                 10.00
    Cleveland. Plymouth Cong. Church, $43.80; Mrs.
      H. M. P., $1                                            44.80
    Edinburg. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Hartford. Mrs. E. B.                                       1.00
    Madison. Mrs. M. P. St. John, _for Freight_                2.00
    Marysville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Mount Vernon. First Cong. Ch.                            127.98
    Oberlin. J. W. Merrill                                    25.00
    Oberlin. Rev. Geo. Thompson and family, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Painesville. Ladies of First Ch., box of
      school supplies, _for Athens, Ala._
    Ruggles. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Strongsville. Free Cong. Ch.                              10.00
    Walnut Hill (Cincinnati). E. W. Hyde                      15.00
    West Farmington. Mrs. M. A. Sprague                        5.00
    Weymouth. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             8.00


  ILLINOIS, $803.30.

    Chicago. Union Park Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              66.90
    Chicago. Rev. E. N. Andrews, $15; Cash, 28
      cents                                                   15.28
    Danvers. Cong. Ch.                                        11.30
    Galesburg. “A Friend”                                     25.00
    Jacksonville. J. M. L.                                     1.00
    Lee Center. MRS. MARTIN WRIGHT, $30, to const.
      herself L. M.; Cong. Ch., $8.67, and Sab.
      Sch., $3.12                                             41.79
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch.                                  8.80
    Lombard. First Ch.                                         9.75
    Mendon. Mrs. J. Fowler, _for John Brown
      Steamer_, and to const. REV. ROBERT KERR and
      WILLIAM HAYES, L. Ms.                                  100.00
    Metamora. Cong. Ch., _for African M._                     26.05
    Morrison. Cong. Ch. ($30 of which to const.
      ROBERT WALLACE, L. M.)                                  50.00
    Paxton. “A Friend”                                        25.25
    Peru. First Cong. Ch.                                     12.90
    Princeton. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary in
      Ga._                                                    24.00
    Rockford. First Cong. Ch., $52.82; T. D.
      Robertson, $20                                          72.82
    Roscoe. Mrs. A. A. Tuttle ($2 _of which for
      Indian M._)                                              5.00
    Savoy. Mrs. H. B.                                          0.51
    Waverly. Cong. Ch., $24.55, and Sab. Sch.,
      $12.10                                                  36.65
    Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                       16.65
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       3.65
                                                             ——————
                                                             553.30

    LEGACY.

    Galesburg. Estate of Mrs. W. C. Willard, by
      Prof. T. R. Willard, Ex.                               250.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $803.30


  INDIANA, $10.25.

    Evansville. Rev. J. Q. Adams and wife, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               10.00
    Indianapolis. R. R. W.                                     0.25


  MICHIGAN, $1,010.22.

    Adrian. A. J. Hood                                        10.00
    Ann Arbor. James D. Duncan                                10.00
    Battle Creek. Cong. and Presb. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              12.00
    Benton Harbor. O. E.                                       1.00
    Benzonia. Amasa Waters                                    10.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch.                                 147.30
    Galesburgh. “Friends,” _for furnishing room,
      Michigan Floor, Stone Hall, Talladega C._               25.00
    Grass Lake. First Cong. Ch.                               15.00
    Greenville. Cong. Ch.                                     50.88
    Greenville. Hon. E. C. Ellsworth, _for
      furnishing room, Michigan floor, Stone Hall,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch., $113.38; “*” $5              118.38
    Pontiac. Cong. Ch., $15.91, and Sab. Sch., $3             18.91
    Romeo. Miss Mary A. Dickinson, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                25.00
    South Haven. Clark Pierce                                 10.00
    Sparta Center. Mrs. C. I. Martindale                       2.00
    Union City. “A Friend” ($30 of which for life
      membership)                                            500.00
    Warren. “The Lord’s Money”                                 5.00
    West Adrian. Sab. Sch. Missionary Soc.                     5.25
    Ypsilanti. Rev. G. H. G.                                   0.60
    Northport. First Cong. Ch.                                 8.90


  WISCONSIN, $104.59.

    Arena. Woman’s Miss. Soc. _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             1.30
    Beloit. Mrs. S. M. Clary. Box C. and $2.75
      _for freight, for Macon, Ga._                            2.75
    Blake’s Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                 3.00
    Elkhorn. Cong. Ch.                                        10.84
    Fort Howard. Rev. D. C. Curtiss, _for Macon,
      Ga._                                                     2.00
    Fox Lake. D. W. Stuart                                    11.70
    Geneva. G. Montague                                       10.00
    Mazo Manie. Cong. Ch.                                      2.24
    Rosendale. Woman’s Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             3.00
    Sheboygan. “Friends,” Box of C. and $2.95 for
      freight, _for Macon Ga._                                 2.95
    Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                       7.31
    Waukesha. Young Ladies’ Miss Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            16.25
    West De Pere. Cong. Ch.                                   25.25
    West Salem. Cong. Ch.                                      6.00


  IOWA, $272.44.

    Alden. Mrs. E. Rogers                                      2.00
    Belle Plaine. “A Few Friends,” _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            4.70
    Bradford. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  6.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 41.07
    Council Bluffs. Mrs. Mary B. Swan, _for
      furnishing room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._              35.00
    Creston. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Pilgrim Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                     15.00
    Decorah. G. C. Winship, $5, _for John Brown
      Steamer_, and $5 _for African M._                       10.00
    Des Moines. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for furnishing
      room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._                         35.00
    Green Mountain. “Mrs. H. L. C.,” _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           25.00
    Green Mountain. “R. & H. M. S.”                           10.00
    Magnolia. Rev. L. P. S.                                    1.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” $30; Mrs. R. D.
      Stephens, $25, _for Student Aid, Straight U._           55.00
    Montour. Cong. Ch. ($1 _of which for Talladega
      C._)                                                    22.67
    Montour. Ladies’ Miss. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            7.00
    Montezuma. C. W. Herron, _for Mendi M._                    3.00


  MINNESOTA, $31.18.

    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 27.18
    Monticello. Rev. H. A. H.                                  0.50
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                          3.50


  KANSAS, $1.00.

    Osawatomie. C. H. C.                                       1.00


  NEBRASKA. $23.00.

    Blair. Cong. Ch.                                           3.00
    Humboldt. Jared B. White ($10 _of which for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                    20.00


  MISSOURI. $10.00.

    Kirksville. J. S. Blackman                                10.00


  COLORADO, $15.00.

    Colorado Springs. Young Peoples’ Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              15.00


  CALIFORNIA. $50.00.

    San Francisco. Rev. J. Rowell, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                50.00


  MARYLAND, $147.23.

    Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                               147.23


  TENNESSEE. $243.80.

    Chattanooga. Ida K. Ferrand, _for Atlanta U._              2.50
    Memphis. Le Moyne School, Tuition                        241.30


  NORTH CAROLINA, $201.50.

    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Wilmington. Normal School. Tuition                       196.50


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $276.58.

    Florence. M. E. Ch., by Rev. F. L. Baxter,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 2.08
    Charleston. Avery Institute, Tuition                     274.50


  GEORGIA, $906.41.

    Atlanta. S. M. Inman, $50; Richard Peters,
      $25, _for Atlanta U._                                   75.00
    Atlanta. Atlanta University, Tuition                     105.05
    Atlanta. Storr’s Sch., Tuition. $435; Rent, $15          450.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           80.11
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Savannah. Beach Institute, Tuition, $151.25;
      Rent, $10                                              161.25
    Savannah. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             30.00


  ALABAMA, $360.62.

    Anniston. Tuition                                          7.50
    Athens. Rent                                               2.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          2.37
    Mobile. Emerson Institute, Tuition                       154.90
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund, $175; Ladies’ Miss.
      Soc., $5                                               180.00
    Selma. First Cong. Ch., $8.15; E. C. S., $1                9.15


  MISSISSIPPI, $65.20.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University, Tuition                    65.20


  LOUISIANA, $120.50.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition                120.50


  TEXAS, $177.25.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst. Tuition                  172.25
    Paris. Rev. J. W. Roberts, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00


  CANADA, $10.00.

    Unionville. Rev. Edward Ebbs                              10.00
                                                          —————————
      Total                                              $17,128.71
    Total from Oct. 1 to Nov. 30                          33,880.78
                                                         ==========

                                    H. W. HUBBARD, _Treas._,
                                                56 Reade St., N.Y.




Constitution of the American Missionary Association.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided, that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. VI. The officers of the Association shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, Corresponding Secretaries (who shall also keep the
records of the Association), Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive
Committee of not less than twelve members.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counseling, sustaining and
dismissing missionaries and agents; the selection of missionary
fields; and, in general, the transaction of all such business
as usually appertains to the executive committees of missionary
and other benevolent societies; the Committee to exercise no
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the missionaries; and its doings
to be subject always to the revision of the annual meeting, which
shall, by a reference mutually chosen, always entertain the
complaints of any aggrieved agent or missionary; and the decision
of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. VIII. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

       *       *       *       *       *

ART. IX. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit; repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 18; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 18;
Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.—In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as below:

  NEW YORK      H. W. Hubbard, Esq., Treasurer, 56 Reade street.
  BOSTON        Rev. C. L. Woodworth, Dis’t Sec., Room 21
                  Congregational House.
  CHICAGO       Rev. Jas. Powell, Dis’t Sec., 113 West Washington
                  street.


MAGAZINE.

This Magazine will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the
Missionaries of the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen
who take up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Those who wish to remember the AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION in
their last Will and Testament are earnestly requested to use the
following


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.”

The Will should be attested by three witnesses (in some States
three are required, in other States only two), who should write
against their names their places of residence (if in cities,
their street and number). The following form of attestation will
answer for every State in the Union: “Signed, sealed, published
and declared by the said (A. B.) as his last Will and Testament,
in presence of us, who, at the request of the said A. B., and in
his presence, and in the presence of each other, have hereunto
subscribed our names as witnesses.” In some States it is required
that the Will should be made at least two months before the death
of the testator.

       *       *       *       *       *




                   NOW IS THE TIME TO SUBSCRIBE.

                      Harper’s Young People.

                      AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.

The name of HARPER’S YOUNG PEOPLE is now =A HOUSEHOLD WORD= in
many thousands of homes throughout the English-speaking world. The
efforts of the publishers have been directed to sustaining the
pure, elevating and entertaining character of the paper, which
has won for it the reputation of being “=The Best Periodical for
Juvenile Readers=.” The rapid—perhaps unprecedented—growth in
its circulation within the past twelve months proves that its
conductors have correctly appreciated the requirements of the class
of readers for whom it is designed. Public and private teachers in
every part of the country have hailed it as =A POWERFUL ALLY OF
THE SCHOOLS= in the great work of Education, and in many instances
have borne practical testimony to its merits by putting it into
the hands of their pupils to be used as a regular text book—a
distinction rarely enjoyed by a periodical publication. Its value
as a means of =Developing the Intelligence of the Young= has
recently received the highest possible recognition, the managers
of the _Chautauqua Young People’s Reading Union_ having included
HARPER’S YOUNG PEOPLE among the works which the members of the
Union are required to read.

Encouraged by their magnificent success, the conductors of HARPER’S
YOUNG PEOPLE will endeavor to make the third volume superior, if
possible, to either of the preceding volumes. The publishers have
already secured serial stories by favorite authors—among others a
new tale by JAMES OTIS, entitled “Mr. Stubbs’ Brother,” through
which readers will renew their acquaintance with persons to whom
they were introduced by “Toby Tyler.” They have also arranged
for several series of instructive articles upon =Scientific,
Historical and Artistic Subjects=, in which =Pens Trained to Write
for the Young= will present such topics with the aid of effective
illustrations, in the most charming and profitable manner.
Exquisite =WOODCUTS OF CELEBRATED PAINTINGS=, on subjects which
appeal to the imagination of the young, will be given in the paper,
and will serve to create and cultivate in its readers a =Correct
Taste for Pictorial Art=. Special attention will be devoted to
descriptive sketches, with


                             PORTRAITS

of persons connected with current affairs interesting to young
people—a feature which added greatly to the attractiveness of
several numbers of the second volume. The love of amusement,
which is inseparable from youth, will be further ministered to by
explanations of old-established


                         SPORTS AND GAMES,

and by suggestions of new methods of enjoyment in the field and at
the fireside.

  BRIGHT SHORT STORIES,
      SPARKLING POEMS AND RHYMES,
          FASCINATING PUZZLES, and
              BEAUTIFUL ILLUSTRATIONS,

drawn and engraved by the best artists, will, as heretofore, appear
weekly in its pages.

“=THE POST-OFFICE BOX=,” into which little hands have dropped
their missives in such numbers that it has been found necessary to
enlarge it, and through which subscribers have obtained charming
glimpses of the =Domestic Life and Surroundings of Children= in
every clime, will continue to be at the service of those of its
readers who, for the purpose of eliciting or imparting information,
or of effecting exchanges of articles of youthful interest, may
desire to communicate with the =BOYS AND GIRLS IN EVERY QUARTER OF
THE GLOBE=, whose eyes scan eagerly from week to week the columns
of that favorite, sympathetic and humanizing department.

The bound volume for 1881 has been gotten up in the most attractive
manner—the cover being embellished with a tasteful and appropriate
design. It will be one of the most handsome, entertaining and
useful book for boys and girls published for the approaching
holidays, and will receive =A CORDIAL WELCOME IN EVERY HOME= into
which it may find its way.


                              TERMS.

FOUR CENTS a Number. SINGLE SUBSCRIPTIONS, one year, $1.50 each:
FIVE SUBSCRIPTIONS, one year, $7.00—payable in advance: postage
free. Subscriptions will be commenced with the Number current on
receipt of order, unless subscribers otherwise direct.

The Third Volume will begin with No. 105, to be issued November 1,
1881. Subscriptions should be sent in before that date if possible.

Bound Volume for 1881, containing Nos. 53–104, inclusive, $3.00,
postage prepaid. Cover, cents—postage 13 cents additional.

Remittances should be made by _Post-office Money Order or Draft_,
to avoid risk of loss.

  Address            HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE, NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           N.Y. WITNESS.


☞ There will be many important events occurring during the coming
year that you will not know about unless you take the WITNESS.
Do you know, for instance, that a sober and Christian young man,
a private soldier of the U. S. Army, has been thrown into prison
and subjected to great privations and indignities by his superior
officers—treated worse than the miserable wretch Guiteau—for
writing a letter to the WITNESS—a letter which is of great
importance to all young men and all parents? There are many things
published in the WITNESS that other papers dare not print, for fear
of offending some rich and powerful corporation, and so losing
their patronage.

                 The price of the WITNESS is $1.50
                  a year, post-paid; club price,
                      five for $6.00. Sample
                          copy sent free.

Ministers, Missionaries, Evangelists of all Denominations, and
Teachers can have the WITNESS for One Dollar a year.


                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,

                     New York Witness Office,

                17 to 21 VANDEWATER St., NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration: SMITH AMERICAN ORGANS ARE THE BEST.]


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             GREGORY’S

                          SEED CATALOGUE

         My Annual Catalogue of Vegetable and Flower Seed

                             FOR 1882,

Rich in engravings from photographs of the originals, will be sent


                      FREE TO ALL WHO APPLY.

My old customers need not write for it. I offer one of the largest
collections of Vegetable seed ever sent out by any Seed House in
America, a large portion of which were grown on my five seed farms.
_Full Directions for Cultivation on each Package._ All seed

           WARRANTED TO BE BOTH FRESH AND TRUE TO NAME:
              so far that, should it prove otherwise
                  I will refill the order gratis.

The original introducer of the Hubbard Squash, Phinney’s Melon,
Marblehead Cabbages, Mexican Corn, and scores of other vegetables.
I invite the patronage of =all who are anxious to have their
seed directly from the grower, fresh, true, and of the very best
strains=.


                    NEW VEGETABLES A SPECIALTY.

                       JAMES J. H. GREGORY,
                                    Marblehead, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  VICE-PRESIDENTS.

    Hon. E. S. TOBEY, Mass.
    Hon. F. D. PARISH, Ohio.
    Hon. E. D. HOLTON, Wis.
    Hon. WILLIAM CLAFLIN, Mass.
    Rev. STEPHEN THURSTON, D.D., Me.
    Rev. SAMUEL HARRIS, D.D., Ct.
    WM. C. CHAPIN, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. W. T. EUSTIS, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. A. C. BARSTOW, R.I.
    Rev. THATCHER THAYER, D.D., R.I.
    Rev. RAY PALMER, D.D., N.J.
    Rev. EDWARD BEECHER, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. J. M. STURTEVANT, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. W. W. PATTON, D.D., D.C.
    Hon. SEYMOUR STRAIGHT, La.
    Rev. CYRUS W. WALLACE, D.D., N.H.
    Rev. EDWARD HAWES, D.D., Ct.
    DOUGLAS PUTNAM, Esq., Ohio.
    Hon. THADDEUS FAIRBANKS, Vt.
    Rev. M. M. G. DANA, D.D., Minn.
    Rev. H. W. BEECHER, N.Y.
    Gen. O. O. HOWARD, N.Y.
    Rev. G. F. MAGOUN, D.D., Iowa.
    Col. C. G. HAMMOND, Ill.
    EDWARD SPALDING, M.D., N.H.
    Rev. WM. M. BARBOUR, D.D., Ct.
    Rev. W. L. GAGE, D.D., Ct.
    A. S. HATCH, Esq., N.Y.
    Rev. J. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D., Ohio.
    Rev. H. A. STIMSON, Mass.
    Rev. A. L. STONE, D.D., California.
    Rev. G. H. ATKINSON, D.D., Oregon.
    Rev. J. E. RANKIN, D.D., D.C.
    Rev. A. L. CHAPIN, D.D., Wis.
    S. D. SMITH, Esq., Mass.
    Dea. JOHN C. WHITIN, Mass.
    Hon. J. B. GRINNELL, Iowa.
    Rev. HORACE WINSLOW, Ct.
    Sir PETER COATS, Scotland.
    Rev. HENRY ALLON, D.D., London, Eng.
    WM. E. WHITING, Esq., N.Y.
    E. A. GRAVES, Esq., N.J.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    DANIEL HAND, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., N.Y.
    FREDERICK BILLINGS, Esq., Vt.
    JOSEPH CARPENTER, Esq., R.I.
    Rev. E. P. GOODWIN, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. C. L. GOODELL, D.D., Mo.
    J. W. SCOVILLE, Esq., Ill.
    E. W. BLATCHFORD, Esq., Ill.
    C. D. TALCOTT, Esq., Ct.
    Rev. JOHN K. MCLEAN, D.D., Cal.
    Rev. RICHARD CORDLEY, D.D., Kansas.
    Rev. W. H. WILLCOX, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. G. B. WILLCOX, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. GEO. M. BOYNTON, Mass.
    Rev. E. B. WEBB, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. C. I. WALKER, Mich.
    Rev. A. H. ROSS, Mich.
    Hon. JOSHUA L. CHAMBERLAIN, Me.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Hon. NELSON DINGLEY, JR., Me.
    Rev. L. T. CHAMBERLAIN, D.D., Ct.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


  AUDITORS.

    M. F. READING.
    WM. A. NASH.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

    LYMAN ABBOTT.
    ALONZO S. BALL.
    A. S. BARNES.
    C. T. CHRISTENSEN.
    FRANKLIN FAIRBANKS.
    CLINTON B. FISK.
    ADDISON P. FOSTER.
    S. B. HALLIDAY.
    A. J. HAMILTON.
    SAMUEL HOLMES.
    CHARLES A. HULL.
    CHARLES L. MEAD.
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
    WM. H. WARD.
    JOHN H. WASHBURN.
    A. L. WILLISTON.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


The improvement in missionary literature is well known.
Explorations, heroic endeavors of missionaries and their great
achievements have given glowing themes alike to author and artist.
Communications from the field, encouraging incidents and pictorial
illustrations have combined to afford a wealth of interest to young
and old.

We are keenly alive to the necessity of keeping the AMERICAN
MISSIONARY abreast with the very best publications of other
missionary societies, at home and abroad. We shall seek to make its
appearance attractive by pictures and illustrations. The Children’s
Page will contain original stories and suggestive incidents. The
General Notes on Africa, the Chinese and Indians will be continued.
The fullest information will be given about our work in the South,
now recognized as so important to the welfare of the nation, and
about our labors in Africa—that land whose fate so stirs the heart
of Christendom. The journal of our exploring party of missionaries
up the Nile will be given monthly. The editorial department will
reflect the missionary zeal and work over the whole field, and add
its influence to aid every good agency for the world’s redemption.

No Christian family can afford to be without missionary
intelligence, and no missionary society can afford to be without
readers of its publications; it had better give them to the readers
without pay than to have no readers. Missionary zeal will die in
the churches without missionary intelligence.

But it would be far better for both the societies and the readers
if missionary news were paid for. This would give the magazine
attentive perusal and the society relief from the reproach of a
large expense for publication. Missionary publications should be
put on a _paying basis_. Aside from a free list to life members,
ministers, etc., the cost of publication should be made up by
paying subscribers and advertisements.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on this basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us the moderate
subscription price (50 cents).

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
56 Reade st., New York, N.Y.


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY STREET, NEW YORK.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.

Changed “Tongaloo” to “Tougaloo” on page 15. (By Mrs. M. E. H.
Pope, Tougaloo)

Missing “C” added in the Salem entry on page 26. (for Washington,
D.C.)

Missing “u” added in the Salisbury entry on page 26. (Salisbury.
“G. B. B.,”)

Missing “s” added in the Westport entry on page 27. (Westport.
Cong. Ch.)

Missing “s” added in the Crown Point entry on page 27. (Miss A.
McDonald)

“CAMES” changed to “GAMES” on page 31. (SPORTS AND GAMES)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 1, JANUARY, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.