Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

VOL. XXXVI.       APRIL, 1882.       NO. 4

THE

American Missionary

“THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
matter.]

       *       *       *       *       *




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


  EDITORIAL.
                                                           PAGE.
    A FINANCIAL APPEAL                                        97
    PARAGRAPHS                                                98
    AN OLD-TIME MIDNIGHT SLAVE FUNERAL (cut)                  99
    PARAGRAPHS                                               100
    DEATH OF EDGAR KETCHUM                                   100
    GOVERNMENTAL AID TO COMMON SCHOOLS, BY REV. C. C.
      PAINTER                                                101
    BENEFACTIONS‒GENERAL NOTES‒Africa, Indians,
      Chinese                                                103


  FIELD WORK.

    WORTHY OF RECORD                                         104
    CHURCH, HOME AND SCHOOL, WILMINGTON, N.C. (cut)          105
    A WEEK AMONG THE WORKERS‒AT ATLANTA, GA.;
      TALLADEGA, ALA.; FISK UNIVERSITY; LE MOYNE
      INSTITUTE, NEW ORLEANS, LA.; SAN FRANCISCO;
      HAMPTON, VA.                                           106
    REVIVAL IN CENTRAL CHURCH AND STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY,
      NEW ORLEANS                                            113
    HOW THE FREEDMEN CHILDREN DO IT                          114
    CHURCH AT LITTLE ROCK, ARK.; CHURCH AT LULING, TEX.      115


  AFRICA.

    REV. MR. LADD AT KHARTOUM                                115


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    CHING LING’S PASSPORT, BY MRS. HARRIET A. CHEEVER        117


  RECEIPTS                                                   119

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
be addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ‒‒ dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ‒‒ days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                               THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXVI.      APRIL, 1882.         No. 4.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


A FINANCIAL APPEAL.

In the last number of the MISSIONARY we stated that our receipts
for the four months of the fiscal year to January 31 had been
$83,893.39, or an advance over last year of only 19 per cent.,
instead of $100,000, or the advance of 23 per cent. asked for at
the Annual Meeting.

Special calls for finishing new buildings, useless unless finished,
necessary repairs on old buildings, etc., compelled us to make
appropriations to the amount of the 23 per cent., but the falling
off in anticipated receipts left a deficit of $16,107.

We had hoped that February would show an improvement, but, with
regret, we are compelled to say that the receipts for that month
are about $1,000 less than for February, 1881. We needed $125,000
to meet the total demands due February 28, and our receipts at that
date are $100,045.97, a deficiency of about $25,000.

To us there is the choice between a _debt_ and _retrenchment_;
with our patrons, whose servants we are, is the opportunity of
relief. We dare not make a debt; we are held to this by our pledge
to our friends, and by our past bitter experience. Retrenchment
is a distressing alternative. It will check the progress along
the whole line of our work. The increased receipts of the past
two years have given to the colored people a new impulse of hope
and activity. New buildings have been erected, schools have been
enlarged, new churches formed, and the spirit of self-help has been
awakened in an unwonted degree in the schools and the churches.
Retrenchment will check all this. Years may be required to regain
it. Importunate calls for the continuance of the extended work
crowd upon us, and denial must create discouragement, and this will
be intensified by the disasters of the late floods. To a struggling
people, such a drawback is an incalculable evil. In their behalf we
appeal‒yes, earnestly and importunately we appeal‒to our friends to
come forward to their aid promptly and generously.

       *       *       *       *       *


We give place in this number of the MISSIONARY to communications
relating to a week’s work among the workers, which we believe will
be of special interest to our readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. A. E. Winship, of Somerville, Mass., who was the author of
the first concert exercise in behalf of the American Missionary
Association, has just prepared a second exercise on the same
subject. The exercise can be had gratuitously, with Jubilee Songs
to accompany it, on application to Rev. C. L. Woodworth, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass. We can assure Sunday-schools
and churches that the exercise is one of the best, and that its use
can hardly fail to awaken new interest in the concert.

       *       *       *       *       *

On another page will be found a very interesting letter from
Mr. Ladd, giving an account of a rebellion among the tribes in
the vicinity of Khartoum that threatens to hinder his progress.
A letter of more recent date says that he and Dr. Snow have
relinquished the hope of reaching Fatiko at present, but that they
have made arrangements with the Government for passage on one of
its smaller steamers that will enable them to visit the region of
the Sobat. Our explorers manifest both caution and courage, and we
commend them to the prayers of God’s people.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Northern man now resident in Florida, and always, both North and
South, a warm friend of our work among the colored people, after
reading in our notice of the Nashville Conference, the appeal for
another Theological Seminary further South, gives the whole matter
not only a most cordial, but practical, indorsement by pledging
himself “to be one of ten or twenty or fifty to contribute $1,000
each to make a beginning in the good work.” With thanks to our
friend for his liberality, we send forth the question, Where are
the nine, the nineteen or the forty-nine?

       *       *       *       *       *

“In those portions of the South where the plantations were largest,
and the slaves the most numerous, they were very fond of burying
their dead at night, and as near midnight as possible. In case
of a funeral, they assembled from adjoining plantations in large
numbers, provided with pine knots and pieces of fat pine called
lightwood, which, when ignited, made a blaze compared with which
our city torchlight processions are most sorry affairs. When
all was in readiness, they lighted these torches, formed into a
procession, and marched slowly to the distant grave, singing the
most solemn music. Sometimes they sang hymns they had committed to
memory, but oftener those more tender and plaintive, composed by
themselves, that have since been introduced to the people of the
North and of Europe as plantation melodies. The appearance of such
a procession, winding through the fields and woods, as revealed by
their flaming torches, marching slowly to the sound of their wild
music, was weird and imposing to the highest degree.”‒From “In the
Brush,” by Rev. H. W. Pierson, D.D.

[Illustration: An old-time midnight slave funeral.]

Two or three second-hand communion sets will be very gratefully
received by as many of our needy young churches in the South.
Churches at the North changing from their present to better will
please take note.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were twins in this country. One was slavery and the other
polygamy. One is dead and the other is threatened as never before.
This Association is proud of the part it took in the extinction of
the former. It now extends its heartiest sympathies to those who
are determined upon the destruction of the latter.

       *       *       *       *       *

A postal from one of our schools at the South says: “We received
recently a good-sized box of books and only a few of any value.
Latin books of ancient date, German, French, Spanish, and Patent
Office Reports are of no use to us. Please ask our friends not
to send such, as they are only a bill of expense.” We have had,
heretofore, to make statements of this sort in the MISSIONARY.
We are always thankful for the liberality of our friends, but we
invoke their discretion in giving.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Congregational Year Book, just issued by our British brethren,
is a document well worthy of study on this side of the water.
Besides the usual statistics of ministers and churches, it makes
mention of 19 colleges, 31 new schools, 37 missionary and other
societies, 41 Congregational institutions, 48 periodicals,
published by Congregationalists. It also gives the statistics of 16
non-conformist institutions, one of which is a Ministers’ Seaside
Home‒a species of benevolence that would be invaluable to our
missionary laborers at the South. The record of so much enterprise
and work qualifies the reader to appreciate Dr. Henry Allon’s
eloquent and powerful discourse on “The Church of the Future,”
which is printed in the same volume.

       *       *       *       *       *


The death of Edgar Ketchum, Esq., which occurred March 3, removes
from us a philanthropist and Christian; it diminishes the rapidly
thinning ranks of earnest Christian Abolitionists, and it takes
one who had long been an officer of the American Missionary
Association. Mr. Ketchum was admitted to the bar in 1834; in
1841 he was made Commissioner of Public Funds for this State; in
1861 he was appointed by President Lincoln Collector of Internal
Revenue for the Ninth District of New York; and in 1867 he was made
a Register in Bankruptcy by Chief-Justice Chase, which position
he held till the time of his death. Mr. Ketchum early identified
himself with the anti-slavery cause, and was ardent and constant in
his endeavors to promote it. His house was fired by the rioters in
1863. He was for a long time President of the Board of Managers of
the House of Refuge, on Randall’s Island, to whose interest he gave
untiring and uncompensated time and attention. He was Treasurer of
this Association from 1865 to 1879, a position of responsibility
and supervision, but not of active duty, and without salary. He
was also the legal counsellor of the Association for many years.
Mr. Ketchum was a man of fine personal presence, of very genial
manners, of active business habits, and a devoted Christian.

       *       *       *       *       *


GOVERNMENTAL AID TO COMMON SCHOOLS.

WHAT CONGRESS MAY DO AND WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rev. C. C. Painter._

Education by the State rests upon the sole basis of self-protection.

A despotism must stand impregnable, if at all, in the strength
of its armament. But not so with a republic. It must stand in
the intelligence and virtue of its citizens. It were a solecism
in logic and common sense to admit the nation’s right to manumit
the slave as a war measure, and equip him with the ballot as a
reconstructive measure necessary to the safety of the republic,
but deny at once the right and the duty of qualifying him for the
duties of citizenship when an understanding of these duties is also
essential to that safety. The constitutional right to use the same
power, which is now invoked to qualify the voter for the duty with
which the general government has charged him, has been exercised
so many times in regard to less important matters that precedents
are not wanting to justify this application of it, even to one who
wishes to know that a thing has been done before he will believe it
can be done.

Whatever criticism may be made upon the use which some of the
States made of their share of the $28,000,000 of money distributed
from the surplus funds of the Treasury by the Act of June 23, 1836,
no one can doubt that it was constitutionally done, and done by the
same discretion and power which would be used in giving aid now to
the States. And it may be said that the use of this fund so largely
by the States at their discretion for school purposes legitimates
the confident assurance that a fund now given specifically for
schools would be wisely and conscientiously devoted to that object.

As to the present needs look at the facts:

There are in the United States 6,239,958 persons, ten years of age
or over, who cannot write their names. More than three-fourths of
these are found in the old slave States. More than one-half of the
whole number are colored. If the general government should provide
means to sustain a school for this class alone for three months
in the year, at a salary for the teachers of $30 per month for a
school of 30 pupils, it would require the sum of $18,719,958. Of
this $14,449,579 would go into the old slave States, $9,187,922
because of colored illiterates, leaving $4,961,657 for the whites,
and $4,579,439 would go to the other States for both black and
white illiterates.

In 1879 North Carolina raised for common schools a sum which would
give $20 per annum to each school of 30 illiterates (not school
children). How long it would take that State to make intelligent
and safe voters of her citizens at that rate is matter for sober
reflection, not alone to the politician, who remembers what the
electoral vote of that State is for President, but to every citizen.

If the government should enable North Carolina to keep up her
schools for four months at fair wages, instead of one month, as at
present, at such a salary as can secure only an inferior teacher,
it would be something, but not all that is needed. If such a sum
should be given, Mississippi would receive as her share of it
$1,119,603; New Jersey, with nearly exactly the same population,
would receive $159,747. But $959,529 of Mississippi’s share would
be because of colored illiteracy, leaving nearly exactly the same
amount for white illiterates which New Jersey would receive,
which shows conclusively that it is because of the negro chiefly
this help is needed, and for him, as a voter, the nation at large
is responsible. In considering the disparity between the sum
that would go to the South and the new States of the Northwest
respectively, not only must we remember the negro as a factor in
the problem, but also these facts: By the ordinance of 1787, by
which Virginia ceded the great northwest territory to the general
government on such terms‒Mr. Webster said, in his great speech
on the Foote resolution‒as “fixed forever the character of the
population of the vast regions northwest of the Ohio by excluding
from them involuntary servitude, and impressed on the soil itself,
while it was yet a wilderness, an incapacity to sustain any
other than freemen.” And six days after, in his reply to Hayne,
he said, also, that “it set forth and declared it to be a high
and binding duty of the government itself to support schools and
advance the means of education on the plain reason that religion,
morality and knowledge are necessary to good government.” By this
ordinance of cession, Virginia stipulated that the proceeds from
this vast territory should be considered as a common fund for
the use and benefit of such as have become or may become members
of the confederation or federal alliance of States. The other
States claiming unsettled lands within their territory also ceded
their titles to the general government, which became possessed
of the whole. From time to time Congress has made most liberal
grants of this land to the new States for school purposes, so
that Minnesota, for example, has realized from her share, or has
the land from which, at the same rate of sale, she can realize a
fund of $20,000,000 for educational purposes, while the old States
have not had a dollar, excepting their share in the grant for the
endowment of agricultural colleges by Act of 1862, in which the new
States as well as the old shared ratably. It may be truly said,
then, that every instinct of self-preservation demands that the
unquestionable right of the general government shall be exercised
in using the means at its disposal to meet the great danger which
threatens us from the presence and power of ignorant voters; and
that every sentiment of justice to the negro himself as the subject
of many wrongs and the possible avenger of them, and to the States
themselves, requires that governmental aid shall be given to the
common schools of the country.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS

Ex-Gov. Colby has made a conditional pledge of $10,000 to the
trustees of the Maine Agricultural College.

Gen. E. W. Leavenworth, of Syracuse, N.Y., has recently given
$10,000 to Hamilton College to found a scholarship.

Of the £265,000 endowment secured last year for the University of
Pennsylvania, Mr. Joseph A. Wharton gave £100,000.

Newton Case, of Hartford, Conn., has offered to give $100,000 for
the library of Hartford Theo. Sem., provided an equal amount is
raised.

By the sale of the Williston Mills at Easthampton, Williston
Seminary comes into possession of $200,000 and Amherst College of
$100,000.

Over $100,000 has been raised for land and a new dormitory at
Williams College. The fund for the Garfield Professorship amounts
to $42,000.

The late Joseph E. Sheffield gives $100,000 to the Berkeley
Divinity School, Middletown, Conn. His gifts to Yale College will
probably aggregate from half a million to a million and a half.

University College, Liverpool, England, is to receive £105,000 from
different individuals. Lord Derby, the Rathborne family, Mrs. Grant
and the trustees of the late R. L. Jones have _subscribed_ £10,000
each of the amount.

“_The colored people are too poor to endow their schools. Their
very existence is endangered so long as they are made to depend
upon the yearly gifts of the churches. To endow is to carry a
magnificent beginning to completion._”‒Rev. T. J. Morgan, D.D.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

‒It is reported that Piaggia, the Italian explorer, who purposed
penetrating the Galla country in Southern Abyssinia, is dead.

‒Col. Mills, who formerly occupied the post of Consul-General and
English Political Agent at Mascate, has been appointed to succeed
Dr. Kirk at Zanzibar.

‒M. Maspéro, director of the Egyptian museum, has succeeded in
discovering the opening of the pyramid of Meydoum which has passed
until now as impenetrable.

‒M. Tagliabue, correspondent of the _Exploratore_, has made from
Massaoua an excursion among the Bogos, where he has specially
studied the tobacco plantations.

‒M. Godfrey Roth, who gave proof of so much zeal at the time of the
arrival of the caravans of slaves at Siout, has been attached to
Giegler Pasha, at Khartoum, for the suppression of the slave trade.

‒Rohlfs has written the Secretary of the Anti-Slavery Society that
he hoped to return to London in January, and go from thence to
Cairo, to negotiate peace with the Khedive on the part of the King
of Abyssinia, under the auspices of the English government, from
which he beseeches aid in favor of the Emperor of Abyssinia.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

‒The London Missionary Society has furnished their Indian missions
on the North Pacific Coast with a small steamer. The Baptists also
have one on Puget Sound.

‒The Protestant Episcopal Church sustains 394 missionaries in its
home field, of whom 52 labor among the Indians.

‒The Presbytery of West Virginia, although itself a weak Home
Missionary Presbytery, has ordained three ministers for Alaska.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

‒The Chinese government has decided to increase the tax on foreign
opium and impose a tax on native opium.

‒A Chinese ship loaded with tea recently arrived in London. It is
the first that ever reached that port.

‒Rev. H. V. Noyes, of the Presbyterian mission at Canton, has
prepared a Concordance of the New Testament in Chinese.

‒There were 18 graduates of the Scientific Department of the
Training School at Kioto, Japan, and all remained to pursue the
study of theology.

       *       *       *       *       *




WORTHY OF RECORD.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the May number of the magazine for 1881, was a picture and a
description of Christ’s Church, in Wilmington, N.C. We intimated
at that time that the same generous friend who had built the
church intended still larger outlays and improvements at the same
point, an account of which might be expected at a future time.
That time has come, and we proceed to complete the picture and
the description of Hon. James J. H. Gregory’s noble gift to the
Wilmington mission.

_First, the School-House._‒This was, originally, a wooden two-story
building, 84 × 30 feet, one end of which was occupied by the
mission family, and the other by the schools. It would accommodate,
by crowding, 150 pupils. This building has now been completely
remodeled, and the whole of it devoted to schools and mission work.
It has been flanked by two wings, each 54 × 16, two stories high,
having a front of 116 feet, with room for 300 or 350 pupils. The
lower story contains three school rooms, first and second primary
and grammar; also room for lady missionary, in which she holds
sewing classes, prayer-meetings, and deals out books, papers and
clothing to the needy.

[Illustration: CHURCH, HOME AND SCHOOL, WILMINGTON, N.C.]

The upper story contains high-school room, principal’s room,
assistant’s recitation room, and a hall capable of seating between
three and four hundred, and which can be used, if necessary, for a
still higher grade of school in the future.

_Second, the Mission House._‒The house is a wooden frame in a
brick “jacket,” the main part three stories high, and each story
containing four rooms fifteen feet square, with an open fire-place
in each. The L has nine rooms, exclusive of storeroom, pantry and
wash-room, the latter of which is in the basement.

The roofs are flat, that on the main building having, beneath the
eaves, eighteen ventilators, which insure fresh air for the house
and coolness for the chambers. The house is finished throughout
in pitch-pine, merely varnished, no paint being used inside. The
window sashes and the door frames are of cypress, and with care
will last a century.

The brick is deep red, laid in one-half cement and one-half mortar,
a mixture which has hardened like stone. The walls are plastered
with the same, with the addition of hair to give it proper tenacity
and cohesion. The whole structure is solid, airy and imposing,
admirably arranged for convenience in domestic work and for the
comfort of the teachers and missionaries.

The entire cost of the Home, and of the extension and repairs on
the school-house, is $12,550, and including the church (which is
seen on the left hand of the picture), the whole group of buildings
has cost the donor $16,150.

For the purposes in behalf of which they were erected they
are nearly perfect. Utility and comfort have been combined in
everything with the least possible waste of room or money. They are
a monument to the head and heart and hand of the generous giver,
such as any might covet, but such as few will have.

While they stand they will be a beacon of light and hope to
benighted thousands, and will bring upon the head of their author
the blessing of many ready to perish. Who will imitate the example
and share in the reward?

       *       *       *       *       *


A WEEK AMONG THE WORKERS.

       *       *       *       *       *


EXPERIENCES AND DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH, ATLANTA, GA., SUNDAY, FEB. 12.

_By Rev. Evarts Kent._

Would you like to see our church? Look upon the cover of the
AMERICAN MISSIONARY you hold in your hand; lower left hand corner.
There it is, an attractive, beautiful brick structure with brown
stone trimmings, slate roof, tower, bell, organ, everything, in
fact, but a _mortgage_.

The first experience of this day is sunshine! At this season of the
year “the Gate City of the South,” unlike the New Jerusalem, has
neither foundations nor pavements. Its streets are horrible pits,
its sidewalks miry clay, and any day of the week that brings real
northern sunshine is by no means the least of blessings. And this,
the first pleasant Sabbath of the year, is bright and clear as the
sunniest of New England May days, and we walk on dry land to the
house of God through what only a day or two since was the Red (mud)
Sea.

After sunshine comes Sunday-school, from 9:30 to 11 A.M. The
pastor is superintendent. After the opening exercises, the school
separates by classes, each going to its own room for forty minutes’
study of the lesson.

Our school at present numbers 14 classes, of which three are
Bible classes; an infant class numbering 60 and still growing,
the ten other classes being composed of boys and girls from eight
to sixteen years of age. Attendance for to-day is 210, a fair
average for pleasant weather. At the close of study hour the school
re-assembles for general review, which occupies about a quarter of
an hour, and includes the previous lessons of the quarter as well
as that of to-day. The review, though necessarily brief, reveals
two things: One is the fact that we have a corps of earnest,
faithful and competent teachers. The other, that the pupils have
studied their lessons and are learning how to think. The promptness
of response, the intelligence of the answers given, and the
thoughtfulness of the questions asked by them, I have rarely seen
surpassed. That they are in great part either students or graduates
of the Storrs school will explain the reason of any unusual
proficiency. The majority of the children in our Sunday-school are
as wide-awake, active, keen, as you will find anywhere, and any
dull, prosy, goody-good teacher will find ours the best school in
the world‒to stay away from.

At three o’clock we gather at the first church service of the
day. This is Communion with us, and in connection with the
administration of the Sacrament, a brother recently chosen deacon
is to be set apart for that office.

The sermon which preceded was founded upon a clause from Acts vi.,
3, “Men of good report.” It emphasized the importance of calling to
the diaconate only such men as were of unblemished reputation and
unquestioned integrity in all that concerned themselves and others.

After the sermon, amidst the most impressive stillness of the
congregation, the deacon elect was consecrated to his office,
through the laying on of hands by the pastor and the other deacons,
and with prayer. The service was peculiarly solemn, and will tend
to awaken in our people a truer conception of the qualifications
essential to the holding of responsible positions in the church.

The exercises were concluded with the administration of the Lord’s
Supper. Following this service is a half-hour prayer meeting in one
of the Bible classrooms.

To-day the attendance is unusually large. That there is more than
common interest is evinced by the twelve earnest prayers offered
and the expressions of desire to serve God on the part of some who
are still without the fold.

A sermon to parents in the evening, previously announced, and
preached to a large and attentive congregation, brings this day
to a close‒a day filled with work, of which only an outline is
given‒work that instead of weariness brings rest and strength and
courage.


WORK IN THE THEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT AT TALLADEGA, MONDAY, FEB.
13‒“AVERAGE EXPERIENCES OF AN AVERAGE DAY.”

_By Rev. G. W. Andrews._

We got an hour’s study before breakfast and two more after it,
so as to be ready for the 10 o’clock lecture on the Messianic
Prophecies‒a lecture, since no suitable text-book can be found. The
bell strikes at 10 sharp, and nine intelligent-looking young men,
whose average age is about twenty-seven, are soon in their seats
and the lecturer in his chair. A brief prayer for the blessing of
Heaven on the hour’s work is offered, all standing with folded arms
and bowed heads. Then follows a review of the last lecture for
twenty minutes, each pupil rising in his place and reciting without
questions. Questions and explanations must come afterwards. They
know in brief what they are expected to recite, for it was written
the day previous in their lecture books. They must repeat verses
8, 9, 10 and 11 of Psalm xvi.; must discuss what Peter says on
these verses in Acts ii., 25–31, and what Paul says in Acts xiii.,
33–37, and what Christ says in Luke xxiv., 44–46; also consider at
some length the question “Whether all this Psalm is Messianic or
only certain verses.” Two or three theories, a few questions, and
the recitation is ended. Some grasped and carried the burden of
thought easily, and some, from over-anxiety, stumbled, but all were
fairly good. Monday is not the best day for school, as all teachers
know. Every man now springs to his pencil and paper, taking down
another lecture to be studied and recited to-morrow. This time it
is Psalm xxii., as this one is classed with Psalms xvi., xl. and
lxix. They write rapidly, copy into their lecture books after going
to their rooms, also paste in “proof texts,” memorize verses 14–21,
examine reference books, one or two theories, and in general get
ready for another day. This class has no time for idleness, and I
am glad to say desires none. A clergyman from the North who heard
them recite recently said: “It is the best theological recitation I
ever heard.” About a year is spent on the Messianic Prophecies. We
memorize them all.

One swift hour is gone. In five minutes another class studying
systematic theology are in their places. A word of prayer as
before, and the work of reciting begins. We recite from Pond’s
theology, and supplement from our Andover lectures and ourselves.
The subject to-day happens to be baptism. These four young men
know what they are about and march ahead with vigor. Contrary
to the common opinion, they master the abstractions of theology
more easily than they memorize the “proof texts.” Baptism is a
live subject in these parts, and the work of understanding it is
entered on with evident relish. One discusses Jewish Proselyte
baptism, another John’s baptism, another Christian baptism, as a
“token,” a “sign,” a “seal” and a “rite,” instituted by our Lord,
the mode not essential, while all together examine in groups, and
a few, in particular, the hundred and fourteen classic examples of
“baptizo.” These make it plain that “baptizo” does not always nor
even generally mean immerse. The passages examined from the New
Testament proved the same to them. They were a little surprised at
the new light. Immersion as the only baptism works great mischief
among the colored people, leading them to trust in the outward rite
rather than the inward cleansing. A very interesting hour with an
interesting class. I can give you no idea of it. Please give us
more room next time. The rest of the day is spent in private study.
Talladega has 30 ministers in the field, and through such men is
the way upward for the colored people. The colored preacher is a
bishop of the most dominant order, hence he must be wisely fitted
for his work. We give much time here to the study of the Bible.
“The entrance of Thy word giveth light.”


COLLEGE WORK IN FISK UNIVERSITY, FEB. 14, 1882.

_By Prof. A. K. Spence._

To-day there is in the college classes an actual attendance of
twenty-eight students. Four others are absent; three for the
purpose of teaching, and one on account of ill health. Of those
present, two are seniors, six are juniors, five are sophomores, and
fifteen are freshmen. The freshman class is the largest we have
ever had, numbering at one time twenty.

The classes for to-day are calculus, Horace, Thucydides,
trigonometry, French, physiology, English literature, logic,
geology and Latin prose composition. In some cases classes of
different grades are united in the same study, and students of the
higher Normal course recite with college students. The present
senior class has never been taught separately. The imaginary
visitor, as he goes from room to room to-day, will not see much
that is peculiar either in classes or teaching. The days of romance
in this work have gone by. Aside from African features, more or
less pronounced, and some Southernisms in voice and expression, you
might imagine you were listening to a class in a new Northwestern
college.

We are orthodox, and believe in the good old idea of discipline
through the hard study of Latin, Greek, and mathematics, with
the usual amount of science, both natural and mental, and the
et ceteras. The colored man is just a man, and his mind must be
dealt with as are other minds. He must climb the difficult hill of
education, as his white brother, by many a slow and weary step;
and, as in white colleges, many a toiler falls out by the way
and few reach the shining top. The average time spent by each of
the thirty-two college students thus far under our instruction is
four and nine-sixteenths years. Some have been with us as long as
seven or eight years. The average time is growing less with better
schools and increased facilities elsewhere. Quite a number now
come to us prepared to enter the college preparatory course, and,
occasionally, one fitted to enter college. A college planted in
an intelligent community takes root at once in a soil prepared,
and soon brings fruitage. Not so with the effort begun here twelve
years ago, to develop a college among a people just out of bondage.

Nearly all the students in college are dependent on their own
efforts, with the aid so kindly given by friends in the North, in
acquiring an education. Only one has property, and two live at
home with their parents in the city. Several have others dependent
on them. One, a lady, has care of the family, both parents being
dead. During the last summer all were at work‒three as porters on
railroads, two as clerks, one had charge of a church, which, under
his ministry, enjoyed a revival of religion, and the rest taught
school. Some teach classes in the university and some do manual
labor. Nearly all are compelled to be absent a part of the college
year, thus increasing their toil when they return. Who would not
help people who are thus helping themselves?

All the college students are professing Christians, and out of the
thirty-two, twenty-one have become so while students here. One is a
licentiate for the ministry, and several, we hope, will enter that
calling. Four of the college students are ladies.

The college is the apex of our educational pyramid. The higher the
apex, the broader the base. Passing downward, we find in college
preparatory 48; in higher normal, 27; in normal, 167; in the model
school, 135. Scattered through different grades we have 12, taking,
in addition to other studies, one hour a day of special instruction
with reference to the ministry. Twenty-four have already graduated
from college, one of whom is dead. Of the others, one is a lawyer,
one is a minister, five are learning professions, three being
the ministry, and all the rest are teaching, many of whom occupy
important positions, one being a professor in this University.


A DAY AT LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN., FEB. 15, 1882.

_By Prof. A. J. Steele._

A day’s work in any well organized school is, ordinarily, a simple
enough matter. An intelligent description of the same is quite a
different affair. If the reader will follow me I will attempt to
show him what is done in an average day at Le Moyne.

We first enter the library and reading room. Here are 1,000
volumes, a cabinet of 1,500 natural history specimens, a number of
periodicals, etc.

Passing now to the assembly room, on the upper floor, about 90
students of the Normal department are in their seats, and, as the
clock in the tower is striking nine, and the lower schools are
about to march in, we will take seats with the eight teachers on
the platform for morning devotions. There are about 200 pupils
before us. A song is sung, accompanied on the piano; a short
selection is read from the Scriptures; the Principal leads in a
brief prayer, in which all seem to join, with bowed heads; a few
moments’ silent prayer, another song, and the lower schools file
out of the room and the work of the day begins. During the day we
shall find the students in the assembly room preserving their own
order, a teacher seldom being seen in the room.

In the grammar room we shall hear recitations in English grammar
and composition, conducted by Miss Pelton, the entire work being
made as practical as possible to secure correct speaking and
writing.

In the mathematical room, where Miss Parmelee receives us, we shall
hear classes in arithmetic, from one in compound numbers to those
completing the book. A class is just taking up algebra; while
stepping to the Principal’s room we may inspect the neatly-bound
papers of a class that has successfully passed its final
examination on this subject.

In the room across the hall where Miss Hamilton presides we shall
hear classes in both political and physical geography, and we shall
be especially interested in hearing the senior class in theory and
practice.

Professor Steele’s classes in the natural sciences and civil
government we may find in the library.

Passing now to the model school we see a quiet, busy room, with
three grades of pupils under the care of Miss Cornes. Besides the
ordinary lessons we hear an object lesson given on some flowers.
We notice the skillful use of corn and other seeds by the children
as an aid in the practical understanding of numbers. We note that
nearly every child in the room can write a readable hand on his
slate, and we are fortunate in hearing Miss Miller, the music
teacher, give her lesson in music.

Entering now the intermediate school we find about 50 pupils under
the care of Miss Lyman‒studying in the next three higher grades.
Object lessons, drawing and music are continued here. Classes
from this room are taught by members of the senior class, Normal
department, for practice work, under the watchful criticism of Miss
Lyman.

Finally we pass to the industrial rooms, where we find Miss Milton
instructing classes in needlework, etc., and with great interest
observe the instruction and practice of the class of girls in the
art of cooking, the subject to-day being a cream cake, which is
prepared and baked under the direction of the teacher.

The music room we must pass by, and we can but glance into the
vocal class of 50 from the Normal department to notice that
they are reading music quite readily under the very successful
instruction of the music teacher.


A DAY AMONG THE LOWLY, FEB. 16, 1882.

_By Miss Lena Saunders, New Orleans._

Thursday is visiting day. No mothers’ meeting nor sewing school. My
early morning visit to the Colored Orphanage made and prayer said,
I called upon the sick deacon. Armed with his blessing, my Bible
and basket of creature comforts I went on. Aunt Patience’s humble
home of one room came first. I had missed Aunt Patience from the
mothers’ meeting and now missed her cordial welcome. She was ill
and had lost all confidence in the missionary. It happened in this
way. The church prayer-meeting was very loud one night, the day had
been a long, weary one, and, when about 10 o’clock, a woman was
endued with “the power,” and the consequent excitement ensued, I
quietly left the meeting. Aunt Patience was there, and this morning
before I had even inquired about the “misery,” she exclaimed, “You
dun prayed that the Holy Spirit would come with power and you
telled us to pray for’t tu, and _we did pray good_. Then when it
came you’se the very fust ’un to skedaddle; you didn’t ’cognize the
answer to your own prayers, honey,” and the tears were in her eyes.

“Sure enough,” I said, “but I didn’t know ’twas coming in that
way.” “But, honey, when ye prays to _God_ for power ye must take it
as it comes and be on the lookout.” “Aunt Patience,” I said, “the
power I prayed for was that the Good Spirit would come into our
hearts and make us kind and loving and patient toward each other,
teach us how to lead dying souls to Christ and incline our hearts
to keep God’s commandments.” “Yes, honey.” After a little further
talk we knelt in prayer, and in her petition Aunt Patience prayed,
“Massa Jesus teach dis ole chile to serve you quiet-like if dat
bes’ please you.” They only need to be taught. The next old sister
was more destitute. ‘Mancipation met all her needs ’ceptin’ the
rations. With a few of God’s promises and a material proof of His
love she was comforted.

Three little girls were absent from the sewing-school, so I called
to enquire for them. The mother had learned to guard their health,
and so kept them out of the rain‒reluctantly, because she wanted
them to hear about Christ’s sermon on the mount, which for several
weeks had been our sewing-school Bible lesson.

Old Mrs. H. was at her ironing board, with heaps of snowy linen
about her. Only a few days ago she was “a sinner woman.” To-day she
sang quietly “I’ve been redeemed,” and her face sang, too. Sister
F.’s house is my Valley of Baca. I stopped a moment for a cooling
draught.

Little street children followed for Sunday-school papers. At least
fifty were distributed, and a word about the Crucified One dropped
among as many children. Some of them sat down under the trees to
thoughtfully study the picture of Christ blessing little children,
and one said, “See. See, dat misses knows ol about it.”

The next was the “people’s hour.” From one to two each day they
come for old clothes and new teaching. Then came the Northern
mail; afterwards the students’ mid-week prayer-meeting. Here
teachers and scholars are co-workers, and each strengthened by the
others’ prayers. Baptized anew, I sought the abodes of poverty
and wretchedness. Sinning women turned their eyes for the moment
from the king of the carnival to the King of Heaven. The Chinamen
were very busy, but Yam stopped to say, “I bring more boyee next
Sunday.” Little Joe darted round the corner to ask, “Gwine to have
Sunday-school to-day, teacher?” Poor little Joe doesn’t see any
difference in the days, and reckons Sunday from the Sunday-school.
Passing the large market, I bought a few delicious oranges for the
dying man in the attic of an ill-famed house, and hurried on, for
night was coming. There was no need to hurry. The attic was empty,
but “out of the depths” of sin the Lord heard the cry. Prayers at
the Orphanage closed the day, while the carnival lights made night
in the old city seem beautiful morning.

Where has the day gone? Into to-morrow’s past. Who noted its
flight? The recording Angel. When will its history be read? In that
Great Day, when Aunt Patience and little Joe, and all who came
between, shall stand side by side with missionary and teacher, and
shall say, “We b’lieves, ’cause we’se dun taught,” and they shall
add, “We taught, because we were sent.”


DAY’S EXPERIENCE AMONG THE CHINESE.

_By Jee Gam, San Francisco._

At a quarter past eight I started for my usual journey to
Oakland, but as there was no Chinese case in court I returned
home. I generally read or study on my trip, so as to waste no
time, but this morning my heart felt like David’s when he said:
“Oh, praise the Lord for his wonderful goodness to the children
of men.” The night before at half-past nine a fire broke out in
the next building, which came very near burning the roof of our
Mission-house. Nearly all my clothing and bedding were taken down
stairs by friends, but through the providence of God not the
slightest damage was done to our Mission. No wonder that my heart
overflowed when I thought how God had preserved us. Immediately
after reaching home I was asked to go with a Chinese friend to his
attorney and do a little interpreting for him. I then went to the
Palace Hotel to call on Hon. Yung Wing, who was on his way to
Pekin. My intention was to invite him to visit our school and speak
to the pupils, for I thought a few words from him would have great
weight. Not being able to see him, I returned home and went out
again to do some shopping for our Chinese Christian Association.

A few minutes before 7 P.M. our scholars came flocking into
Brenham Place School-house. Just before nine the bell rang, and
our principal, Miss J. S. Worley, asked for Scripture recitations.
This week the verses were to contain either the word new or old, it
being the last Friday of our year. Miss Worley spoke a few words
about “Putting off the old man and putting on the new man,” which
I translated, and I hope that many of our scholars will become new
creatures in Christ Jesus. Singing followed, and the school was
closed with the Lord’s prayer. I wish you could look in upon this
school. One hundred and ten scholars are present, of all ages,
sizes and appearances; a few studying history, grammar, geography;
some reading in the third reader, others repeating A B C. They
have been in America from a few days to seven or eight years.
Their occupations also vary‒shoemakers, cigarmakers, tailors,
laundry-men, cooks, clerks, etc. Many of them are true followers of
the Lord Jesus; others have just begun to feel interested in this
new religion.

Our new year commenced February 17. We held a watch-night meeting
the 16th. Many of our brethren spoke on God’s goodness to us. When
the clock struck twelve we all knelt down (about thirty present),
and six of our brethren prayed. After each prayer a hymn was sung.
A few words were said about making new resolutions, and that we
should go forward and work more zealously for the Master. The
Chinese temple, about half a block away, was signaling the new year
with the sound of trumpets. The heathen Chinese offer prayer to the
God of war and wealth, etc., but our prayer was that they might
know the true God.

At a little before six A.M. our Chinese friends began to come
to wish us a Happy New Year. At nine A.M. a delightful union
prayer-meeting was held by the five different denominations. At
11 A.M. we again assembled at our Association rooms, when Rev. W.
C. Pond addressed us, and gave us a motto for the new year, with
good advice, which I hope we shall all follow. The meeting of the
General Association was held at seven P.M., and was the best yearly
meeting we ever had. The business meeting followed with reports of
the secretary and treasurer. Thus the days come and go:

    “Only the eternal day
    Shall come but never go”


HOLIDAY AT HAMPTON, SATURDAY, FEB. 18, 1882.

_By Miss Isabel B. Eustis._

There are to-day at Hampton 85 Indian students, 57 boys and 38
girls, representing 15 different tribes.

Saturday is a holiday for most of the Indians, but the rising
bell sounds loud as usual, to call the scholars to their early
breakfast, and the meal well over, the work call is given at
quarter to seven. Most of the Indian boys who have had their five
half days of school and five half days at their trades feel that
they have earned a good holiday, and are not disturbed by it.
Eleven who are in the advanced classes hurry off to the shops.
Wild-Cat and Murie go to the printing office to set up type for the
_Southern Workman_; five are carpenters, and work on the new desks
and benches for the school. Chisholm fits uppers on shoe-lasts to
help fill a Government contract. Robbie Conalez goes to the big
barn to put it in order and feed the cattle. Peters works in the
blacksmith shop, and Maquimetus fits the spokes in a new set of
cart-wheels, and earns an extra afternoon hour for himself by his
good work.

Meanwhile the girls have gone to their rooms and begun the week’s
cleaning. The floors are scrubbed, and the wardrobes and bureau
drawers put in order. Some of them have cedar boughs, the boys have
cut for them, and they fasten them upon the walls in pretty and
fantastic designs, tieing them with ribbons and hanging Christmas
cards and bright papers from them. A few make pretty bowers for
their dollies, and perch them in a cunning way among the branches,
where they get loving and admiring glances from the little girls
below.

Then the clothes which have been washed and ironed during the week
are laid out, and the room is ready for the teacher’s visit.

Nobody knows when the Indian girls would think it worth while to
change their garments, or how they would be laundried, if it were
not for the week’s inspection. As it is, the piles are most of them
full and white and neatly folded, and the rather stolid faces grow
eager as they look over the teacher’s shoulder to see whether a
zero or a five on the record is to reward the work.

Soon the matron’s room is a busy place. Girls in all the chairs and
girls on the floor, all manner of rents and rips and holes to be
repaired, and the motherly lady who has done the work many times
for her own children and grandchildren, goes among them busy and
patient, finds patches and pieces, gives a hint here and a lesson
there, till the garments are whole again.

When the morning’s work is done, the lawn in front of Virginia
Hall becomes a gay play-ground. See-saws and jump-ropes, balls and
croquet mallets are kept busy all the afternoon. A few fortunate
girls borrow a boat from one of the teachers and row in the pretty
creek. The boys come now and then to the edge of the ground and
look rather longingly over the boundaries, but turn back and find a
vent for their spirits in foot-ball and leap-frog and the parallel
bars, remembering that Washington’s Birthday comes next week and it
will all be common ground. The games last till the sun sends its
last slanting beams over the creek and the lawn and the six o’clock
bell announces that the day of work and pleasure is over.

Before the shadows of night fall heavily, the school assembles in
the chapel. The hush of worship comes upon the crowded room. The
song of praise and voice of petition rise, and then while all heads
bow in silent prayer the burden and pain and desire of 500 hearts
are told to Him who understands. So another week ends; its record
is made of success and failure, of work and sacrifice.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVAL IN CENTRAL CHURCH AND STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.

W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

We have occasion to bless the “Evangelical Alliance,” which, under
the Divine direction, introduced the observance of the “Week of
Prayer.” It has been with us every year a period of religious
awakening. Its coming is anxiously and prayerfully anticipated.
Through the month of December our prayer meetings were tender
and earnest. The thoughts of the people seemed centered upon the
longed-for presence of the Holy Spirit and the “Week of Prayer,” as
the gate-way to a glorious experience of spiritual refreshment.

The first week in January was marked by growing earnestness on
the part of God’s people, but no real case of inquiry among the
unconverted. The second week brought some to the “mourners’ seats,”
but no important break in the ranks of sinners. We all felt that
the Lord was drawing near. The congregations greatly increased
until the audience room was entirely filled. The third week of our
continuous services was exceedingly precious. The Holy Spirit came
in power. The truth preached in great simplicity was owned of God
in the awakening of nearly one hundred souls. On many occasions
thirty were on the anxious seats, weeping and calling upon God for
mercy. From these seats on two successive evenings nine persons
arose and said they felt the assurance of forgiveness and a change
of heart. During the five weeks of continuous services 66 professed
hope in the Saviour, of which number 25 were students of our
University. From our family of boarding students at Stone Hall
eleven were brought under conviction, who have joyfully consecrated
themselves to the service of the Saviour.

It was a very tender and impressive scene where among the
“inquirers after God” were so many of our bright, mature students.
We hope most earnestly that they all may be strong for God and
everything that is good.

On the first Sabbath in February, 81 were received to Central
Church on profession of their faith, and on the two succeeding
Sabbaths four more, 35 in all. I mention, as a fact showing
the prevalence of infant baptism, that of the 35 admitted on
profession only nine received baptism, the remaining 26 having
been christened. Our friends in the North will be glad to know
that of the nearly 100 awakened and the 66 converted only six
manifested any undue excitement, and but one of the number had been
an attendant upon our church services. The church is stronger in
every respect. The average attendance upon our Sabbath services is
larger by nearly 100, and there is every indication of a steady and
healthful growth.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW THE FREEDMEN CHILDREN DO IT.

Mr. E. C. Silsby, of Selma, Ala., writes:

Our Sunday-school have been interested in the proposed missionary
steamboat “John Brown,” for the Mendi Mission. Several Sundays ago
we voted to take the contributions of subsequent sessions until
they should amount to $10, to be sent on for the boat. A picture
of the boat was drawn on the board and the contribution of classes
recorded as given. The result is shown by the enclosed order for
$10.20. A class of little girls who have a “mite box,” not only
voted its contents, but held a fair for the sale of articles which
had been prepared by their own deft fingers, under the direction of
their teacher, applying the proceeds to the fund. May the boat do
much toward carrying the “glad tidings.”

Rev. Evarts Kent, of Atlanta, Ga., writes:

I send you draft for the amount of our annual collection for the
A. M. A. You will be interested to know that the contributions
were mainly in small sums, from five cents to one dollar, and that
there were eighty-five different contributions. I enclose you
specimens of the envelopes I had printed for the purpose. I think
they added somewhat to the amount. One little boy of ten years of
age brought his envelope with five cents in it‒the most generous
contribution of all. He is the eldest of three brothers, all in
the Storrs school, kept there by a mother who is not a Christian,
and extremely poor‒so poor that when visited in sickness the other
day by Miss Stevenson and Mrs. Kent the only dishes in the house
were a tin plate, a tin spoon, one cup and a broken knife; we are
helping them just now; but it was most touching when they called
at the house last Saturday evening and found this lad getting
his missionary envelope, received the Sunday before, “ready for
to-morrow.” I doubt if Our Saviour has seen anything like it since
that day when in Judea He was looking into the treasury.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHURCH AT LITTLE ROCK, ARK.

BY REV. B. F. FOSTER.

A number of the friends of the A. M. A. would no doubt be glad to
hear from our church-work here. Since our dedicatory exercises,
which proved to be such an inspiration to our little band of
believers, we have been marching onward and upward.

The first day of this year and the first Sabbath in the month was
our communion season. A delightful season it was, too. We had
intended beginning a series of meetings to last four or five weeks,
but the cold and inclement weather prevented us from putting on the
plastering, and we could not, therefore, commence with any hope of
success. We decided to defer till warmer weather. Notwithstanding
this impediment, the word found lodging in the hearts of twelve
of our young people, all of whom connected themselves with the
Congregational Church. We also received one by recommendation.
All of these seem to be hopeful conversions. Our Sabbath meetings
are well attended. As soon as we make the last payment on our
church-lot‒which will be the 18th of February‒we hope to complete
our building. The insurance on it is $1,000. When completed, its
cost will be $2,000. We are waiting very anxiously for the erection
of the “Edward Smith College” here.

       *       *       *       *       *


DEDICATION OF CHURCH AT LULING, TEXAS.

On the 26th of February the new Congregational Church edifice was
dedicated, Supt. Roy assisting Pastor Hillson. The house is 24 × 46
feet‒is tastefully built. The lot was given by Mr. T. W. Pierce, of
Boston, the president of the Galveston & San Antonio Railroad, “The
Sun Set Route;” and this association assisted in the building.

Miss M. E. Green, our teacher at Flatonia, thirty miles away,
came up with her baby organ to play it and lead the music of the
occasion, adding much to the enjoyment of the same. She found
here some young men, now in business, whom she had taught as boys
elsewhere, and whom she had trained in singing, now to join her in
this service.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


REV. MR. LADD AT KHARTOUM.

                                       KHARTOUM, Jan. 9, 1882.

We are in Khartoum at last, and glad to get here after the long
Desert journey and the slow sail from Berber. We arrived on
Saturday, the 7th, a little after noon. The American Consul came on
board to welcome us. He is said to be the richest man in Khartoum,
and we found that he had spared himself no trouble and expense
in fitting up rooms for our use while here. We are indeed very
comfortably situated.

Our arrival seemed to be a great event in the city, and all the
prominent people were anxious to be among the first to welcome us.
One party of six gentlemen called. They said they had heard that we
had come to found schools and churches, that they were delighted at
the idea, and hoped that we would commence at once at Khartoum, as
their children were suffering for the want of education, there not
being a school of any kind in Khartoum. One of them had formerly
given a large tract of land for this purpose, but it had not been
used; if we would accept it, it was ours now, and we might build
upon it as soon as we pleased. There is a report current, which
seems to have some foundation in fact, that there have been serious
troubles during the last two or three weeks in the vicinity of
Fashoda, near the Sobat.

January 11.‒Giegler Pasha has just returned from Fashoda, and this
is his statement of the present difficulty in the Soudan:

“A fanatical Arab by the name of Mohammad Achmet, who lived upon an
island in the Nile, south of here, by his much fasting and praying,
finally got his head turned, and believed that he was a prophet,
sent to be a Saviour of the people. He wrote letters all around the
country, and soon had a large following. Many flocked around his
standard, especially from among those disaffected ones who wished
to escape the payment of their taxes. They finally became obnoxious
to the government, and a detachment of 120 men was sent against
them on the island. These were not properly handled and were slain
at once, as fast as they landed. The leader now feared to remain
longer on the river, and crossing over with all the men, women and
children, who had gathered around him, he retired to a mountain,
some distance back, called Jebel Geder. It was the policy of the
government now to let them alone, but a new Governor of Fashoda
having been appointed, he must needs show his zeal by getting
after the rebels. He frequently asked permission to attack them,
and finally, contrary to orders, he collected the garrisons from
the Sobat Station, from Kaka, and from Fashoda, about 400 regular
soldiers, and taking with him 200 Shillooks, and other irregulars,
under the king or chief of the Shillooks, he marched against the
rebels.

“This chief of the Shillooks was a fine young man‒loyal and
energetic‒who administered affairs among his people in the
interests of the Government. The advance was made by forced
marches. They were six days on the way, and when the ‘fool’ reached
the mountain, instead of resting his men, he commenced the attack
after a two hours march on the seventh day, when the men were worn
out and utterly unfit for it. They were all cut to pieces and
slain. About 60 were taken prisoners, and only 70 out of about 600
escaped. The Governor of Fashoda was killed, and also the Chief of
the Shillooks, which we greatly regret, as we intended to make him
a Pasha. He will be a great loss to us. We wanted to send him to
Cairo, as he was anxious to see the Khedive.

“It is difficult to estimate the number of those who have assembled
around this fanatical leader, but probably it is in the vicinity of
1,500. We feared that they might take Fashoda, and so I went down
to see about it. I have left troops at Fashoda, but the Sobat is
abandoned, as there is really nothing there worth saving, except
a few straw huts, and they are welcome to them if they want them.
The station of Kaka is also left without a garrison. The people
have become uneasy, and these events, taken with the news of the
troubles at Cairo, have frightened them. We are expecting troops
from Cairo, but not to put down this muss, which we hope will all
be over before they arrive. We are short of troops at all points,
and need more to protect the country. I would not advise you to go
by boat. Wait and go by government steamer, if you go at all. I
have just returned from Fashoda, and these are about the facts in
the case.”

The above statement does not differ materially from the current
reports, except in the number of the insurgents, and that has
probably been greatly exaggerated in the minds of the people. It
must also be remembered that this is the best phase which the
government, wishing to smooth the matter over and hush it up, can
put upon it. The probable number of the insurgents is about five or
six thousand. They are now armed with some 600 Remington rifles,
besides their own native weapons, and are complete masters of the
country west of Kaka, and towards Kardofan. They are said to have
secret agents in Khartoum, who send them word of the movements of
the government. Their numbers are also said to be increasing every
day. Now, taking into consideration all that has been stated, we
seem to be shut up to one of three courses, viz.:

1. To follow the advice of the more timid, and considering our
journey necessarily brought to an end, to look about here, learn
all that we can, and then to return. This has been suggested as
perhaps our only course by some who wish to display “the better
part of valor.” I may say that I have all along felt that while
things are not as we could wish, that yet a way would be opened for
us to go forward. I cannot bring myself to turn around now and go
back, without at least seeing the Sobat. We both feel that nothing
short of actual danger to life ought to turn us back from our
purpose after coming so far, if we can find the means to go on.

2. To wait here till a government steamer is sent up to Gondokoro,
take passage in it and see the country as best we can. The most we
can learn about this plan is that no steamer is likely to leave
here in less than a month; that it will take fifty days to reach
Gondokoro, on account of the _sud_ and other obstructions, and
that it will not be possible to get away from there before the
rainy season sets in. The _sud_ is the great trouble. Sometimes
whole weeks have to be spent in the marshes in one spot, cutting a
channel through.

3. To get the use of a little steamer in some way and do what we
started out to do‒explore the region of the Sobat. The least that
we can get a steamer for is said to be £12 a day. We cannot expect
to be gone less than a month and do the work well. That would be
£360.

You can understand, I think, what our perplexity is. Our hope
now is to arrange it in some way through Giegler Pasha to get a
steamer at a more reasonable sum. As soon as we can do this, I
think we shall go on, and if we do, the French Consul, an able
French gentleman, and our Consul with others, advise us to ask for
a body-guard of soldiers from the government. We need your prayers,
and I wish we might have your wisdom in this emergency.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHING LING’S PASSPORT.

BY MRS. HARRIET A. CHEEVER.

“And you say there is no hope!”

“None whatever, that we can see.”

“But I am barely five-and-thirty, Doctor. Only think! still in my
early prime,” urged the pleading voice.

“I know it, Fairfax; I know it, my poor fellow; and would
thankfully have it otherwise, but God wills it so. I cannot deceive
you, and your special request was to know the truth.”

“But Heaven knows I was unprepared for it!” was the passionate
rejoinder.

“Try and calm yourself, my friend,” continued the doctor in
low, deliberate tones. “I’ve still another unwelcome piece of
intelligence: Mrs. Carter says she can remain no longer, feeling as
she does, completely worn out with her duties; and just now, with
so many critical cases on my hands, I hardly know where to look for
another nurse. You say there is no friend or relative you could
summon?”

“No; and it makes no sort of difference _who_ comes in Mrs.
Carter’s place; I might as well die alone like a dog, if I’ve got
to hand in my checks at the outset of the game‒confound this heat!”
and the voice even more than the words was full of bitterness and
rebellion.

Dr. Wharton took his hat, but paused again at the bedside.

“I am going around by the Chinese quarter this noon,” he said,
“and will do my best to bring some good assistant. Some of those
Chinamen make excellent nurses. Have you any objection to trying
one?”

“Oh, I don’t care a‒pin who comes,” answered the poor, impatient,
suffering man; and the next moment the doctor left the room as the
nurse glided softly in, and the patient closed his weary eyes.

Philip Fairfax was a man of wealth and education, but his fine
fortune had been sadly misused. Moreover, his naturally sound
physical constitution had been unwarrantably abused by a hard round
of indulgence in dissipation and vice, which had caused him in
his early manhood to fall an easy prey to the dangerous malarial
fever so prevalent at certain seasons, and which now had assumed a
malignant form, rendering recovery almost impossible.

Just previous to the foregoing conversation, a consultation of the
ablest physicians of the county had been held in Mr. Fairfax’s
elegant library, with what result we have already seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Do you give it up, Ching?”

“Yes: me givee up, but trust God still.”

“We tellee you, it impossible; college chances not for Chinese
boys.”

“It not impossible with mine God. All things are possible with Him.
Me only givee up for this term,” was the cheerful reply.

The scene was a Chinese cabin, scantily furnished, but extremely
neat in its simple arrangements. On lines outside, handsomely
made clothes were drying, while on the one large piece of kitchen
furniture in the cabin‒a huge stove‒numerous irons were heating.

Ching Ling, as he was called, was a great overgrown boy of
seventeen, who had picked up religion, as his companions
grotesquely name it, at some of the chapel meetings connected with
one of our institutions for learning. He was a quaint, original
character, and could turn his hand to almost anything useful‒turn
it to good purpose too. He had learned to read, nobody knew how or
when, and now the absorbing, irrepressible longing of his heart was
to get an education, at the college. It made no difference how much
or how often others ridiculed the eager desire, there it remained,
and after some laughable banter on the part of his less ambitious
associates on one occasion, as to his many projects and failures
in attempting an entrance to those halcyon halls, his good-natured
reply was:

“Oh, me wriggly in yet, somehow. You see!”

Ching Ling was ironing briskly and skillfully when Dr. Wharton’s
buggy stopped before the door, and without alighting the doctor
beckoned Ching to come to him.

“Want to earn some money, Ching?” asked the Doctor.

Ching’s delicate hands were instantly held out in mock display of
entreaty.

“Would you go into danger for money, Ching?”

The small hands were quickly withdrawn as he replied:

“Me do no wrong for muchee monee?”

“But would you go into a close, sick room, and nurse a gentleman
who has a dangerous disease‒a man perhaps dying with fever?”

“Yes, Doctor; me no afraid of the sickness or the fever. Mine God
would go with Ching; no God, all danger; with God, all safee.”

“Come on, then, I want you right away.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The days grew hotter and the fever grew fiercer, and the
requirements of the irritable, dying man became almost unendurable;
but the ungainly Ching never flinched as with untiring, patient
hands he waited upon the hard master whose young life was fast
burning itself out in the relentless fires of the unyielding fever.

Mr. Fairfax had been fitfully dozing at the close of a weaker,
but slightly more comfortable day, when, on suddenly opening his
eyes, he saw Ching catching a peep into a little, dark book he had
noticed before‒one he had evidently carried about with him.

All at once he asked in a thin, vexed voice:

“What confounded book is that you’re always reading?”

The slant eyes filled with tears as a hurt voice replied:

“This mine Bible, my Christ book; my passport in this book; this no
_confound_ book, this mine dear Bible!”

“Your passport!” and the thin voice really had the semblance of a
laugh it. “What kind of a passport, pray!”

“Listen: ‘There is no other name under Heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved. The blood of Jesus Christ his son
cleanseth us from all sin,’”‒here Ching was interrupted:

“Does it say _all_ sin, boy? look sharp, now!”

“Yes, master; all sin.”

“Let me see.”

A faint ray of light was admitted while the poor weak eyes scanned
the page; yes, it was there, sure enough.

Then the sick man, roused to momentary energy, asked questions‒a
few that night, more the next day, until by degrees he learned
all the story of poor Ching’s conversion; his eager desire for
learning, and as he read the Bible more and more to his now willing
listener, a new light and hope dawned for the sick man.

We cannot take space to tell minutely how Ching cried and rejoiced
when one day Mr. Fairfax had a lawyer come and so arrange his will
as to handsomely endow the college, also giving Ching‒faithful boy
that he was‒a “chance;” but this was not the best of it. Ching
prayed so hard, and was so skillful in his wonderful ministrations
at the sick man’s bedside, and the calming, soothing influence of
his passport, his “Christ book,” was so blessed, that, after all,
the naturally strong physical nature of the man asserted itself, to
the amazement and gratitude of the physicians, and Philip Fairfax
lived to be the almoner of his own bounties.

And now Ching Ling’s pointed fingers hold a pen powerful for good
among his countrymen, and Philip Fairfax is one of the chief
benefactors of the blessed institution whose inmates dearly love
the kind Christian gentleman, spending so much of his time and
money in their interest, while always in the breast pocket of
his coat is a little dark book, the very counterpart of Ching’s,
containing also the rich man’s passport in time to come, “to
mansions in the skies.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $885.25.

    Andover. Mrs. E. P.                                        1.00
    Augusta. South Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($30 of
      which from B. E. Potter to const. FRANK A.
      LITTLE, L. M.)                                          63.00
    Biddeford. J. N. A.                                        1.00
    Blue Hill. “A Friend”                                      1.00
    Brunswick. Mrs. David Patten.                              5.00
    Ellsworth. Mrs. L. T. Phelps.                             10.00
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and $1
      _for Freight, for Wilmington, N.C._                      1.00
    Farmington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Normal Sch., Wilmington, N.C._                           5.00
    Limington. Arzella Boothby.                                2.00
    Machias. Ladies, 3 Bbls. of C. and $2.09 _for
      Freight, for Wilmington, N.C._                           2.09
    Newcastle. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      18.00
    New Gloucester. “Friends,” by Mary K. Lunt,
      _for Student Aid, Selma, Ala._                          12.00
    Portland. Ladies Circle and Sab. Sch. of High
      St. Cong. Ch., Set Furniture _for
      Wilmington, N.C._
    Portland. E. G.                                            1.00
    Skowhegan. Mrs. L. W. Weston.                              5.00
    South Berwick. Dea. I. P. Yeaton, $10; Hugh
      and Philip Lewis, $3.                                   13.00
    South Freeport. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C. and $3 _for Freight, for Wilmington, N.C._            3.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. Of C., and
      $1.86 _for Freight, for Wilmington N.C._                 1.86
    Ladies in Maine, by Mary E Smith, Chairman
      Com., _for support of Lady Missionaries at
      Wilmington, N.C., and Selma, Ala_.                     670.30
                                                            -------
                                                             815.25

    LEGACIES.

    Bangor. Bequest of Miss Maria Thoreau, by Geo.
      A. Thatcher.                                            50.00
    Bethel. Estate of Sarah J. Chapman, by A. W.
      Valentine, Ex.                                          20.00
                                                            -------
                                                             885.25


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $429.89.

    Bristol. Mrs. H. M. E.                                     1.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Claremont. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             43.36
    Colebrook. J. A. H.                                        0.50
    Concord. South Cong. Ch., by M. P. W., to
      const. MRS. LOUISA M. WARE GREELEY, L.M.                30.00
    Dover. Mrs. S. H. Foye, $3; Mrs. Fairbanks,
      $2, _for Raleigh, N.C._                                  5.00
    Durham. A. G. W.                                           0.51
    Epping. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.50
    Exeter. “A Friend,” _for Mendi M._                         8.00
    Francestown. A. F.                                         0.50
    Great Falls. First Cong. Ch., $28.89; Mrs. M.
      M. W., 50c.                                             29.39
    Keene. Mrs. J. A. G.                                       0.60
    Lancaster. H. F. H.                                        1.00
    Mason. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and $1
      _for Freight, for Wilmington, N.C._                      1.00
    Nashua. G. H.                                              1.00
    Nashua. Rev. and Mrs. F. D. Austin, $10; Mrs.
      E. J. Hall, $11, _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                     21.00
    Nashua. “Friends,” Set Furniture, val. $40,
      _for Wilmington, N.C._
    New Ipswich. J. W. C.                                      0.50
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               49.53
    South Newmarket. Ladies, 2 Bbls. C., _for
      Wilmington, N.C._
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.50
    Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson                           10.00
    Wentworth. Ephraim Cook, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Wilton. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Savannah, Ga._
                                                            -------
                                                            $231.89

    LEGACY.

    Nashua. Estate of ‒‒‒‒                                   198.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $429.89


  VERMONT, $214.89.

    Burlington. J. P.                                          1.00
    Cornwall. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 33.30
    Greensborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.00
    Ludlow. Mrs. L. M.                                         1.00
    Monkton. Henry Miles                                       5.00
    Morrisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           15.00
    Pawlet. A. Flower, _for John Brown Steamer_                2.00
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            46.00
    Post Mill Village. Mrs. E. J. C. May, Bbl. of
      C., _for Savannah, Ga._
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    49.17
    Thetford. P. R.                                            1.00
    Townshend. Mrs. M. B. Burnap                               5.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of C.
      and $1 _for Freight_                                     1.00
    Wells River. H. D.                                         0.51
    West Brattleborough. Dea. P. F. Perry                      3.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.25
    Wethersfield. Mrs. Edson Chamberlin                       10.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.66


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,032.83.

    Amherst. “C.” ($10 of which _for John Brown
      Steamer_)                                               25.00
    Andover. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      Books, _for Emerson Inst._
    Andover. West Parish Juv. Miss’y Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Auburndale. “Friends in Cong. Ch.,” for
      Student Aid, Fisk U.                                    30.00
    Beverly. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Washington St.
      Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta U._
    Beverly. A. H.                                             0.50
    Boston. Nancy B. Curtis, $200; B. F.
      Whittemore, $25; “A. L. M.,” $20; Mrs. Susan
      Collins, $5; 8 Individuals, $1 each; 6
      Individuals, 50c. each; E. C. H., 51c.                 261.51
    Boston. By S. D. Smith, organ, _for Savannah,
      Ga._                                                   400.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      _for Lady Missionaries_                                204.78
    Boston. Trinity Ch., by Mrs. Hayden, _for
      Mobile, Ala._                                           20.00
    Boston. Miss L. P. Auld, _for Student Aid,
      Normal Sch., Wilmington, N.C._                           4.00
    Bradford. Ladies, 2 Bbls C. _for Wilmington,
      N.C._
    Brookline. “S.A.”                                         20.00
    Campello. Mrs. A. L.                                       0.51
    Chelsea. Ladies Union Home Mission Band, 5
      Bbls. of C., _for Chattanooga, Tenn._, val.
      $100
    Cummington. “A few Friends”                                8.00
    Dunstable. J. S., _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                      1.00
    East Bridgewater. C. H.                                    1.00
    Falmouth. ‒‒ to const. GEO. E. CLARKE L. M.               30.00
    Fall River. M. E.                                          1.00
    Fitchburg. W. M. Leathe, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                10.00
    Framingham. Aux. to Woman’s Home Miss. Assn.,
      $15; Ladies of Plym. Ch., Box of Bedding,
      _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                           15.00
    Framingham. Mrs. F. B. H., 50c.; Mrs. E. E.
      G., 51c.                                                 1.01
    Gilbertville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Great Barrington. Mrs. L. M. Chapin                        5.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                23.37
    Greenwich. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. REV. E.
      P. BLODGETT, L. M.                                      30.00
    Groton. Miss Elizabeth Farnsworth                         20.00
    Harwichport. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Haverhill. Center Ch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Talladega C._
    Hingham. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          3.38
    Holliston. “District No. 4 Bible Christians”              25.00
    Holliston. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
    Housatonic. W. G.                                          0.51
    Hubbardston. A. G. D., $1; Mrs. A. B., 50c.                1.50
    Hubbardston. Mrs. E. B. P., $1; “E. C.,” $1.
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 2.00
    Lanesborough. Rev. W. F. Avery                             5.00
    Lawrence. Sab. Sch. of Lawrence St. Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid_, Fisk U.                              50.00
    Leominster. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $171.30; “A.,” $10                                     181.30
    Lowell. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              70.00
    Lowell. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of
      C. and $4.50 _for Freight_; First Cong. Ch.,
      2 Bbls. of C. _for Wilmington, N.C._                     4.50
    Lowell. Mrs. M. E. Bartlett, _for Student Aid,
      Normal Sch., Wilmington, N.C._                           8.00
    Malden. Rev. W. H. Willcox, D.D. _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, $2,550,
      _for Buildings, Wilmington, N.C._, and $50
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                           2,600.00
    Marlborough. Class in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              10.00
    Medfield. Mary J. Cheney, 2 Bbls. of C., _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Medway. Miss C. P.                                         0.60
    Middleborough. Mrs. G. H. D.                               1.00
    Monson. Mrs. G. W. Andrews, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Newburyport. ANN P. BASSETT, in memory of her
      sister, and to const. herself L. M.                     30.00
    Newburyport. J. D., $1; Miss P. N., 50c.; Mrs.
      J. B., 50c.                                              2.00
    Northborough. Mrs. H. B. D.                                1.00
    Paxton. Cong. Ch., by Ella L. Rowell, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Peabody. Prof. J. K. C.                                    1.00
    Peru. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_.                                               10.00
    Phillipston. Eva C. Knowlton, Bbl. of C., _for
      Savannah, Ga._
    Reading. James M. Carlton, $5; Mrs. S. P. W.,
      50c.                                                     5.50
    Rockland. Elijah Shaw to const. MISS NANCY
      HOLBROOK L. M.                                          35.00
    Roxbury. Miss S. B. Jones.                                10.00
    Rutland. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Salem. Primary Class in Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              12.00
    Salem. Mrs. P. H. McI.                                     1.00
    Somerville. Matthew P. Elliot. Box Hats and $2
      _for Freight, for Atlanta U._                            2.00
    Somerville. H. B. S.                                       0.50
    Southbridge. Miss S. R. L.                                 1.00
    South Hadley. Mt. H. Sem., “A Friend.”                     2.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $51; Miss Grover’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._, $12; to const.
      MRS. LUCY E. REED and MISS CHARLOTTE B.
      TOWER L. Ms.                                            63.00
    Springfield. Mrs. J. D. L., $1; G. B. K. $1                2.00
    Stoneham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              25.30
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Upton. Ladies’ Soc. (ad’l), _for Freight_                  0.30
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         24.41
    Warwick. A. W.                                             1.00
    Watertown. “Corban Society,” Phillips Ch.,
      $18.17, _for Independent Lincoln Temperance
      Soc., St. Augustine, Fla._, also 3 Bbls. of
      C., _for Talladega C._                                  18.17
    Watertown. Mrs. Wm. R.                                     0.60
    West Boylston. “Willing Workers,” $35 _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._, $25 _for Student
      Aid, Storrs Sch._, and $10 _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                70.00
    West Boylston. C. T. W., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    West Dennis. Mrs. S. S. C.                                 1.00
    West Newton. J. H. P.                                      0.50
    Winchester. Mrs. N. W. C. H.                               0.50
    Woburn. “A Friend”                                         2.00
    Worcester. Central Church, $92.58; Old So. Ch.
      and Soc. (ad’l), $1; M. F. W., $1                       94.58
    Worcester. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               50.00
    Worcester. Children, by M. F. W., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           1.00
    Worcester. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Central Ch.,
      2 Bbls. of C., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._
    ‒‒ Two Bbls. C., _for Talladega C._
    ‒‒ Bbl. of C., _for Macon, Ga._
                                                          --‒‒‒----
                                                          $4,728.83

    LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of Rev. Henry B. Hooker, D.D.,
      in part                                               $200.00
    Lancaster. Estate of Miss Sophia Stearns, by
      Wm. W. Wyman, Ex.                                        4.00
    Westfield. Estate of DEA. CHARLES A. JESSUP              100.00
                                                          --‒‒‒----
                                                          $5,032.83


  RHODE ISLAND, $101.77.

    Newport. D. B. Fitts                                       5.00
    Peace Dale. Rev. O. P. E.                                  1.00
    Pawtucket. Mrs. H. M. Blodgett                            10.00
    Providence. Beneficent Cong. Ch., $52.29;
      North Cong. Ch., $28.48; Union Cong. Ch. and
      Soc. (ad’l) $5                                          85.77


  CONNECTICUT, $1,858.53.

    Ansonia. Mrs. J. D., $1; Mrs. M. T., $1; C.
      C., 50c.                                                 2.50
    Bridgeport. V. C., 50c.; Mrs. J. E. G. C.,
      50c.; W. G. L., 50c.                                     1.50
    Bridgeport. E. B. P. and A. B. P., $1 ea.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_.                                2.00
    Bristol. Cong. Ch., _for Mendi M._                       143.79
    Burnside. Sab. Sch. Class, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Canton Center. Mrs. S. B. H.                               1.00
    Chapin. Rev. J. W. S., $1; J. W. C., 51c.                  1.51
    Chester. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. M. A.
      HURLBURT and MRS. JABEZ BACKUS L. Ms., $70;
      Mrs. Sarah H. Watrous, $2                               72.00
    Chester. Hon. E. C. Hungerford, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Collinsville. ‒‒, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     13.50
    Danbury. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., Box of
      bedding and $2 _for Freight, for Talladega
      C._                                                      2.00
    Darien. Mrs. N. E. G.                                      1.00
    Danielsonville. J. H. B.                                   0.50
    Derby. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          12.25
    East Wallingford. Mrs. Benj. Hall.                         5.00
    East Woodstock. S. N. and E. L., $1 each                   2.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Sab. Sch., bal. _for
      furnishing room, Talladega C._                          10.00
    Groton. Mrs. M. E. W.                                      1.00
    Guilford. Mrs. Sarah Todd, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Guilford. H. N. D.                                         0.50
    Hartford. Mrs. E. Hills, $400; “Two Members
      Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.,” $40; Mrs. Catherine
      R. Hillyer, $30, to const., MISS CATHERINE
      R. HILLYER L. M.; South Cong. Ch., $11.                481.00
    Hartford. D. H. Wells, _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               25.00
    Hartford. Mrs. John Olmstead, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Jewett City. Mrs. E. G. B.                                 1.00
    Lakeville. Mrs. S. P. Robbins                              5.00
    Lebanon. W. H.                                             1.00
    Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Meriden. Center Cong. Ch.                                 23.50
    Middlefield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Mill Brook. E. A.                                          1.00
    Morris. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. WM. L.
      BURGESS L. M.                                           30.00
    New Britain. Mrs. A. A.                                    1.00
    New Hartford. John Richards’ Bible Class,
      North Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             22.00
    New Haven. College St. Cong. Ch., $49.13;
      Dwight Place Ch., $30; “T.,” $10; Mrs. Eliza
      A. Prudden, $5; M. N., $1; R. F., $1; Rev.
      S. W. Barnum, 6 vols. “Romanism as it is”               96.13
    Norfolk. The Misses Eldridge, $100; R.
      Battelle, $10; Mrs. Welch, $5, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                         115.00
    Norfolk. Miss Eldridge, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     10.00
    North Guilford. Mrs. Eben F. Dudley                        5.00
    Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., $133.74; First
      Cong. Ch., $17.85                                      151.59
    Saybrook. Mrs. M. L. Whittlesey, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Savannah, Ga._
    Seymour. Cong. Ch.                                        14.62
    South Britain. E. M. A.                                    1.00
    South Norwalk. Rev. Wm. H. Gilbert                        10.00
    South Windsor. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Mobile,
      Ala._                                                   13.00
    Rockville. Bbl. of C., and $1.59 _for
      Freight_, by Mrs. A. P. Hammond, _for
      Raleigh, N.C._                                           1.59
    Roxbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               23.80
    Terryville. A. S. Gaylord, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Terryville. “A Friend,” _for ed. of Indians,
      Hampton N. & A. Inst._                                  26.25
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      37.00
    Trumbull. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               8.00
    Wallingford. Rev. E. J. D.                                 1.00
    Washington. “Z.,” _for Indian M._                          1.00
    Waterbury. First Cong. Ch.                               300.00
    West Avon. Cong. Ch.                                       7.00
    Westbrook. Charles Chapman, 2d, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Windsor Locks. Mrs. L. P. Dexter                           6.00
    Winsted. Mrs. Emily W. Case ($10 of which _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._)                             11.00
    Winsted. Mrs. C. S., $1; Cong. Ch., Box S. S.
      Books                                                    1.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     40.00


  NEW YORK, $810.20.

    Albany. Vina S. Knowles                                    5.00
    Amsterdam. S. L. Bell                                      5.00
    Amsterdam. Sab. Sch. Class Presb. Ch., _for
      Ladies’ Island, S.C._                                    2.50
    Bangor. Cong. Ch.                                         15.24
    Brentwood. E. F. Richardson, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Brooklyn. Mrs. Lewis Tappan, $10; Rev. E. P.
      Thwing, $10, and 100 copies “Persian Queen;”
      Mrs. Rev. Geo. Hollis, $2                               22.00
    Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Church of the Pilgrims,
      _for ed. of Indians, Hampton N. & A. Inst._            200.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Missionaries at Ladies’ Island, S.C., and
      Fernandina, Fla._                                      150.00
    Castile. Rev. Jeremiah Porter                             20.50
    Champion. Box of Books, by Rev. C. W. Fifield.
    Dryden. Mrs. M. L. K.                                      1.00
    East Bloomfield. Mr. and Mrs. P. W. Peck, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      3.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        13.19
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       38.35
    Goshen. “Freedmen’s Friend,” $2, and Bundle of
      C.                                                       2.00
    Hamilton. Second Cong. Ch.                                17.00
    Honeoye. Cong. Ch.                                        64.75
    Jamesport. Rev. T. N. Benedict                            15.00
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                    11.00
    New Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             26.46
    New York. Rev. H. C. Hayden, D.D., $10; Miss
      E. Merritt, $10; Dr. A. S. Ball, $5; “A
      Friend,” $5; Miss M. H., 50c.                           30.50
    North Walton. Cong. Sab. Sch., $13.24; Cong.
      Ch. $15.40                                              28.64
    Oneonta. Mrs. W. McC., $1; Mrs. H. C. S., $1;
      L. J. S., $1                                             3.00
    Patchogue. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C. _for
      Marion, Ala._
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Poughkeepsie. W. C. S.                                     0.50
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Saugerties. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. S.                                        1.00
    Union Valley. William C. Angel, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           2.00
    Volney. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                      18.67
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      REV. SAMUEL B. SHERRILL L. M.                           61.90
    West Camden. N. C.                                         1.00
    West Camden. E. W. C., _for John Brown Steamer_            1.00


  NEW JERSEY, $74.63.

    Elizabeth. Mrs. H. W. P.                                   1.00
    Jersey City. Sab. Sch. of Tab. Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    Lyons Farms. Raymond T. Crane, package S. S.
      Papers.
    Montclair. Mrs. J. H. A.                                   0.50
    Morristown. Rev. W. B.                                     1.00
    Newark. Belleville Ave. Cong. Ch., Samuel
      Baldwin, deceased, by J. H. Denison                     10.00
    Newfield. Rev. Charles Willey                             10.00
    Orange Valley. Ladies Benev. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., by Mrs. Austin Adams, Bbl. of Bedding
      and 50c. _for Freight, for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst._; Mrs. A. A., 50c. _for Mag._                      1.00
    Paterson. Sab. Sch. of Tabernacle Cong. Ch.
      $15.63; Mrs. C. A. F. 50c.                              16.13
    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        25.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $77.00.

    Gibson. “Friends,” $60, to const. DR. AMASA
      WARD and HENRY R. MACK L. Ms.; L. G., 50c.;
      Miss B. C., 50c.                                        61.00
    Hermitage. Mrs. Margaret Stewart, $4; Mrs. E.
      P., $1                                                   5.00
    Philadelphia. M. E. M.                                     1.00
    Prentissvale. Mrs. C. L. Allen, _for John
      Brown Steamer_.                                         10.00


  OHIO, $326.99.

    Barnes. G. McF., $1; A. McF., 50c.                         1.50
    Burton. Mrs. H. F.                                         0.50
    Castalia. Mrs. I. W. S.                                    1.00
    Chardon. Cong. Ch.                                        13.25
    Chardon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    Claridon. D. B. L. and O. W., 50c. ea.                     1.00
    Cleveland. Mrs. H. P. Hickox, $10; Miss B. J.
      D., 51c.                                                10.51
    Cleveland. Sab. Sch. of Heights Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                               8.00
    Columbus. Rev. Benj. Talbot, _for Library,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Fostoria. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            20.25
    Harmar. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.39
    Lexington. Rev. D. A. S.                                   0.50
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           16.71
    Madison. W. H. S.                                          1.00
    Oberlin. Harris Lewis                                      5.00
    Oberlin. Miss J. C. Miller, _for Freight, for
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Painesville. Hon. Reuben Hitchcock, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                25.00
    Plain. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                        5.38
    Sharonville. J. H.                                         1.00
    South Salem. D. S. Pricer, $4.50; Miss M. M.
      M., 50c.                                                 5.00
    Strongsville. Elijah Lyman                                10.00
    Toledo. Mrs. M. A. Harrington                              5.00
    Toledo. “Friends,” by Miss Parmelee, _for
      Memphis, Tenn._                                         25.00
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed ($1.50 of which
      _for John Brown Steamer_)                                2.00
    Wakeman. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           29.75
    Warren. Emma Ways’ S. S. Class, _for Mobile,
      Ala._                                                    3.75
    Weymouth. J. G. Webster, _for Freight_                     3.50
                                                            ‒‒‒----
                                                            $226.99

    LEGACY.

    Oberlin. Estate of Mary I. Hulburd, by Hiram
      Hulburd, Ex.                                           100.00
                                                            ‒‒‒----
                                                            $326.99


  ILLINOIS, $312.55.

    Altamont. Miss E. P., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            1.00
    Aurora. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                        39.19
    Batavia. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Byron. I. S. K.                                            1.00
    Chicago. E. Rathbone, $15; “A Friend,” $5;
      Mrs. J. H. McArthur, $5; M. C. S., $1; H.
      B., $1; Mrs. E. F. C., 50c.                             27.50
    Chicago. Col. C. G. Hammond, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                60.00
    Chicago. Ladies of U. P. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               25.00
    Crystal Lake. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Dundee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            3.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch.                                          10.78
    Englewood. Mrs. P. I. F.                                   1.00
    Evanston. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of Christmas
      Gifts and $2 _for Mobile, Ala._                          2.00
    Galesburg. First Ch. of Christ, $43.60; D. W.
      F., $1                                                  44.60
    Millington. Mrs. C. J. O. V., $1; Mrs. D. W.
      J., $1                                                   2.00
    Paxton. Cong. Ch.                                         18.48
    Princeville. W. S. Stevens                                 5.00
    Rockford. B. B.                                            1.00
    Roseville. Mrs. S. M. Axtell, _for freight for
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Shabbona. Chas. White (birthday gift)                     10.00
    Sycamore. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            7.00
    Sycamore. Mrs. E. W., A. C. W. and W. H. W.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 1.00
    Turner. Mrs. Roxanna Currier                               2.00
    Wyanet. J. R. P.                                           1.00


  MICHIGAN, $1,599.61.

    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                45.65
    Armada. First Cong. Ch.                                   34.26
    Battle Creek. S. A. G., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Blissfield. W. C.                                          0.50
    Covert. W. F. C.                                           1.00
    Detroit. Mrs. C. H. Ladd, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Galesburgh. P. H. Whitford, $100; Sarah M.
      Sleeper, $5                                            105.00
    Grand Rapids. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev. J. H.
      H. Sengstacke_                                          70.00
    Greenville. Mrs. E. P. C.                                  1.00
    Hudson. A. W. C.                                           0.50
    Kalamazoo. Mrs. J. A. Kent                                 5.00
    Morenci. Cong. Sab. Sch., $4; Mrs. L. A. A.,
      $1, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                      5.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                         11.00
    Owosso. First Cong. Ch. ($20 of which from A.
      Gould)                                                  35.05
    Saint Clair. Cong. Ch.                                    15.61
    Summit. Ladies Missionary Soc., $4.24; Mrs. A.
      Van S., 50c.                                             4.74
    Tallman. First Cong. Ch.                                   0.85
    Union City. “A Friend,” $1,000; Cong. Ch.
      ($3.50 of which from Andrew Lucas), $157.95;
      A. L., 50c.                                          1,158.45
                                                          ‒‒‒‒‒----
                                                          $1,499.61

    LEGACY.

    Kalamazoo. Estate of Sophia Hitchcock, by D.
      T. Allen, Ex.                                          100.00
                                                          ‒‒‒‒‒----
                                                          $1,599.61


  WISCONSIN, $130.50.

    Baraboo. Mrs. M. C. Tilton                                 2.00
    Black Earth. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary_                                              5.00
    Bristol and Paris. Cong. Chs.                             37.00
    Caledonia. T. S.                                           1.00
    Columbus. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Olivet Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                   8.00
    Fond du Lac. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            10.00
    Fond du Lac. H. S. M., 50c.; Mrs. H. B., 50c.              1.00
    Fredonia. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Madison. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             5.00
    Menasha. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               38.50
    Plattville. Rev. A. P. Johnson, _for Mag._                 3.50
    Ripon. Ladies of Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. of C.,
      _for Talladega C._
    Superior. Mrs. J. W. Gates                                 5.00
    Tomah. Rev. E. Chalmers Haynes, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           5.00
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             8.00


  IOWA, $418.79.

    Anamosa. Mrs. D. McCarn                                    2.00
    Burlington. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $17.50; Mrs.
      E. S. Grimes, $20, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           37.50
    Clay. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                            4.00
    Clinton. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Central City. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                         16.00
    Davenport. Edwards’ Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Davenport. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           12.50
    Des Moines. Ladies of Cong. Ch. 2 Bbls. of C.
      and Bedding, _for Talladega C._
    Fayette. H. W. Waterbury                                   3.00
    Genoa Bluff. Cong. Ch.                                     8.00
    Green Mountain. REV. HENRY L. CHASE and MRS.
      HENRY L. CHASE, to const. themselves L. Ms              75.00
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              28.49
    Grinnell. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Keokuk. Cong. Ch.                                         67.00
    New Hampton. Mrs. E. F. Powers                             2.50
    Oskaloosa. Rev. Asa Turner, $10; Mrs. Asa
      Turner, $10; Mrs. B. F. Northrop, $4, _for
      Student Aid Tougaloo U._                                24.00
    Postville. First Cong. Ch.                                11.10
    Tabor. Dr. J. F. S.                                        0.50
    Waltham. Wm. Mason                                         5.00
    Algona. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., $3.45; Cedar
      Rapids, Woman’s Miss’y Soc., $10, by Mrs. M.
      G. Phillips, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           13.45
    Cresco. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1.25; Decorah,
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $10; Elkader, Mrs. Mary
      H. Carter, $2; Mrs. H. B. C., $1; Fayette,
      Ladies of Cong. Ch., $3.75; Lansing, Woman’s
      Miss. Soc., $3; Marshalltown, Young Ladies’
      Soc., $5; Monona, Ladies’ Aid Soc., $1;
      McGregor, Woman’s Miss. Soc., $12; National,
      Mrs. Dea. Sherman, $2; Ogden, Ladies of
      Cong. Ch., $1.50; Postville, Ladies of Cong.
      Ch., $3.75; Traer, Ladies of Cong. Ch.,
      $6.50, by Mrs. Henry L. Chase, _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           53.75


  MINNESOTA, $240.32.

    Alexandria. First Cong. Ch., _for Flatonia,
      Tex._                                                    6.00
    Campbell. Samuel F. Porter and Mrs. L. H.
      Porter, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     100.00
    Duluth. “* M. *,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     10.00
    Glyndon. S. N. W., _for Emerson Inst._                     1.00
    Hamilton. Wm. E. Brown, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.10
    Hawley. Adna Colburn, Sr., $10; Adna Colburn,
      Jr., $10                                                20.00
    Hawley. M. C., _for John Brown Steamer_                    1.00
    Marshall. Cong. Ch.                                       19.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $30.22; E. J. G.,
      50c.                                                    30.72
    Northfield. Rev. H. L. Kendall, _for Teacher,
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          50.00
    Saint Paul. Rev. R. H.                                     0.50


  KANSAS, $24.35.

    Grant. Mrs. S. D. Peirce                                  10.00
    Manhattan. Sab. Ch. of First Cong. Ch.                    14.35


  NEBRASKA, $32.13.

    Exeter. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                               15.00
    Indianola. Rev. Amos Dresser, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Knox County. First Cong. Ch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.13
    Wayland. Sarah P. Locke                                    2.00


  UTAH TER., $2.

    White Rocks. Miss Eliza C. Ayer                            2.00


  COLORADO, $42.

    Colorado Springs. Young People’s Mission
      Circle, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                 41.00
    Evans. Mrs. A. L. V., _for John Brown Steamer_             1.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $4.

    Olympia. First Cong. Ch.                                   4.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $10.

    Washington. Instructors and Students in Howard
      University, _for John Brown Steamer_                    10.00


  MARYLAND, $100.

    Baltimore. T. D. Anderson                                100.00


  KENTUCKY, $13.01.

    Ashland. Hugh Means                                       10.00
    Berea. Sab. Sch. of Ch. of Christ, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           3.01


  VIRGINIA, $2.10.

    Elm Grove. Mrs. B. D. A., $1; C. P. A., $1;
      Emma Herbst, 10c. _for John Brown Steamer_               2.10


  TENNESSEE, $514.98.

    Cave Spring. Students of Milligan College,
      _for Mendi M._                                           2.00
    Green Brier. Miss S. E. T.                                 0.51
    Grassy Cove. Rev. J. S.                                    1.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          202.50
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      308.95


  NORTH CAROLINA, $200.51.

    McLeansville. M. A. McL.                                   0.51
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                         195.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $315.90.

    Charleston. Avery Institute, Tuition                     292.65
    Charleston. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Greenwood. Tuition                                         3.25


  GEORGIA, $1,148.73.

    Atlanta. Atlanta University, Tuition, $278.63;
      Rent, $4                                               282.63
    Atlanta. Storr’s School, Tuition, $435.60;
      Rent, $6                                               441.60
    Atlanta. Cong. Ch.                                       120.00
    Savannah. Beach Institute, Tuition, $142.95;
      Rent, $11.90                                           154.85
    Savannah. Cong. Ch.                                       40.00
    McIntosh. Dorchester Academy, Tuition                     18.20
    Macon. Lewis High School, Tuition                         86.45
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00


  ALABAMA, $569.78.

    Anniston. Tuition                                          2.50
    Florence. Cong. Ch.                                        2.33
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           204.10
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Mobile. Cong. Ch., $1; Lulu A. C. $1, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      2.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Montgomery. M. Blanche Curtis, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         9.00
    Talladega. Talladega College, Tuition                    163.75
    Talladega. “The Strivers,” Talladega C. _for
      Mendi M._                                                1.10


  LOUISIANA, $164.50.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition                164.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $142.95.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University, Tuition,
      $117.45; Rent $15                                      132.45
    Tougaloo. Cong. Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_             10.00
    Jackson. W. L.                                             0.50


  TEXAS, $176.00.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 173.00
    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      2.40
    Whitman. Mrs. I. H.                                        0.60


  CALIFORNIA, $10.00.

    Santa Cruz. Pliny Fay                                     10.00


  INCOME FUND, $140.00.

    C. F. Dike Fund                                           87.50
    Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                           35.00
    Theological Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._               17.50


  CANADA, 50c.

    Guelph. S. H.                                              0.50


  ENGLAND, $25.41.

    Congregational Union, £5 5s.                              25.41
                                                          ‒‒‒‒‒----
          Total                                           16,152.58
    Total from Oct. 1st to Feb. 28th                    $100,045.97


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Derby, Conn. First Cong. Ch.                              19.25
    Hartford, Conn. Windsor Av. Cong. Ch.                     19.50
    Norfolk, Conn. “Friends in Cong. Ch.”                     24.00
    Southington, Conn. Coll. Union Meeting, First
      Cong. Ch.                                               20.19
    Arthington Mission Fund, Income                          337.65
    London, Eng. Freedman’s Missions Aid Soc., £300        1,458.00
                                                          ‒‒‒‒‒----
                                                           1,878.59
    Previously ack. in Jan. receipts                         313.14
                                                          ‒‒‒‒‒----
          Total                                           $2,191.73

                                   H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                               56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




                      CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                        HAVE JUST PUBLISHED

THE BIBLE COMMENTARY; NEW TESTAMENT, VOL. 4.‒Hebrews, by William
Kay, D.D.; The Epistle of James, by Dean Scott; The Epistles of
Peter, by Canon Cook and Professor Lumby; The Epistles of John,
by the Bishop of Derry; Jude, by Professor Lumby; Revelation, by
Archdeacon Lee. 1 vol., 8vo., $5.

             Complete in 10 vols. Royal 8vo. $5 each.

                       THE BIBLE COMMENTARY

         (Known in England as _The Speaker’s Commentary_).

_The Bible Commentary_ was begun ten years ago, with the object
of making available to students of the Scriptures and ordinary
lay readers the accumulated treasures of modern antiquarian and
philological research.

The contributors are in every case men who have made special
investigation in some department of Biblical learning, and have
been chosen for their special fitness. More than forty of the best
English scholars have united to make this Commentary the most
scholarly, instructive and valuable that exists for the general
reader. Among them are included Professor Westcott, Professor
Plumtree, The Archbishop of York, The Bishop of Ely, Professor
Rawlinson, Dr. R. Payne Smith, Dr. H. Longueville Mansel, Canon
Cook, Canon Lightfoot and Dean Howson.


                        THE OLD TESTAMENT.

Vol. I.‒Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy.

Vol. II.‒Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, 1st Kings.

Vol. III.‒2d Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther.

Vol. IV.‒Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon.

Vol V.‒Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations.

Vol. VI.‒Ezekiel, Daniel, The Minor Prophets.


                        THE NEW TESTAMENT.

Vol. I.‒Matthew, Mark and Luke.

Vol. II.‒John and Acts.

Vol. III.‒Romans to Philemon.

Vol. IV.‒Hebrews to Revelation.


                         CRITICAL NOTICES.

Decidedly the best of the many series of Commentaries on the whole
Bible recently issued.‒_The Presbyterian Review._

Thank God for this glorious constellation of talent, learning and
piety, combined to elucidate the word of God for the use of those
great masses of the people who are not and cannot be scholars.‒_The
Christian Union._

There is no other Commentary which can take the place of this.
Those who desire something for family use, something in which the
unlearned may find condensed in a reasonable space an explanation
of difficult passages so far as recent research enables them to be
explained, will find this Commentary the best that has yet been
published.‒_The American Church Review._

For sale by all booksellers, or sent by mail, upon receipt of
price, by

                     CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS,

                Nos. 743 & 745 Broadway, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            Father Kemp

Originator of the world-renowned “Old Folks Concerts,” and
proprietor of the popular Boot and Shoe Store, 1,090 Washington
street, Boston, testifies by the following letter to the benefit he
received from using Hood’s Sarsaparilla.

                                  BOSTON, Mass., Jan. 16, 1882.

GENTLEMEN.‒Your preparation has done so much for me that I cannot
refrain from sending you my simple, unsolicited testimony. In my
travels through this country and Europe, and giving two concerts
per day for more than twenty years, I found at last my health
became so impaired that I had to give it up. That was fifteen years
ago. Since that time until last summer (when I commenced taking
Hood’s Sarsaparilla), I had scarcely seen a well day. Dangerous
symptoms with constant roaring in the head, abscesses forming,
with fearful suffering until they would break, and then only a
temporary relief until another would form. My legs from the ankle
to knee would swell and turn black; in fact, I suffered all that
man could suffer and live. I consulted the most eminent physicians
in the country and could get no relief. A friend prevailed on me
to try your preparation. I did so. Result, to-day I am a well
man; no pains or ails, and can do as much work, feel as fresh, as
forty years ago. I am well known through the country, and would be
willing to answer any letter of inquiry as regards my case.

                          Respectfully yours,       FATHER KEMP,

Originator of the “Old Folks Concerts,” and sixty-one years old.

                       Hood’s Sarsaparilla,

Sold by all druggists. Price $1; six for $5. Made only by C. I.
HOOD & CO., Apothecaries, Lowell, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: What it will do.]

Fifty cents enclosed in a letter and mailed to JOHN D. WATTLES,
725 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, with a request that _The Sunday
School Times_ be sent to you, will result in your receiving that
paper every week for three months. _The Sunday School Times_ is
a large 16-page weekly paper, and is used by more than 40,000
teachers. You will at least wish to try it for three months, if you
are not already a subscriber. At the end of three mouths, if you
feel that your investment has not been a good one, the publisher
will send the money back to you. _The Scholars’ Quarterly_,
published at the same office, would help your scholars. Its
beautiful double-page colored map is alone worth the price of the
book. Send seven cents for a specimen copy.

Do you know of any better time to attend to all this than _just
now_ as you read this notice?

_In writing, please mention this paper._


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           N.Y. WITNESS.

☞ There will be many important events occurring during the coming
year that you will not know about unless you take the WITNESS. Do
you know now, for instance, that a sober and Christian young man,
a private soldier of the U. S. Army, has been thrown into prison
and subjected to great privations and indignities by his superior
officers‒treated worse than the miserable wretch Guiteau‒for
writing a letter to the WITNESS‒a letter which is of great
importance to all young men and all parents? There are many things
published in the WITNESS that other papers dare not print, for fear
of offending some rich and powerful corporation, and so losing
their patronage.

                The price of the WITNESS is $1.50
                  a year, post-paid; club price,
                      five for $6.00. Sample
                          copy sent free.

Ministers, Missionaries, Evangelists of all Denominations, and
Teachers can have the WITNESS for One Dollar a year.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,

                     New York Witness Office,

                17 to 21 VANDEWATER St., NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

=Case’s School Furniture.=—Parties about to purchase School
Furniture are invited to correspond with us. Our work is all of
the most approved patterns, and is unequaled for strength and
durability.

=Camp’s Outline Maps.=—Set of 9 maps, with key. No. 1. Hemispheres;
No. 2. North America; No. 3. United States; No. 4, South America;
No. 5. Europe; No. 6 Asia; No 7. Africa; No. 8. Oceanica; No. 9.
Physical World.

=Case’s Bible Atlas.=—Embracing 16 full-page maps, quarto size,
beautifully printed in colors, covering the whole ground of
Biblical Geography; also 16 pages of Explanatory Notes on the maps.
Sent by mail on receipt of price; bound in boards, $1.; cloth,
$1.50. _Agents wanted._

                  Circulars sent on application.

                   O. D. CASE & CO., Publishers

                                AND

                  School Furniture Manufacturers,

                          HARTFORD,‒CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          KELLY & JONES,

                202 Greene Street,       New York.

                       LOW AND HIGH PRESSURE

                               STEAM

                             AND OTHER

                        HEATING APPARATUS.


                      We make a Specialty of

                  Steam Heating and Ventilating
                 Apparatus, for Churches, Schools,
                       Public Buildings and
                        Private Residences.

Plans and Specifications of the latest and most approved methods
furnished on application.


Our apparatus is in operation in the following buildings:

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.; Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Georgia; Third Judicial District Court House, New York City; Museum
of Art, New York City; Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.,
New York City; State College, near Bellefonte, Pa.; New York State
Reformatory, Elmira, N.Y.; Point St. School, Providence, R.I.;
Board of Education (Schools), Pittsburgh, Pa.; Van Wert Co. Court
House, Van Wert, Ohio; Mahoning Co. Court House, Youngstown, Ohio;
Washington Co. Court House, Washington, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil.
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil.
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use.
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.


OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.‒Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.‒Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.‒The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.‒To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                              HENRY STOKES,
                                                      President.

  J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                          JOHN VAN & CO.,

                         MANUFACTURERS OF

                           VAN’S PATENT

                           WROUGHT-IRON

                              RANGES,

                  For Hotels, Public and Private
                    Institutions, and Private
                   Families, in a great variety
                             of sizes.

               HOTEL BROILERS, PORTABLE BAKE OVENS,

       Carving Tables, Laundry Stoves, Coffee and Tea Urns,

        And all kinds of Implements for Culinary Purposes.

         No. 10 EAST FOURTH ST.,    ‒    CINCINNATI, OHIO.

This house has furnished the American Missionary Association, for
their Colleges, Ranges and other Kitchen Apparatus, also Laundry
Stoves.


                 *       *       *       *       *


    Physicians have Prescribed over Half a Million Packages of

                      VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES,

      And have found this BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD indispensable
          in the treatment of all Diseases of Debility,
              and in all Mental or Nervous Disorders.

It restores to the busy, active brain of man or woman the energy
and ability that has been lost by disease, worry or overwork. It
restores vitality where there has been debility and nervousness,
and prevents memory and brain fatigue; it is a regenerator of the
tired brain and nerves.

In impaired vitality it restores to the system that which has been
wasted in excitement, in abuses, in excessive bodily or mental
emotions.

It _prevents_ consumption and other diseases of debility.


            F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Ave., N.Y.

         For Sale by Druggists; or by mail in P.O. order,
                  bill or postage stamps, $1.00.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: EVERY CORSET WARRANTED SATISFACTORY OR MONEY
REFUNDED]

                    BALL’S _HEALTH PRESERVING_

                              CORSET

                      SOMETHING ENTIRELY NEW.

By a novel arrangement of fine coiled wire spring, which yield
readily to every movement of the wearer, the most =Perfect Fitting=
and comfortable corset ever made is secured.

Is Approved by the Best Physicians. For sale by all leading dealers.

                        Lady Agents Wanted.

                       Price by mail, $1.50.

                       Manufactured only by

                        CHICAGO CORSET CO.,

                           Chicago, Ill.

               and FOY, HARMON & Co., New Haven Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         ESTABLISHED 1780.

[Illustration]

Set Complete in Terry, $58. Set Complete in Plush, $64. Parlor,
Lodge and Church Furniture. No charge for packing. Send for
Illustrated Catalogue.

                        SHAW, APPLIN & CO.,

                                      27 Sudbury St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                 $1.00 S. S. LIBRARY BOOKS FOR 5c.

         CONTINUATION OF CATALOGUE.      IMMENSE SUCCESS.

    Over 1,250,000 Sold Already. 12,500 Schools now Using Them

                                                        Original
                                                        Price in
  No.   Name.                                      Cloth Binding

  105. More than Conquerors                                $1.00
  106. Sought and Saved                                     1.50
  107. Lionel Franklin’s Victory                            1.25
  108. History of a Three-penny Bit. Frank Spencer’s
         Rule of life                                       1.25
  109. The Harker Family                                    1.25
  110. Christie’s Old Organ                                 1.25
  111. Frank Oldfield                                       1.25
  112. Tim’s Troubles                                       1.25
  113. True to his Colors                                   1.25
  114. The Distiller’s Daughter and other stories            .75
  115. Greyledge: an original book                          1.25
  116. Rachel Noble’s Experience                             .90
  117. Doing and Dreaming                                   1.25
  118. Mother Herring’s Chicken                             1.00
  119. Brought Home                                          .75
  120. Our Poll and other stories                            .75
  121. Rachel and the S. C.                                 1.25
  122. Cobwebs and Cables                                   1.00
  123. Fearndale                                            1.00
  124. David’s Little Lad                                   1.00
  125. Alec Green                                           1.00
  126. Buy Your Own Cherries and other stories               .75
  127. Grandmother Dear                                     1.00
  128. Jennie’s Geranium; Lost in the Snow                  1.00
  129. The Brewer’s Family                                   .90
  130. Sidney Grey                                          1.00
  131. Froggie’s Little Brother                             1.25
  132. Jessie’s Struggles                                   1.00
  133. Dot and her Treasures                                1.00
  134. Jessie Dyson, John Worth                             1.00
  135. Faith Hayne                                          1.00
  136. Scamp and I                                          1.25
  137. Caleb Deane’s Clock                                  1.00
  138. Black Bob. Scrub, the Workhouse Boy                  1.00
  139. Millerton People                                     1.25
  140. Duties and Duties                                    1.25
  141. The Curse of Telfourd                                1.25
  142. The Scathed and the Saved                            1.25
  143. Castle Williams                                      1.25
  144. Ruth and Her Friends                                 1.00
  145. Old Bill’s Good Angel                                 .75
  146. Mabel’s Experience                                   1.00
  147. The Cousins                                          1.25
  148. Under the Curse of the Cup                           1.25
  149. Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress                          1.50
  150. Louis’ School Days                                   1.50
  151. Blossom and Blight                                   1.00
  152. A Candle Lighted by the Lord                         1.00
  153. Bruey, a Little Worker for Christ                    1.00
  154. History of a Shilling, Toil and Trust                 .75
  155. Wee Donald, Chips                                    1.00
  156. Digging a Grave with a Wine-glass, Little Blind
         May                                                1.00


Complete Catalogue (156 books) free on application. Sample book and
envelope, 8 cents, post-paid.

PRICES IN LOTS ASSORTED.‒Five or more books at 6 cts. each; 10 or
more, at 5¾ cts. each; 15 or more, at 5⅔ cts each; 20 or more, at
5½ cts. each; 30 or more, at 5⅓ cts. each; 40 or more at 5¼ cts
each; 50 or more, at 5 cts. each; 100 or more, at 4¾ cts. each; 200
or more at 4½ cts. each. Subscription price per year (52 numbers),
$2.50.

THE ENVELOPE ADDITION.‒This consists of a strong manilla envelope,
large enough to take in any one number of the Library, and which
answers not only to protect the books from wear, but as a library
member’s exchange card. It has printed on it blank for name,
residence and class number and library number of member, catalogue
of books, library rules and a simple plan of exchanging and keeping
account of books. The envelopes cost but 1½ cts. each; no more than
ordinary library cards.

All other Sunday school goods at marvelously low prices. Address,

     NAME THIS PAPER. DAVID C. COOK, 148 Madison St., Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN]


As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         LESSON COMMENTARY

On the International Lessons for 1882. Covering not only the
lessons for the whole year, but the entire book of Mark, and
accompanied by the “Revised Version Text,” a revised reprint of
the “Cambridge Scholars’ Commentary.” Prepared by G. F. Maclear,
D.D., and J. J. S. Perowne, D.D. Price, =10c.=, postpaid. Book
is put up in strong postal card covers. No similar work for less
than $1. Large sales are expected, and orders will be filled in
turn. We also publish a complete Bible Dictionary of two thousand
complete articles, 512 columns, and nearly 100 illustrations, for
10c., postpaid; The “Teachers Compendium,” nine books on teaching,
in one; The “Ideal Sunday-School;” “Sunday-School Management” (a
choice book for teachers); “Word Pictures” and “Normal Half-Hours,”
each for 10c., postpaid. Address,

                                       DAVID C. COOK,

                                         148 Madison St., Chicago.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                              BABCOCK

                               FIRE

                           EXTINGUISHER


                   A Sentinel that Never Sleeps.


                        SIMPLE!

                            EFFECTIVE!

                                  DURABLE!


                          S. F. HAYWARD,

                          GENERAL AGENT,

                     407 Broadway, N.Y. City.

[Illustration]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of
Fencing. Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_‒In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 18;
Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.‒_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.‒8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.‒11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.‒Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.‒In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa‒a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions were corrected.
Inconsistent hyphenation was retained due to the multiplicity of
authors. Period spellings were retained.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 4, APRIL, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.