Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

VOL. XXXVI.      MAY, 1882.       No. 5

THE

American Missionary

“THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, In Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
matter.]




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *

  EDITORIAL.
                                                         PAGE.
    PARAGRAPHS                                             129
    BENEFACTIONS                                           130
    CONCERNING ENDOWMENTS                                  131
    DEATH OF REV. J. M. WILLIAMS                           133
    GENERAL NOTES——Africa, Indians, Chinese                133
    CUT OF MODOC FUNERAL                                   135
    ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS                              136


  THE FREEDMEN.

    REVIVAL NEWS——From Tougaloo, Chattanooga,
      Macon, Atlanta, Hampton, Paris and McIntosh          137
    OUR YOUNGEST, THE TILLOTSON                            140
    TEACHER’S INSTITUTE AT TALLADEGA                       140
    HON. WM. E. DODGE AND ATLANTA UNIV.                    141
    ATLANTA TEACHER AT MACON                               141


  AFRICA.

    MR. LADD’S JOURNAL                                     142
    ELEPHANT HUNTING (cut)                                 143


  THE CHINESE.

    STATISTICS FOR FEBRUARY——Chinese New-Year              147
    JAPANESE PLEASURE PARTY                                149


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THE GRASSHOPPER TEACHER                                150


  RECEIPTS                                                 151

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY. D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
be addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ———— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ———— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVI.       MAY, 1882.         NO. 5.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


The friends of the A. M. A. who examine the receipts acknowledged
in this number of the MISSIONARY will be gratified to see a total
of $31,976.58 for March, thus making up in some measure for the
falling off in February. But too much encouragement must not be
taken from this single item. Let it only stimulate our friends to
a steady effort to round out the year with the $300,000 called for
by the annual meeting and by the imperative needs of the work. To
reach that sum $168,000 will be required for the remaining six
months of the year, or $28,000 per month.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most infamous enactments of the Congress of the United States
have been made in response to the demands of caste prejudice; as
for example in the Fugitive Slave Law. A parallel to this is found
in the recent bill prohibiting Chinese immigration——an enactment
injurious to this country, a wrong to China and a violation of the
fundamental principles of the Declaration of Independence, and of
the law of God. It is a shameful repudiation of our boast that
this land is an asylum for the oppressed of all nations, and it
is a cowardly acknowledgment that a hundred thousand inoffensive
Chinamen can so excite and alarm a nation of fifty millions of
people. It is with great gratification that we chronicle the
veto of this bill by President Arthur. We only regret that he
has not put the veto more squarely against the principle of such
prohibition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Popular virtue is spasmodic. It was a spasm of public righteousness
that overthrew Wm. M. Tweed in New York. But the spasm soon passed
and New York was again misgoverned. Sudden uprisings of enthusiasm
in the temperance cause have given us prohibitory and other
stringent laws, but soon again the tides of intemperance have swept
onward. In missionary as well as reformatory work is the evil of
these spasms felt. Some new developments of special need or of
special encouragement arouse the churches, and unwonted streams of
contributions pour into the treasuries of the Mission Boards. On
the strength of these gifts the mission work is enlarged and new
responsibilities are assumed, but ere long the decay of the special
impulse leaves the Boards to face their newly-created obligations
with an empty treasury.

This has been specially true in regard to the work among the
Freedmen. On the proclamation of Emancipation, and the enactment of
laws giving the ballot to the blacks, the popular enthusiasm knew
no bounds. Liberal benefactions called into life the Freedmen’s Aid
Societies and filled the treasury of this Association. At length,
however, the Freedmen fell into the hands of the politicians, and
the nation lost interest in the conflicts of parties and factions
over them. The Aid Societies were abandoned and the A. M. A. with
its vast machinery was left in debt. Now, again, within the last
few years has the public attention been aroused to the education
of the colored people as their only hope and the nation’s only
safety. Presidents Hayes and Garfield have voiced the feelings of
the North, and Senator Brown and Dr. Haygood have re-echoed the
sentiment for the South. During these late years the treasury of
the A. M. A. has felt the new impulse, and again it has ventured
upon enlargement. Shall it once more be left on the sands of a
retreating tide and the work for the Freedmen be again crippled?
Nothing will avert such a result but conscience and Christian
principle on the part of the friends of the colored race. If this
work ought to be done, and what patriot or Christian doubts it,
then the patriot and the Christian must give it their steady and
generous support.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. Garry Brooks has given $30,000 to found a Brooks Professorship
at Oberlin College.

The medical department of Dartmouth College receives $2,000 from
the will of the late E. W. Stoughton, of New York.

Hon. Frederick Billings, of Woodstock, Vt., has given $5,000 to
the fund now being raised for an additional gymnasium building at
Amherst College.

Gen. James M. Coale, of Maryland, bequeathed $10,000 each to
Georgetown College, D.C., and St. Mary’s Industrial School for
Boys, Baltimore.

The Marquis of Bute offers to add £10,000 to the fund to the
proposed University College of Wales, provided the institution be
established at Cardiff.

Ex-Gov. Morgan, of New York, has given $100,000 to Williams College
for a new dormitory building. The gifts of Gov. Morgan to Wells
College amount in all to $275,000.

Miss Sarah Burr, of New York, bequeathed $95,000 for educational
purposes in connection with institutions already established and
$60,000 towards founding new ones.

       *       *       *       *       *

_During the past twelve months we have recorded under the head of
“Benefactions” $9,118,500 to different educational institutions
in the United States. The greater part of this was given for
endowments and permanent educational facilities——a portion of it
had been provided by donors during previous years, and a part
still remains unpaid. Of the grand total only $66,500 was for
Freedmen——the money for their support having for the most part come
through the contribution boxes._

       *       *       *       *       *


CONCERNING ENDOWMENTS.

The success already achieved by the institutions of this
Association and the favor already won by them among all classes of
the Southern people, amply justify the work hitherto carried on. It
is believed that the time has fully come when this work should be
put upon a more substantial basis. Permanent endowments are needed
that these institutions may achieve that larger success which is
rightly expected of them.

Certain phases of our work, sometimes overlooked, greatly emphasize
this need. Careful attention is invited to the following points:

1. _The unusual difficulties attending the successful prosecution
of our work._ It is no ordinary school teaching that we have
undertaken to carry on in the South. Our pupils bring to the
class-room absolutely no inheritance of scholarly mind. Only two
or three generations separate them from the heathenism of the most
uncivilized continent in the world. Some of them come with the
most meagre vocabulary——a few hundred tattered and torn remnants
of English words. Many of them have no equipment of general
information, such as other children absorb from their parents. But
worse than all is the evil inheritance which many of our pupils
bring from centuries of heathenism and slavery. Let us be frank and
add that even the great boon of freedom, so righteously conferred,
has, by the very suddenness of its bestowal, unavoidably brought
peculiar peril and damage to many of the freedmen.

It is not a light task to deal with such material as this. Moral
character must be developed at the outset and carefully nurtured
all along. The rubbish of incorrect speech must be cleared away,
and a correct and copious vocabulary formed. The commonest facts
of general information must be imparted. Of course, in our higher
institutions there is less of such work to be done; but a still
more responsible and difficult task takes its place——that of
preparing college and normal students to perform this same arduous
primary work as teachers and leaders of their own people. Never was
such a mass of ignorance thrown so suddenly upon the educational
resources of a civilized people. But there is a brighter side.

2. _The unprecedented facilities now available for the prosecution
of our work._ Never was a civilized people so well prepared as
our nation now is to meet this great emergency. The progress made
in the science of education was never so great as it has been
in recent years. The adaptation of methods of teaching to the
varying necessities of pupils was never so well understood as now.
Text-books and school apparatus, juvenile literature and helps for
Biblical study were never so excellent as at present. The value
of industrial training, even as an element in the most liberal
culture, is receiving unwonted emphasis. In short, the accumulated
wisdom of the latest and best century stands ready to serve us, if
we only summon its aid. Much of it is in service already; but far
more is needed than our present financial resources can command.

3. _The necessity of a high order of talent in the teachers and
managers of our work._ To understand thoroughly the needs of such
pupils as crowd our schools, and to apply successfully the most
approved educational methods, requires something more than an
ordinary teacher. An eminent advocate of popular education has
stated it as his belief that the most interesting and valuable
improvements yet to be made in pedagogical science will be made in
connection with the education of the colored people. But tyros and
bunglers in teaching will never give us much that is interesting
or valuable. The very best teaching ability must continually be
employed in our schools and colleges, and be properly remunerated.

4. _The relation of our work to the future of education in the
South._ The justification of all Northern missionary teaching in
the South has been that it was designed to accomplish what the
Southern people were not prepared to do themselves. To whatever
extent they may in the future take up our work, it will still be
our mission to maintain that helpful leadership which it has been
our privilege to exercise from the beginning. Our institutions
should be the best and do the best work of any in the South. We
should be the first to discern the peculiar needs of Southern
pupils and the first to introduce whatever is new and excellent
in educational appliances. We ought, for instance, to have
at once industrial departments connected with all our larger
institutions. Every normal and college graduate should be able
to use intelligently either the wood-working or the iron-working
tools; and the same expenditure of time and money which the Harvard
and Yale boys make in learning to wield the oar and the bat would
accomplish this much desired end. Already our institutions are
being visited by Southern teachers eager to witness the advanced
methods of teaching already introduced. We should always be able to
reward such visitors by showing them something which they have not
seen before. Above all, we should send out from our institutions
such noble specimens of young manhood and womanhood as shall prove
a stimulus to the whole educational work in the South.

The destiny of the colored race is to be largely determined by the
character of the young men and women now crowding forward into
active life. The immediate future will demand all our resources,
and more, to save these young people. In the more distant future,
our success as influential leaders in education will depend largely
upon the promptness with which our institutions are _now_ put upon
a substantial basis. Every consideration of past success and of
present and future need enforces our plea that these endowments
should be provided at once.

       *       *       *       *       *


REV. J. M. WILLIAMS, of the Mendi Mission, died at Freetown,
February 21. Mr. Williams was a native of British Guiana, and born
in 1828. He was early impressed with a love to the Saviour and
to Africa by his grandmother Christina, a native of the interior
of Congo. He was educated in Ebenezer Chapel School, and studied
theology with the pastor of the church; became assistant minister,
then tutor in training school at Clarkson. But in his own words:
“The promise of my childhood made to my grandmother that I would
carry the word of God to Africa for her, when a man; this promise
made with no other object than to soothe her in her tears for
Africa, grew up with me, till I felt I would rather travel from
town to town with my Bible, reading and publishing Christ the
Saviour to my benighted brethren in Africa, than fill the most
exalted and lucrative position in British Guiana or anywhere else.”
In 1861 he went to Africa, and with the exception of three years
spent in England remained there till the time of his death. Mr.
Chase, who visited him in 1880 at Kaw Mendi, where the last five
years of his life were spent, says: “For Africa Mr. Williams’
effort may be considered a success. Very few missionaries could
accomplish so much in so short a time in any field in Africa.”

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

——West Central Africa is to receive four missionaries from Oberlin,
who will go out under appointment of the A. B. C. F. M.

——The London _Standard_ has received from Durban a dispatch
announcing the return of Mr. Richards, a missionary, who has been
well received by Oumzila. The King has permitted him to establish a
mission in his possessions.

——Of forty physicians who offered themselves to accompany to the
Gold Coast Mr. Praetorius, sub-inspector of the Basle Missions, the
committee has chosen Dr. Ernest Maehli, of Swiss origin.

——A survey is to be made for a light railway from the West African
Gold Coast through the mining regions of the Wassan. If this road
is constructed it will open up a country rich in palm oil, India
rubber and precious metals.

——John Smith Moffat has been sent to Lessouto as British
representative. Born at Kourouman and brought up in England, he
has still passed nearly 25 years in Africa, and exercised in the
Transvaal a civil magistracy among the natives, whose interests,
material and moral, he has always protected.

——Capt. Foot, commander of the ship Ruby, has accepted a call of
the Sultan of Zanzibar, with a view to the suppression of the slave
trade, which appeared concentrated at Bemba. The Arab bark with
which Capt. Brownrigg joined combat has been captured. The French
and English governments have taken up the matter.

——The Arab influence is said by the missionaries of the C. M. S. to
be destroyed in Mtesa’s kingdom. “No fear of starving now,” writes
Mr. O’Flaherty. “We can water our garden, which bears fruit twice
a year. We live like lords on native food, have flesh meat twice a
day. The climate is lovely, country beautiful, people affable and
kind, and we are happy. Our work is so increasing daily that we do
not know where to begin or what to do first.”

——A section of the Geographical Society, of Lisbon, has been formed
at Horta, chief town of Fayal, one of the Azores, and has commenced
to seek means for establishing a help station for shipwrecks, a
measure desired for a long time in this latitude where violent
tempests so frequently surprise one.

——Messrs. Thornycroft & Co., of England, are constructing a steamer
for the use of the Baptist mission on the Upper Congo. The steamer
is to be of steel, having twin screws for her more easy control
and management amid the currents and sand-banks of the river. Her
length will be 70 feet and she will draw only 12 inches of water.
The lightness of flotation is secured by a singularly ingenious
arrangement of the screws. The contract price of the vessel,
complete and packed for transmission to the Congo, with a steel
boat and duplicates of the most important portions of the machinery
and gear, has been fixed at £1,700. To this will have to be added
about £150 for sundry stores, so that the entire cost of the vessel
will not exceed £2,000.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

——There are 5,500 Indians drawing rations at the Agency of Standing
Rock, Dakota.

——During the present session of Congress 140 bills relating to the
Indians have been introduced, an average of one to about every
1,700 Indians.

——Thirty descendants of Indians in Delaware have asked to be
admitted to the Maryland Conference of the Methodist Protestant
Church.

——There are 1,000 Indians in the Everglades of Florida, speaking
their own language. They are said to be friendly and honest in
their dealing with the whites.

——Among the 275,000 Indians reported in the United States there
are 219 churches and 30,000 church members. Out of 70 tribes, 22
are stated to be self-supporting.

[Illustration: MODOC FUNERAL.]

——The Choctaw Nation, in the Indian Territory, have long had a law
to prevent excessive cruelty to animals; inspired, it seems, not
from any example of the whites, but from their own instincts of
humanity. The penalty is a fine of thirty lashes.

——A sub-committee appointed by Presbyterians to prepare a memorial
for Congress relating to the Indians, adopted the following: “For
Indians we want American education, we want American homes, we want
American rights——the result, of which is American citizenship.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHINESE.

——Shanghai, China, has a temperance society with 400 members.

The Chinese pupils at Stockton and Oroville have purchased cabinet
organs for their respective schoolrooms.

——In order to introduce telegraphy into China, the authorities
grant the free use of the wires to the people for a month.

——A decree has been issued exempting all Chinese converts to
Christianity from all levies for idolatrous worship, processions or
theatrical performances.

——The Catholic Bishop of Hong Kong says that the Catholic mission
there took 400,000 Chinese children last year to bring up in the
faith of their church.

——A tract which is being distributed by the Japanese says:
“Christianity is spreading like fire on a grassy plain, so that in
capital and country there is no place where it is not preached.”

——According to the latest statistics on the subject, there are
at the present time 310 Protestant missionary agents in China.
Reckoning the population of China at 350,000,000, a ratio is found
of _one_ missionary agent to a population of 1,129,032.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY ANNOUNCEMENTS.

HOWARD UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D.C.——The anniversary of the
Theological Department will be on Friday evening, May 5, when
addresses will be made by five young men, who will graduate,
and who will be addressed at the close by some person yet to be
selected.

FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.——Friday night, May 20, public
exercises of Class A., and the conferring of normal certificates.
Sunday, 3 P.M., Baccalaureate sermon by President Cravath. Sunday
night, Missionary address by Rev. C. L. Woodworth, of Boston,
Mass. May 23, 24 and 25, examination of classes. Thursday, May 26,
Commencement Day, Anniversary address by Rev. R. G. Hutchins, of
Columbus, Ohio.

TALLADEGA COLLEGE, TALLADEGA, ALA.——Baccalaureate sermon, Sunday
morning, June 11, by President De Forest. Missionary sermon in the
evening by Rev. Edward W. Bacon, of New London, Conn. Examinations
on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. Monday night, exercises of the
Literary Societies. Tuesday night, address by Rev. E. W. Bacon.
Thursday, Anniversary exercises and graduation of two from the
Theological Department. Commencement concert in the evening.

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, TOUGALOO, MISS.——Examinations Thursday. Friday
and Monday, May 25, 26 and 29. Sabbath-school Convention, Sunday,
May 28. Annual sermon by the President, Sunday night. Exhibition,
Tuesday night, May 30. Literary exercises of graduating class,
Wednesday morning, May 31. Annual address, Wednesday, P.M., by Rev.
Truman N. Post, of St. Louis.

TILLOTSON COLLEGIATE AND NORMAL INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEX.——Public
examinations, June 5 and 6. Closing exercises, June 7.

WILMINGTON, N.C.——Examinations, June 1. Exhibition in Memorial
Hall, June 2.

CHARLESTON, S.C.——Commencement exercises, May 31. Address by Rev.
E. J. Meynardy, D.D., of the Bethel M. E. Church.

BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.——Closing exercises, May 31.
Examinations and grading for next year during the week preceding,
ending May 26.

MACON, GA.——Friday, May 26, close of primary school. Saturday,
closing exhibition of sewing-school. Sunday, address to the
students of the Lewis High School, by J. W. Burke, Esq. Monday and
Tuesday, examinations. Wednesday, May 31, closing exhibition, with
presentation of certificates of scholarship. Wednesday evening,
concert for the benefit of the school.

LEMOYNE SCHOOL, MEMPHIS, TENN.——May 28, annual sermon. May 29,
Junior exhibition. May 31, graduating exercises and the annual
address.

MOBILE, ALA.——Written examinations, May 23 and 24. Oral
examinations, May 25. Closing exhibition on the night of the 26th.

MONTGOMERY, ALA.——Examinations and closing exercises, May 30 and 31.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVAL NEWS


RELIGIOUS INTEREST AT TOUGALOO.

For the past two weeks there has been a great deal of religious
interest among the students here. At the meetings, which have been
held nearly every night during this time, twenty-nine persons have
told us of their determination to serve God for the rest of their
lives.

Many of those who have lately begun this new life are young people,
who have a good deal of influence over their classmates and
associates. We feel glad to know that now they are on the side of
Truth and are ready to use whatever influence they may have in the
best way. Not only have sinners been converted, but Christians have
been stirred up to do better work.

One night, after a sermon upon the subject “Confession,” from the
text: “Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me,” an invitation
was given to all who felt it to be their duty to confess any sins
that were weighing upon them. The first who arose was a young
man who was converted a year or two ago, and who has ever since
been foremost in every good work. He said that he had been guilty
of an act of dishonesty which had caused him much sorrow. In a
lesson that he had written upon the board a few days before he
had misspelled a word. One letter was wrong, but as it happened
to resemble very closely the right letter, he reported it as such
when he saw his mistake. For the next three or four days he had
no peace. He knew that he ought to confess the act to the teacher
whom he had deceived, but he was afraid that she would lose all
confidence in his integrity. He also tried to persuade himself that
it was a very little thing, hardly worth reporting. Why not keep
quiet about it? No one would ever find it out. But these thoughts
brought no comfort with them. The more he thought about the matter,
the more he felt convinced that his act was not a little thing. He
knew that it was a _sin_, and therefore not a small thing.

After praying about the matter, this suggestion came to him: “Since
you have asked the Lord to forgive you, you have done all that is
necessary. You need not ask your teacher’s forgiveness.”

He soon saw that he ought not to expect God to pardon his sin until
he had done what he could to set the matter right with his teacher.
He felt now as if the very salvation of his soul depended upon
his making this confession. As soon as possible, after coming to
this conclusion, he went to her and acknowledged his sin. With this
acknowledgement came peace.

Other confessions followed this. Some told of similar acts of
dishonesty, which they had committed. All who spoke expressed a
sincere determination to do better for the future. We felt as if
these confessions had cleared the moral atmosphere and made it
possible for more effectual work to be done for those who did not
profess to be Christians.

Among the number recently converted is a middle-aged woman from the
neighborhood. For at least thirteen years she has fully realized
that she ought to lead a better life, but has been so much under
the influence of old superstitions and ignorant associates, who
told her that she could not be called a Christian until she would
say that she had seen all sorts of impossible visions and had
numerous strange experiences, that she has hardly known which way
to turn. Now she has come out from under her yoke of bondage and
feels as if she had seen a great light, a much clearer and better
one than that for which she watched so many years.

We are hoping and praying that the good, work which has been begun
here may continue: that those who have started in the right way
may have strength of character enough to keep in it, even when the
prospect looks dark and they do not feel so full of enthusiasm as
now.

                                          _Miss F. J. Webster._


A SUMMER SHOWER.

It fell out of a clear sky, without foretokening of cloud or of
electric display. It was at Chattanooga, in Pastor Joseph E.
Smith’s church. At the regular Wednesday evening prayer meeting a
young man announces that he has made up his mind to turn and live a
Christian life. Good Deacon Morford asks of the pastor: “How would
it do to have a meeting to-morrow night?” It is appointed. Two or
three more at that time come out on the Lord’s side.

Then a meeting every night is agreed upon, with a sermon from
the pastor; and every night souls are hopefully born again. The
series continues two weeks. For the last few days Pastor Penney and
Superintendent Roy drop in to help glean a little. Over two-score
souls are numbered among the believers. Forty are examined and
approved by vote for membership in the church.

But there was some preliminary work after all. The lady missionary,
Mrs. Almira S. Steele, of Revere, Mass., who is sustained by the
ladies of the Congregational churches of Chelsea, besides her
general service, has had a Friday afternoon sociable for the
women, which not only worked as a preparation but was used all
through the revival with marked spiritual results. So her service
in the Sunday-school, with the handling of the review intrusted
to her, had borne upon the happy issue, and all the people, who
are delighted with their lady assistant, trace the work back
in part to her influence. The pastor, who had become almost
discouraged, becomes a new man. The church is confirmed. This
fruitage encourages the patient culturing of the Sabbath-school. It
rewards proper teaching. There was no noise, no confusion. None of
the inquirers were looking for visions and dreams, for long-drawn
agonies, for “the power.” They were just marched up to the question
of immediate submission and trust. This work shows how our little
churches that are striving for purity and order and character may
be spiritually empowered and built up.


REFRESHING AT MACON.

It will gratify our friends to know that our A. M. A. mission in
Macon has been spiritually refreshed. There was a growing religious
interest among the children of our day-school and Sunday-school,
and early in February we were enabled to secure the aid of Rev.
E. E. Rogers, of Orange, Conn. The neighborhood prayer-meetings
and house-to-house visitation by day were followed by powerfully
impressive meetings at night. The work spread remarkably among
the children, many of whom have started out in the new life. For
more than three weeks the scholars of our Lewis High School would
voluntarily leave their play and spend the whole half-hour of noon
recess in prayer and religious instruction at the parlor of the
Mission Home to the number of sixty and upward. At one memorable
pray-meeting in the school-house there were twelve or fifteen of
the students who gave their hearts to God. It was a Pentecostal
season, a time of great rejoicing to the faithful teachers who had
so long prayed for their pupils. The clear, decided testimony of
one bright little Sunday-school boy, eight years of age, who was
converted in one of the Sunday-school prayer-meetings, would put
to shame the half-way, timid professions of some older people.
“Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected
praise.” Sixteen members of our Sunday-school have joined our
(Congregational) church. Twenty-two in all have united, of whom
eight are heads of families, while eight or ten of the students
have joined other churches, where their families are connected. The
daily meetings continued for six weeks, with the efficient help
of Rev. D. Sherrell, of Savannah, for a few days, after Brother
Rogers’ departure.


GOOD HARVEST.

The religious interest in Atlanta University, which was reported
to you some time since, has continued for five weeks without any
abatement, and a good harvest has already been gathered. The
meetings have been well attended, in spite of some sickness and bad
weather, and have been marked by an earnest attention to the truth
and a fervent spirit of prayer. We have good reason to believe
that many more than a score of souls have chosen the service of
Christ, and they show a tenderness of devotion and a carefulness of
demeanor which promise well for their stability.

Scarcely one is left among those who made their home here who has
not been deeply affected, and who has not taken some steps in
advance. We do not expect any reaction or falling away from the
uplift which the whole school seems to have experienced.


INCREASE IN PRAYER MEETINGS.

The prayer meetings at Hampton are well sustained, and the
religious feeling in the school is good. There has been a marked
increase in our prayer meetings this year. We often have 200 in
our Sunday morning meeting conducted by the students, where last
year there were only thirty or forty. We have kept up two Indian
meetings during the week, in which a verse of the Bible is read in
English by one of the students, then by all who can read English in
concert, then by one in Dakota. Then it is explained. After trying
several ways, this seemed to be the most satisfactory. Prayers are
offered in Dakota, in Arizona and in English by the students.

A meeting is kept up by the English-speaking students among
themselves in order to fit them to take part when they go back to
their homes.


PARIS, TEXAS.

We are in the midst of a special work of grace. Nineteen have given
evidence of having been born by the Holy Spirit. They all have been
added to our church. Besides these, one came by letter from another
denomination. Others are anxiously inquiring the way of life. All
these converts, with two exceptions, are from the Sunday School.
Among these “new-born babes” one is the wife of a minister and one
is the wife of a deacon. The two oldest children of the pastor are
among those that professed a hope in Christ.


M’INTOSH, LIBERTY CO., GA.

Last Sabbath was a “high day” with us. We have been holding extra
meetings about four weeks. The result was the conversion of about
fourteen persons, among whom were several of our most promising
scholars. Our communion season came off last Sabbath, when nine of
these converts came to unite with us.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR YOUNGEST——THE TILLOTSON.

The Austin branch of the Texas Central, a few miles below the
capital, falls into the valley of the Colorado. As you run up that
lovely vale, you soon see on the right, just out of the city, the
Tillotson, a five-story stone and brick edifice, crowning a ground
swell that overlooks the river and town. Its neat fence and the
grounds graded by nature are attractive. As we roll up the valley,
I see a fine carriage standing at the door; and this, as I come
up to the place, I find to be the turnout of Gov. Pease, who has
brought his family up to visit the institute and to call upon
the family of teachers. An original Connecticut man, 30 years a
resident of Texas, her Governor for a term, during which a fund of
$2,000,000 was set apart for public schools, and now a trustee of
the Tillotson, his interest and influence are worth much to such an
institution at the South.

But, so soon, the house is full to overflowing, in its
assembly-rooms, in its dining-hall and in its dormitories. So that
already the call is for another building. I find 140 scholars, of
whom 65 are boarders. I find enthusiasm and spring in these freshly
gathered students. In this State the colored people are getting
land faster than in any other: partly, for the reason that, from
the beginning, there was here the least opposition to their doing
so; and, partly, from the fact that Texas is a new and largely a
Western State; and so, these more well-to-do parents are ready to
avail themselves of the advantage of such a school. The father of
one of these young men was a slave, but now owns 500 acres of land,
on which he has paid $6,000 of the $7,000 purchase money.

The President, Rev. W. E. Brooks, who left his pastorate in West
Haven, Conn., to take this position, is supported by Prof. J. J.
Anderson, a graduate of Beloit College, with a dozen years of
experience, and by Misses Hunt and Topping, graduates of Olivet,
who are born teachers and disciplinarians. The President, besides
teaching several classes, preaches on the Sabbath in the chapel,
and also conducts a Sunday-school. He is welcomed to the pulpits of
the city, and is on the friendliest terms with the first citizens.
Rev. Dr. E. B. Wright, pastor of the Northern Presbyterian Church,
is one of the trustees, and is greatly attentive to the interests
of the Institute. Mrs. Brooks, an accomplished pianist, has
_twenty-eight_ colored pupils in piano music, which shows the
zest for cultivation. Once a week a lecture is delivered before
the students by teachers or prominent citizens. The wife of Judge
Garland, who has had an A. M. A. school in Austin for fifteen
years, continues in a primary school near at hand; and the Judge
himself, for the present stress, is volunteering a half-a-day of
teaching for a month. A New Hampshire schoolmaster, he became a
lawyer, then a judge in Texas, under appointment of Gov. Davis.

A grand future is apparent for the Tillotson in this Empire of a
Commonwealth. The only question is whether it can keep up with its
opportunity and its demand. It gives us no time to rest. No sooner
is it opened than it calls for more room. The growing brain makes
room for itself, and so must this educational enterprise.

       *       *       *       *       *


ALABAMA.

TEACHERS’ INSTITUTE AT TALLADEGA.

_President, Henry S. DeForest._

Of late it has been the custom to end the spring term at Talladega
College with a teachers’ institute, giving special training to
those who are so soon to go out and teach. The one just held at
the last of March has been very pleasant and helpful. Prof. A. J.
Steele, of the Le Moyne Institute, Memphis, Tenn., was present,
bearing a large part in its instruction, and giving it the
choicest fruits of his own training and experience. The Hon. H.
Clay Armstrong, State Superintendent of Education, had a place on
the programme, and Rev. Daniel Duncan, the County Superintendent,
was present at every session from beginning to end. Three years
ago, at the beginning of the series, he said, that was “the first
institute ever held in Talladega County, from the creation of the
world.” This one, especially, roused all his enthusiasm, and again
and again he gave his testimony to the good that was effected.

The need of such institutes and of the steady, persistent work of
a college to train teachers and preachers is most apparent, when
it is considered that probably not more than one in ten of the
blacks, in a State where they make about half of the population,
can read so as to make the sense, and half of the voters of all
colors are unable to read either God’s Law or the amendments to
the Constitution. Some are teaching who have never been at school
themselves. School-houses are few, and often without floor, or
window, or fireplace; desks and school-books are scarce; the
school-year averages only 67 days, and the appropriation _per
capita_ for the year is 97 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGIA.

HON. WILLIAM E. DODGE AND ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

_Mrs. T. N. Chase._

Some of you doubtless remember seeing a recent account of a very
cordial welcome given Gov. Colquitt, of Georgia, at a handsome
reception in the home of Hon. William E. Dodge, of New York. The
courtesy was soon reciprocated, and a few days ago the Atlanta
_Constitution_——a democratic daily which stands at the head of
Southern journals——announced the expected arrival of Mr. and Mrs.
Dodge in Atlanta.

This good man and his noble wife have made frequent trips to
Georgia and Florida during the past ten years, always stopping to
say a cheering word to Atlanta University and shake hands with
two or three needy students, who each year for all this time have
been supported by the generosity of these good people. To-day they
visited the school, accompanied by Mrs. Gov. Colquitt and one of
her lady friends.

Mr. Dodge said he remembered well the first time he addressed the
students. He wondered how many had a purpose to go out and gather
forty and fifty about them to do for those in the dark places what
had been done for them by their teachers on this hill. He begged
them to remember that unless they sought first the kingdom of
Heaven and its righteousness all other knowledge would be vain. He
said he must add a word about temperance, in which he knew they
were so much interested. He could not believe any before him would
ever reel through the streets a staggering drunkard, but their only
safety lay in total abstinence.

His words were so instructive and his benign face so inspiring
that the very instant he took his seat the entire school burst
spontaneously into the plantation melody:

    “Do you think I’ll make a soldier?”

I might as easily describe an exquisite fragrance as these choruses
of young voices from our 250 students, especially when singing this
“spiritual,” whose words so touchingly portray the mingled hopes
and fears of those deep, emotional natures. But, when in verses
second and third they triumphantly sing:

    “We are climbing Jacob’s ladder,
    Every round goes higher, higher,”

our hopes with theirs conquer our fears, and we sympathize with
Mrs. Colquitt when she remarks: “I feel like making a speech to the
school myself.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ATLANTA TEACHER AT MACON.

_Miss Julia A. Goodwin._

Everything here is new to us, and we enjoy the country-like city
in its irregularity, broad streets, steep ascents and descents,
its profusion of flowers, especially its roses. Then it is a real
pleasure to compare the workings of the school and church with our
own. We think we could not accomplish what these teachers do who
are obliged to teach some of the time——two of them in one room,
each conducting a recitation at one and the same time; but they
work admirably together, without a particle of friction, and are
a very happy family. Mrs. Lathrop’s sewing-school is also very
interesting. As we walked into the room last Saturday morning,
two old ladies, who were sewing just as busily as the children,
arose from their seats and came across the room to greet us. One
of them, whose sprightly manner and unwrinkled face would never
have betokened her great age, said to us: “I am ninety-two years
old if I live till Monday. I can’t do much, my hands are so stiff;
but I thank the Lord that I can come here and sew a little;” and
she showed us her patch-work squares with as evident satisfaction
as any of the younger pupils. Ninety-two years old and learning to
sew! Ah, thought I, most old ladies are through with their needle
at that age. These sewing-schools must bring some comfort into many
homes.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. LADD’S JOURNAL.

_Saturday, Dec. 3._——We started from Assiout at five o’clock
this morning on our voyage up the Nile. The air to-day has been
wonderfully fine. The landscape, too, has presented a constantly
varying panorama full of novelty, full of interest, full of beauty.
We have called for a few moments at a number of villages to leave
the mail. We have been peering through our glasses, as we sat under
the awning on deck, at the natives along the banks in their varied
costumes, and in almost no costume at all, at the high bluffs,
which in some places rise abruptly from the river, and at the
wonderful tombs with their hieroglyphic inscriptions cut out high
up in the rocks. The river is full of boats of one kind or another
coming and going.

_Sunday, Dec. 4._——One misfortune of travel on the Nile is that any
discussion of the weather becomes monotonous and trite. Every day
is like every other day, beautiful, bright and balmy. No church
bells ring for us to-day, so our thoughts naturally turn homeward.
The views, as we slowly steam up the river are charming. We pass
some bold headlands, call, as yesterday, at many villages by the
way, and witness many interesting and peculiar scenes. A fringe of
“shadoofs,” with half naked men hard at work at them watering the
crops, keep up a constant creaking. We notice also great numbers of
birds of every size and shape. We tie up for the night at Keneh,
celebrated for its porous jugs, its dates, and once on a time, its
dancing girls, whom the march of civilization has driven higher up
the river.

_Monday, Dec. 5._——We have seen something of what is left of the
great city of Thebes, its magnificent temples, its stupendous
halls, its wonderful colossi, its interesting tombs——Karnak and
Luxor, on one side, Gourna on the other. It is hard to realize what
pomp and splendor were once displayed among these ruins, still so
grand in their desolation. The strong current of the river got
the best of us to-day. The steamer in rounding a point could not
be made to obey her helm, and before we knew what was going to
happen, with full steam on we ran bunt up against and on to the
steep bank. The men pushed and grunted, and finally we got clear
and righted up again. We have witnessed a nearly total eclipse of
the moon this evening, soon after it rose, which for the manner
in which it came on and went off was very remarkable. We could
hear the natives in their villages trying to frighten away the
dragon which was supposed to be swallowing the moon. We tied up at
Esneh for the night. Here we went ashore with torches and lights
to visit a portion of a temple, which is in an excellent state of
preservation. I first went to see the Mudir to get him to telegraph
for us to Korosko for camels. He had retired for the night, but as
our business could not be transacted at any other time, I sent in
our orders from Cairo, and he soon appeared. Coffee was served, our
papers made out, viz.: An order to the governors of places where we
might call within his _mudirieh_ to show us proper attention, and a
telegram signed by the Mudir to provide camels for us at Korosko.
Then joining the rest of the party we visited the temple. The top
of it is only a little above the successive deposits of ages, and
one has to descend a long flight of steps to reach its floor. It is
completely covered with sculptured work, which is finely preserved.
This, however, is only the portico of the real temple, the entrance
to which is walled up.

[Illustration: ELEPHANT HUNTING]

_Tuesday, Dec. 6._——Our steamer made a long stop at Edfou to-day,
as is customary, to let passengers see its splendid temple. This is
the most complete, and the best preserved in Egypt, and gives one
the best idea of ancient Egyptian architecture. Its massive pylons
had long been in sight as we steamed up the river. As soon as the
steamer stopped we took donkeys and started toward them through the
winding mud-walled streets of the little town. What a temple! A
book would fail to do it justice! Every inch of it is covered with
the most beautiful carving. I have not space nor time to tell of
how we climbed the pylons and wandered through the dark mysterious
chambers, and stood in admiration before those beautiful and ever
varied pillars, and explored dark winding passages built in the
walls themselves. One has an overwhelming sense of sublimity and
awe as he stands under the shadow and in the profound hush of these
sacred monuments of a departed glory. We tied up for the night at
Gebel Silsileh, a narrow, rocky passage, through which the river
seems to have burst its way. Here we went on shore and with the
help of torches examined the tombs and chapels and noted quarries.
The perfect silence here was almost painful. There was not even the
usual gentle murmur of “backsheesh.” Returning to our steamer we
took a moonlight row up the river, and over to the opposite shore.
Ruins and moonlight, and a boat ride on the Nile! Could anything
be more romantic? Here is a picture hung upon the walls of memory
never to be forgotten.

_Wednesday, Dec. 7._——We have run aground twice to-day. We passed
the ruins of Comombo early this morning, and now we are at Assouan,
with another stage of our journey accomplished. We have visited
the bazaars, where all sorts of curiosities from Nubia and the
Soudan are sold, and had crowds of wild-looking, long-haired,
grease-smeared and more than half naked desert Arabs thronging
around us, and have been besieged with strange looking people with
stranger looking things to sell, of which we bought none. In fact,
our novel experiences in and about the town would, if all told,
be a tale too lengthy for these brief pages. We also visited the
island of Elephantine, with its ruins of pottery, human skeletons,
and interesting Nile meter. Ibrahim was dispatched the first thing
on our arrival, to secure a dahabeyeh for us. He has returned, and
reports that he has found one, such as it is, which will take us
and our baggage from here to Korosko for £5. We have agreed to take
two men, Mousa and Ibrahim Cohen, with us to Khartoum to lighten
our expenses. Then we have Mongades, the Bible Society’s man with
us, so that we shall really have to pay for the dahabeyeh only
about £3. We have been invited to see a “fantasia,” but our taste
not being cultivated in that direction we declined.

_Thursday, Dec. 8._——Some one was sick in the night. Thinking it
might be the Doctor I jumped out of bed to go to him, and landed
in cold water! The ship had sprung a leak. All the rooms on one
side were found to be flooded, and the engine-room was a pond. The
pumps were put to work, but it was some hours before the water was
where it belonged. Some things in my room were spoiled. We started
early for Philæ, where our dahabeyeh lay, at the other end of the
cataract. It was five miles, and we took camels so as to gain a
little experience in riding preparatory to the long desert journey.
Our route lay through the ancient bed of a river. On the way we
visited the famous granite quarries, and saw the huge obelisk left
partially cut out of its bed. We all went on board our dahabeyeh
for lunch. The stars and stripes had been raised, and we also
ordered up the English flag in honor of our guests. After lunch,
while Ibrahim and Mourgan were getting our baggage on board, we,
the party, took a small boat and rowed out to the interesting
island of Philæ. First we rowed around it to get a comprehensive
view of its beautiful temples. Then we landed, and examined them
all in detail. We also visited the ruins of a little Christian
church, which an American has discovered.

_Friday, Dec. 9._——For some reason I did not sleep well, and was
up early and over the side of the dahabeyeh for a good swim in
the Nile. A light breeze soon sprang up, the sail was set, and at
8.30 A.M. we were off, the Englishmen still in the cataract. We
passed an island to the right of Philæ, stopped for a few moments
at a little village where some of our sailors lived and then we
were off again, slowly passing immense granite boulders, between
narrow banks fringed with dom-palms and very black Nubians,
creeping along pretty fast for the light wind that just fills our
big sail. We pass Debod, and then towards evening the wind goes
down, and we have to make the bank and tie up. We do not remain
here long, however. Our Reis, who is a fine fellow, ever on the
alert, hears a rustling in the trees, a gale is upon us; the big
sail is quickly flung out, and we start almost with a bound and
strike a rock! The captain reports “no leak,” and off we go again,
fairly flying before the wind. After a while it dies down and once
more we have to make the bank and tie up just this side of Gebel
Kalabshe. Here we go ashore and wander about, but are quickly
recalled by the Reis. A good steady breeze has followed the lull
after the gale, and off we go. Now we enter scenery that in the
deep shadows of the moonlight is grand and sublime in the extreme.
The granite mountains tower up from the water’s edge close to us
on either side. There are deep gorges and overhanging cliffs, and
huge boulders around which the pent up river swirls and eddies. I
have named this wild spot “The Gates of the Tropics,” for now we
pass the invisible line and enter the tropics. The southern cross
is clearly visible in the heavens near the horizon, and toward it
we are flying on the wings of the wind. In the witchery of such
an evening, in such a place, we sit on deck till long past the
midnight hour.

_Saturday, Dec. 10._——The captain has been up all night and we have
made a good run of it. It is very hot, and the wind dying down.
Over we go for a swim. We have passed a rock-temple, and another
very good temple at Dakkeh. The flies are getting to be a perfect
pest.

_Sunday, Dec. 11._——The wind is lighter and our progress has been
slower. However, we have gradually drawn away from the grand rocky
mountains that rose up abruptly from the water’s edge on our
left this morning, and now around us are the volcanic peaks that
indicate the vicinity of Korosko. We reached Korosko at 4 P.M.,
having made remarkably good time from Assouan. We noticed a queer
peak just before reaching the town. There is a sacred mountain with
a tomb upon it just at the rear of the village. Soon after our
arrival the governor and various other officials came on board.
The old governor was delighted when he found that we could talk
together in Turkish. The usual formality of salaams, and coffee,
etc., were duly exchanged. Our camels were ready for us.

_Monday, Dec, 12._——We had a pleasant visit this morning from a
merchant who arrived by caravan during the night from Darfur. We
talked together in Greek. We have moved our boat higher up stream.
Have received a number of visits from officials and sore-eyed men.
The Doctor is having quite a practice. We have climbed the road
that weary pilgrims tread to the top of the sacred mountain Gebel
Aboo-Gowenah, whence we have had a fine, extensive view of the
winding river, and the billowing ocean of volcanic peaks, and our
own desert route that winds in and out among them. We send off a
batch of letters for home, pack and get ready for our long journey.
The bread is all made and properly dried.

_Tuesday, Dec, 13._——Up about 5 A.M., roused the crowd, and pushed
things as fast as possible. We expected to find the camels waiting
on the bank, but not a living being was in sight. Hours went by and
nobody appeared; we sent two men in different directions after the
sheik of the camel-drivers, but he was not! Finally patience was
exhausted. We went to the Governor’s house to see if we couldn’t
start things up a little. He was pretending to hold court, but
dismissed the case when he saw us. Then it being the proper thing
to do we raised a row with His Majesty over our delay. It had the
desired effect. The sheik was speedily produced, and we rode back
to the boat on donkeys, with the whole crowd at our heels. Here
we soon discovered that the governor, the sheik, and every other
man in the crowd was determined to have a finger in the pie, and
make us pay double the proper prices for all our camels. We talked
and reasoned till 1 P.M. without avail. Then we grew righteously
indignant. We laid down our terms——refused to listen to another
word——gave orders to have everything put back on board the boat if
they were not accepted, and threatened to go on to Wady Halfa and
denounce the whole crowd of them as miserable rascals. Our terms
were then accepted, and they thought a good deal more of us for
standing for our rights instead of yielding to their exorbitant
demands. Part of the money was paid and part held in reserve; the
papers were made out, the baggage weighed and loaded, and at 1.30
P.M. we started out. We went about a mile or two into the desert,
and camped in a rocky ravine, and here we got everything into good
shape, looked to everything connected with our water supply, and
made ready for the real business of the long desert before us; and
here begins our tent life.

_Wednesday, Dec. 14._——Broke camp, and started the caravan at 8.30
A.M. Now for the great desert journey! All the morning we pass peak
after peak of a volcanic nature. At 2 P.M. we stopped, took a hasty
bite of lunch in a sort of cave in a mountain called Elemnasir.
Then on and on we go, swaying back and forth on our camels, and
trying to “bone down” to the regular business before us. At 5.15
P.M. we went into camp for the night, considering it wiser not
to make too long a day of the first one, as camels and men were
both fresh, but to reserve our forces for the great strain toward
the last. The spot chosen for our camp is a wild place under the
shelter of a volcanic peak called Diakazarkha. Up goes the tent,
all hands taking hold with a will. Mourgan starts a fire; now then,
in the words of the “old folks’” song, “Jerusha, put the kettle on
and we’ll all take tea.” Mourgan produces a marvel of a meal for
such a place, and we fall to at once to do it ample justice. Our
caravan consists of 19 camels and 15 men. The guide is a strong,
bold fellow, thoroughly up to his business, and evidently enjoys
commanding his men. The camels get only 2½ quarts of dourra a day,
carry about 400 lbs. each, and are expected to go without water
till we reach Murrat. Our water supply is to last us till we reach
the Nile at Aboo-Hamed, as the water at Murrat is not drinkable.
How brightly the stars shine out here. The stillness of the desert
soon rests upon the camp, broken only by the occasional growl of a
camel, and the snoring of the men.

_Thursday, Dec. 15._——We are all up early, take a hasty breakfast,
pull down the tent, load the camels amid a chorus of roars and
growls, and start the whole caravan at 7 A.M. More volcanic peaks.
The ground is everywhere covered with balls of iron from the size
of a large pea to that of a cannon-ball. The iron is so pure that
the natives are able to beat these balls into knives, etc. Now
we see our first mirage. It is a beautiful lake, whose surface,
scarcely rippled by the gentle breeze, clearly reflects a distant
mountain range. The illusion is perfect. We lunch in a cave in
a place called Gamoor. We have met one caravan of cattle and
another of two or three hundred camels. Our guide stopped to camp
about five o’clock, thinking probably that we were exhausted by
this time. He looked surprised but pleased when we protested, and
informed him that we intended to make forced marches of at least
twelve hours every day. On and on we went into the darkness, for
it is dark at five. At 7.10 we halted and pitched our camp in a
portion of the desert called _Nasbelhedoriah_. Before we arrived
in camp there was a commotion. What’s the matter? Nothing, only
the cook has fallen asleep and rolled off from his camel! But the
shining, round face comes up with a grin, “All right, kutter herak
kattir.” We are not half way to Murrat yet, and the water in our
“bootleg” bottles and skins is as black as ink. A whole week more
before we reach the river!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE STATISTICS FOR FEBRUARY.

Figures may be dry, and yet I am sure that a summary of those
contained in the February reports from our schools cannot but
interest and gratify all friends of our work. No less than 116 new
pupils were enrolled in our schools during that month. Change of
location or other causes produced the removal from the schools of
99. But the total number enrolled, 726, is the largest total ever
reached, and the average attendance, 354, is also larger than ever
before. Among the pupils thus enrolled are 119 who give evidence
of Christian life. The total number who have become members of our
schools during the fiscal year, thus far (_i.e._, from Sept. 1st to
Feb. 28th) is 1,375.


THE CHINESE NEW YEAR.

In the month of February occurs the Chinese New Year Festival——the
great holiday period for them of the entire twelvemonth. At my
request, our teachers have given me some account of the way in
which it was observed by our Christian Chinese in their respective
localities.

Rev. Mr. Ostrom, of Oroville, who has served as a missionary in
China and whose heart is still there, states the following “general
facts”: “Their preparation for the New Year is commenced weeks
before the close of the old. One of the first things is to plant
the Narcissus——a water lily called by the Chinese ‘the water angel
flower’——so that it may be in bloom on New Year’s Day. A beautiful
legend connected with this flower is everywhere told and believed
in China. In a certain district of the Fo Kien province lived a man
who had two wives and a son by each wife. The man died, leaving
a farm, which the elder brother seized, allowing to the younger
brother only a small, marshy corner, through which ran a sluggish
stream. These lilies were found growing in the stream——all that the
marsh and stream produced. The gentler younger brother, loving the
beautiful flower, cultivated it, and found that it would always
bloom on the New Year. Its beauty and fragrance won the admiration
of many and the demand for the bulbs increased till finally it came
in from all parts of China, and the wealth of the owner of the
little stream and marsh soon surpassed that of the avaricious elder
brother. Then, through some pretence, the latter took possession of
the little stream and marsh, expecting thus to grasp the revenue
from the sale of the lilies. But, lo! when New Year came, they
refused to bloom. Conscience-stricken by this apparent rebuke
of the gods, the marsh and the stream were surrendered to their
rightful owner, and then, strange to say, the lilies bloomed forth
as before.

“Such is the legend; now for plain facts. At the close of the year
the house is cleaned, and dressed on its posts and walls with
new red paper containing good words from the sages. On the last
day of the old year, every family worships the ancestral tablet,
and the idols, with offerings of slain birds and other animals,
with vegetable delicacies added. Eight kinds of meat are offered
to the ancestral tablets, and only fish, pork and chicken to the
idols. Fruit, and a pudding cooked in boiling lard are also used
as offerings. These furnish the feasts for the following day; for
the spirits only inhale the perfume, leaving the substance for base
mortals.

“On the last day of the old year, the married daughters must be at
their husbands’ homes, and must not revisit the paternal roof till
the New Year’s festival is over. The devotee rising very early on
New Year’s morning, worships, first of all, the ancestors, burning
incense, and red paper representing money, before the tablet, on
each side of which candles have been lighted, and before which
the offerings have been placed. Then the idols of the household
are worshipped, and, next, those of the temple. Fire-crackers are
snapped by the priests in the temple, and by all the people at
their homes and their places of business. If any one has married,
or is successful in gambling or in business, he expresses his
gratitude by these explosives. Breakfast comes next, composed of
vegetables only, for no blood must be shed or be used on New Year’s
Day. Liquor distilled from rice is sipped from tiny cups. Now,
calling and the exchange of cards follow. Only good words are to be
spoken. It is a violation of etiquette, established by the custom
of ages, to speak evil of, or to, any one during the first ten days
of the New Year.”

Such of these usages as are purely social are retained by our
Christian Chinese: The house-cleaning which brings to our several
mission houses a thorough renovation; the trimming upon the walls
and elsewhere with evergreen wreaths, with bouquets of artificial
flowers and other samples of Chinese art; the cultivation of the
fragrant Narcissus, and the interchange of calls and cards and
mutual good wishes; the treating with candies, fruits, and tiny
cups of tea——guiltless of the American concomitants of sugar and
cream——all these you will find our Christian Chinese carrying
forward with no less zest than their heathen countrymen. In these
cases, this year, they invited the teacher with the whole family to
which she belonged, to a banquet after the Chinese style; and in
_all_ cases the teachers seem to have been remembered with gifts
selected often with exquisite taste and purchased at a considerable
cost.

But with our Christian Chinese these days are holy days rather than
holidays. The week is a week of prayer. In all their sociality
their religion is remembered and their Saviour is recognized. If
on their special reception-day, a minister is among the first to
call, he will be likely to be asked to open the day’s enjoyment
with prayer. Every day there are special religious services; and
connected with these, fresh resolves of consecration to Christ and
fresh and earnest intercessions for each other and for their still
benighted countrymen. One such meeting I attended by appointment at
the home of our Oakland brethren. I remained with them an hour and
a half. The school there had been in an unsatisfactory condition;
running down in attendance and in spiritual power, while the
schools in this city and at most other points were advancing
in both respects. We looked the facts in the face; prayed over
them; and then took counsel together. The result was a unanimous
determination to take up missionary work among their countrymen
with more earnestness and more system than ever before, and with
God’s help to make their school as large and as efficient for good
as possible.

[Illustration: JAPANESE PLEASURE PARTY.]

Perhaps the account given by Mrs. Carrington, of the services at
Sacramento, presents the week’s work as fairly as any. “A watch
meeting closed the old year and opened the new. On Saturday evening
there was a union meeting at the Presbyterian Mission House. On
Wednesday evening a New Year’s banquet was given at our Mission
House. Rev. Dr. Dwinell and Mrs. Dwinell, with the superintendent
and teachers in the Chinese Sunday-school and other friends, were
present. Other evenings were spent in less formal but more social
worship, and on Saturday evening, February 25, a crowning union
service was held at our Mission House. The room was filled to
overflowing. Twenty or more of the American friends were present,
and much interest was manifested. And so this New Year’s festival
was closed.”

As between the hurried and meaningless New Year’s calls, with
the accessories of unwholesome food in gluttonous quantities,
washed down by poisonous wines and fiery liquors, which the old
Knickerbocker custom has entailed upon Americans, and these
festivities of our Christian Chinese, it does not take me long to
judge which ought to be preferred.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GRASSHOPPER TEACHER.

_By M. K. Smith. Atlanta University, Ga._

A young lad who had found his way from the West coast of Africa to
Atlanta University entered my class in entomology last October.
Shortly after, when naming the teachers under whose instructions he
came daily, he quaintly designated me as his “grasshopper teacher.”

In order to give some idea of the amount of enthusiasm the common
grasshopper is capable of rousing in the mind of the average
colored student, it may be interesting to give a brief explanation
of the method of study pursued.

The pupils had no particular love for the troublesome insect;
in fact, they had hitherto entertained for him a sentiment the
reverse of friendly, and when I gave each student a pin upon which
a grasshopper (it had been killed by immersion in alcohol) was
transfixed, a dissatisfied giggle or a contemptuous sniff from each
gave evidence that the little world of the class-room was decidedly
out of sympathy with the existing state of affairs.

The African boy refused to touch a “specimen,” and regarded me
with an expression in which surprise, fear and defiance were
blended. The fear was doubtless the result of experience with
poisonous insects in his fatherland, while the surprise was that
a grasshopper should usurp the place of a book, for which the
savage has all the superstitious reverence which characterizes
the civilized student, and the defiance probably arose from a
resolution that no earthly power should induce him to touch the
strange animal. I did not urge him, but quickly called attention
to the insect in hand. Without much difficulty they found the
principal parts, to which I gave the names, head, thorax and
abdomen. By the time these words were written on the board the
class was pacified, for the colored student loves new words whose
significations are beyond his comprehension just as well as his
white brother. When the shape of the head was considered the
students realized for the first time the lack of words which is so
general among these people. “It’s like a horse’s head,” broke forth
a boy, impetuously, while a hum of approval ran along the forms. I
accepted the resemblance, and asked them to observe other things in
connection with the head, and very soon the eyes were mentioned. I
drew on the board a diagram of hexagonal cells, closely connected,
and explained that the compound eye of the grasshopper is composed
of _facets_ of similar form and each having power of sight.

“Why, he is better off than we are,” exclaimed a wondering youth.
“We have only two eyes apiece, while he has thousands of ’em.
What’s that for?”

“God made him that way,” returned another, as he handled his
“specimen” a little more gently, while the African boy leaned over
to get a good look at those queer eyes that were even nicer than
his own.

I then called attention to the position of the eyes on the head and
secured the statement that by their being placed just as they are
the insect can see before, behind and on both sides at the same
time. In a moment more than a dozen hands were waving wildly in
the air, while two excited youths came to their feet as suddenly
as if they had been moved after the manner of a “Jack in the box.”
“I know, I know,” shouted one, “they are there so that he can see
danger all round him. Many a time I’ve tried to catch him, and I
would steal up behind him and ease my hand up soft, soft (the boy
illustrated the action) and then just when I thought I had him, he
was off!” and the lad’s hands were outspread to imitate the sudden
movement of the insect.

I directed attention to the place where the head joins the thorax.
“He’s got a collar on,” shouted one. “What is that for?” “To
cover the seam nicely, and keep it from harm,” answered another,
before I had time to speak, “and it’s made mighty pretty, too,” he
continued, admiringly. “I should like to know what this means?”
exclaimed another, who had extended his investigations, and now
held up to the astonished gazers the under wings, spread out as
they had never before seen them. I wish, dear reader, you could
have been with us that day, to have felt with me the delight of
those people, who for almost the first time were using their eyes
as I think God intended they should be used——to give light to the
understanding. “Just like a thin lady’s gray veil,” suggested a
little girl, as soon as she found a chance to speak, whereupon a
quizzical laugh arose, until she explained that the veil was thin,
and not the lady.

The African boy at the very next lesson held out his hand for a
“specimen,” and throughout the term was as much interested as the
others, striving with all his might to announce his discoveries
in correct English. The grasshopper became popular. We studied
him for more than two weeks and then felt we were only beginning
his acquaintance. The students spent their leisure in watching
grasshoppers eat, in studying their habits and in finding out
their uses. The lessons went on with an eagerness that made the
“grasshopper teacher” fear that something must be wrong, for it
seemed against all law and order that teacher and taught should
have such an uninterruptedly good time.

The pleasure was ever new, while, side by side with the development
of power to think and reason, grew a sense of God’s care over and
nearness to his creatures.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MARCH, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $311.45.

    Bangor. Rev. I. P. Warren, D.D. ($30 of which
      to const. MRS. SARAH L. WARREN L. M.)                  $50.00
    Bangor. Miss Haynes, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             2.00
    Bethel. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Brownsville. Cong Ch. and Soc.                            17.00
    Brunswick. Ladies, Bbl. of C. and $1.70, _for
      Freight, for Selma, Ala._                                1.70
    Calais. J. Barker, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     25.00
    East Otisfield. Mrs. Susan Lovewell, $5;
      Joseph Loring, $3; Mrs. Sarah Morton, $2.               10.00
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        9.80
    Garland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.00
    Hallowell. “Friends,” _for Furnishing Room,
      Talladega C._                                           13.00
    Hallowell. Mrs. H. K. Baker.                               5.00
    Kennebunk. Union Ch. and Soc.                              5.20
    Litchfield Corner. Cong. Ch.                              10.00
    Lyman. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  6.07
    Machias. Center Street Cong. Ch., $5.89, and
      Sab. Sch., $5; E. G. L., $1                             11.89
    Orono. Cong. Ch.                                           1.04
    Portland. St. Lawrence Street Cong. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    14.53
    Scarborough. Cong. Ch., “A Friend”                        50.00
    Searsport. “A Friend,” $5; M. C. B., 50c                   5.50
    Union. Ladies, Bbl. of C., _for Selma, Ala._
    Warren. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.21
    Wells. First Cong. Ch and Soc.                            18.51
    Winterport. Mrs. DR. E. MANTER, _for Chinese
      M._, and to const. herself L.M.                         30.00
    Winthrop. I. N. M.                                         1.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $420.72.

    Amherst. L. and L. R. Melendy, $100, _for
      Mendi M._, and $10 _for John Brown Steamer_            110.00
    Auburn. Mrs. Sally Coult, to const. MRS.
      HATTIE C. HOUGHTON L. M.                                30.00
    Bennington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            15.36
    Boscawen. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.00
    Concord. “P. S. G.,” _for John Brown Steamer_              1.00
    Derry. Rev. B. F. Parsons                                  5.00
    Exeter. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., val. $45
      _for Kansas Refugees_.
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             9.88
    Fisherville. “A Friend,” to const. MISS JULIA
      SARGENT L. M.                                           30.00
    Groton. Mrs. Parker Blood, $20, and Bundle of
      C.                                                      20.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.16
    Hanover. Cong. Ch., 30 copies “Songs of the
      Sanctuary,” _for Athens, Ga._
    Hollis. Cong. Ch.                                         17.71
    Keene. Miss E. R.                                          1.00
    Lancaster. Mrs. A. M. Amsden.                              5.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  50.91
    Lyndeborough. Cong. Ch.                                    4.45
    Manchester. “Pillsbury”                                    5.00
    Marlborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           16.65
    Milford. Nathan Jewett. $5; D. S. Burnham, $5             10.00
    Nashua. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                              64.60


  VERMONT, $257.11.

    Brookfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              14.40
    Clarendon. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Corinth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               20.00
    East Berkshire. Cong. Ch.                                 11.00
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Felchville. M. C. F.                                       0.50
    Grafton. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    Jericho. Second Cong Ch. and Soc.                         11.51
    Ludlow. Mrs. Luther Martin                                10.00
    Middlebury. Mrs. H. B. S.                                  1.00
    New Haven. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                12.00
    Newbury. Miss E. D.                                        0.50
    North Bennington. Cong. Ch.                                9.67
    Northfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            14.84
    Pittsfield. Cong. Ch.                                     11.51
    Pittsford. Thomas D. Hall                                  5.00
    Pittsford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $46;
      incorrectly ack. in April number from
      Pittsfield
    Quechee. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               26.56
    Strafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Thetford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              15.00
    Vergennes. Mrs. H. S.                                      0.53
    West Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          18.09
                                                          —————————
                                                            $232.11

    LEGACIES.

    Waterbury. Estate of Harriet F. Russ, by
      Daniel Russ, Ex.                                        25.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $257.11

  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,538.21.

    Abington. F. P. H., $1; H. F. R., $1                       2.00
    Adams. Rev. L. V. Price                                   16.00
    Amherst. Mrs H. D. Fearing, $10; Infant Class
      First Cong. Sab. Sch., $10; _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        20.00
    Amherst. Miss Sarah Ensign, _for Student Aid_              5.00
    Andover. South Ch. and Soc., $38.54; J. H. T., $1         39.54
    Andover. South Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           30.36
    Ashburnham. E. L. E.                                       0.50
    Athol. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      JOSIAH HAVEN and MOSES HILL L. Ms                       60.00
    Attleborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     6.08
    Auburndale. Box of C. _for Macon, Ga._
    Ayer. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding, $25, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._, and $45 _for Student Aid,
      Talladega U._                                           70.00
    Bedford. M. E. R.                                          0.50
    Berlin. Mrs. W. A. Houghton                                5.00
    Beverly. Miss M. E. T.                                     0.50
    Beverly. Ladies of Washington St. Soc., Bbl.
      of C. _for Fisk U._
    Boston. S. D. Smith, Organs, $300; Old South
      Ch. and Soc., $293.79; C. F. R., 50c                   594.22
    Boston. Houghton, Mifflin & Co., package Books
      _for Library, Macon, Ga._
    Boxford. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. REV. W.
      S. COGGIN L. M.                                         30.00
    Brockton. Mrs. L. C. Sanford, _for Freight_                3.00
    Cambridge. F. C. Swett, $2; E. W. F., $1                   3.00
    Cambridgeport. G. B. C., 50c.; I. A. N., 50c               1.00
    Charlestown. Winthrop Ch. and Soc., $80.56; A.
      W. P., 50c                                              81.06
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($55 of
      which _for Lady Missionary, Chattanooga,
      Tenn._)                                                 57.60
    Chelsea. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc., $9.44; I.
      H. S., $1                                               10.44
    Chicopee. Mrs. W. L. B.                                    1.00
    Cohasset. “A Friend”                                       1.00
    Deerfield. Mrs. C. E. W.                                   0.50
    Dorchester. Mrs. E. T.                                     1.00
    East Charlemont. P. F.                                     1.00
    East Hampton. Mrs. E. G. Williston, $100;
      First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $60.71; E. A. C.,
      50c                                                    161.21
    East Medway. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     10.10
    East Somerville. Woman’s Home Missionary
      Ass’n, _for Lady Missionaries_                         204.78
    East Somerville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           40.00
    Edgartown. J. W. Coffin                                    3.00
    Enfield. “A Friend”                                      100.00
    Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                             30.00
    Framingham. “A Friend,” to const. MRS. MARY A.
      W. DAVIS L. M.                                          30.00
    Framingham. Hymn and Tune Books, _for Macon,
      Ga._
    Foxborough. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   33.49
    Gardner. H. B.                                             1.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                          8.00
    Haverhill. “For work among Colored People.”
      $1; E. W., 50c                                           1.50
    Hopkinton. Mrs. P. J. Claflin                             25.00
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch.                                 20.12
    Indian Orchard. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  15.37
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.00
    Jamaica Plain. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              50.00
    Jamaica Plain. N. F. R.                                    0.50
    Kingston. L. A. McGlauthlin, Bundle “_Youths’
      Companion_,” _for Macon, Ga._
    Lawrence. Mr. Coit, _for Talladega C._                     2.00
    Lee. Mrs. E. B.                                            1.00
    Lincoln. M. S. R., 50c.; L. C. J., 50c                     1.00
    Littleton. Dea. Otis Manning, to const. EDWARD
      C. HAUGHTON L. M.                                       31.00
    Littleton. Ladies’ Mission Circle, by Mrs. J.
      C. Houghton, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._               8.00
    Ludlow. Children’s Soc., _for Freight_                     2.00
    Lynn. Central Ch. and Soc.                                25.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          59.83
    Mansfield. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    14.22
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for Church
      Building_                                            1,000.00
    Medford. “A Friend”                                        0.25
    Milford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                15.25
    Milford. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Milton. S. D. Hunt. Bbl. of C., _for Macon,
      Ga._
    Mt. Auburn. Rev. D. N. S.                                  0.50
    Natick. Mrs. S. E. Hammond                                10.00
    New Boston. “N. B.”                                       50.00
    Newbury. First Ch. and Soc.                               18.50
    Newburyport. Philip H. Lunt                               25.00
    Newton Center. S. A. E.                                    0.50
    Northampton. “A Friend,” $100; H. R. R., $1              101.00
    North Billerica. J. D. Gould, Books, _for
      Freedmen’s Library, Macon, Ga._
    Northbridge Center. Collected by Edith Putnam
      (eight years old)                                        3.07
    Norton. Mrs. E. B. Wheeler, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  15.26
    Petersham. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     3.08
    Phillipston. A. & T. Ward, $5; D. & L. Mixter,
      $2                                                       7.00
    Plymouth. Pilgrimage Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   65.03
    Rockport. W. H. Patch                                      5.00
    Salem. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of South Ch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 5.00
    Shelburne Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $12; E.
      Maynard, $5                                             17.00
    Somerville. Broadway Ch. and Soc., $10; “A
      Friend,” $1                                             11.00
    South Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        56.23
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch.                                20.33
    South Framingham. South Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                10.00
    South Framingham. G. M. Amsden                             5.00
    South Royalston. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $10.18; Mrs. E. L. R., 50c.; Mrs. S. M. N.,
      50c                                                     11.18
    Springfield. “H. M.”                                   1,000.00
    Springfield. Mrs. Persis Burnham ($1 of which
      _for John Brown Steamer_)                                2.00
    Stoneham. A.R.                                             0.50
    Stoughton. Mrs. B. E. C.                                   1.00
    Templeton. Trinitarian Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Townsend. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  5.00
    Townsend Harbor. S. M. P.                                  1.00
    Ware. C. C. Hitchcock, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     25.00
    Watertown. Mrs. S. S. and Mrs. J. H. S.                    1.20
    Westborough. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $107.75; Mrs. M. M. Morse, $30, to const.
      Rev. LYMAN WHITING L. M.                               137.75
    Westfield. First Cong. Ch.                                44.07
    West Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       10.00
    West Hampton. I. G. Jewett ($1.50 of which
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._)                              2.00
    Westport. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  2.17
    West Somerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        4.46
    West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch.                      15.00
    West Stockbridge. Village Ch. and Soc.                    28.07
    Wymouth and Braintree. Union Ch. and Soc.                 42.20
    Worcester. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., $161.50;
      Mrs. F. C., 50c.                                       162.00
    Wrentham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        20.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        43.12
                                                          —————————
                                                          $4,973.21

    LEGACIES.

    Beverly. Dane St. Ch., Estate of Mrs. Susan C.
      Pickett, _for 17 Life Memberships_                     510.00
    Boston. Estate of Rev. Dr. Hooker, Books, _for
      Freedmen’s Library, Macon, Ga._
    Oakham. Estate of Perley Ayres, by Wm. S.
      Spear, Ex.                                              55.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $5,538.21


  RHODE ISLAND, $30.00.

    Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Rebuilding Emerson Inst._                               20.00
    Providence. “Baptist.”                                    10.00


  CONNECTICUT, $2,826.67.

    Ansonia. “A Friend”                                       10.00
    Avon. Mrs. E. L. Robbins                                   5.00
    Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                                     24.00
    Bridgeport. First Cong. Ch.                              117.48
    Canaan. “M. A. N.,” _for Chinese M._                       5.00
    Canton Center. A. L. S.                                    1.00
    Colchester. Mrs. W. E. Gillette, $5; Mary B.
      Gillette, $5                                            10.00
    Collinsville. Ladies Mission Soc., $16, _for
      Student Aid_; H. S. Collins, $10, _for Theo.
      Dept., Talladega C._                                    26.00
    East Windsor Hill. E. O. C.                                1.00
    East Woodstock. James Walker                               2.00
    Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                                 100.00
    Fairfield. First Cong. Ch.                                30.00
    Fair Haven. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                           41.02
    Georgetown. E. Gilbert, _for Macon, Ga._                   5.00
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch., $16.45; B. A., $1                17.45
    Hartford. South Cong. Ch., $250; Geo. P.
      Bissell, $50; John S. Wells, $20                       320.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Church, $25; “M. J.,”
      $25; Mrs. G. O. Perkins, $50, _for Theo. Dept.,
       Talladega C._                                         100.00
    Hartford. Center Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     66.00
    Higganum. Selden Gladwin                                   6.00
    Hotchkissville. “Widow’s Mite”                             5.00
    Kent. Cong. Soc.                                          29.25
    Kent. Cong. Sab. Sch., $10; Miss Mary A.
      Hopson, $5, _for John Brown Steamer_                    15.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch.                               18.57
    Mansfield. Geo. F. King                                    2.00
    Mansfield Center. Mrs. E. S. Fitch                         3.00
    Middlefield. Lyman A. Mills, to const. HERBERT
      L. MILLS and CHARLES ROWLAND MILLS L. Ms.               60.00
    Milford. Rev. Geo. H. Griffin, _for Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst._                                          25.00
    Milldale. H. H. C.                                         1.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch., Mrs. Mary E.
      House, $30, to const. WILLIAM A. HOUSE L. M.;
      “A Member,” $5; A. N. Lewis, $10                        45.00
    New Haven. Sab. Sch. of Dwight Place Cong.
      Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_                           30.00
    New Haven. Mrs. Mary L. Skinner, _for
      Talladega C._                                          100.00
    New Haven. Ch. of the Redeemer, $244 (of which
      F. C. Sherman, $100; Wm. E. Chandler, $60,
      to const. WILLIAM WOODS CHANDLER and ROBERT
      WOODS CHANDLER L. Ms.); “A Friend,” $5; “A
      Friend,” $5                                            254.00
    New Hartford. Miss C. Richards, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           2.00
    New London. “First Church of Christ.”                     39.21
    New Milford. G. N.                                         1.00
    Norfolk. Robbins Battelle, _for Talladega C._             25.00
    North Branford. J. A. Palmer                               2.00
    Northford. G. W.                                           1.00
    North Stamford. “A Friend”                                 2.00
    Norwich. Park Cong. Ch. and Soc. ($20 of which
      _for John Brown Steamer_)                              271.67
    Old Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                 42.50
    Plymouth. A. S. B.                                         1.00
    Prospect. Cong. Ch. $11; People of Prospect,
      Bbl. of C.                                              11.00
    Roxbury. “Two Friends,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.00
    Simsbury. Mrs. Lucy A. A. Hoskins                          2.00
    Somersville. Cong. Ch.                                    45.25
    South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                            30.00
    Stafford. Mrs. T. H. Thresher                              5.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      81.77
    Wallingford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                           60.00
    Washington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Washington. “Z,” _for Indian M._                           1.00
    Waterbury. Dr. John De Forest, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                     100.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      20.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    West Hartford. Rev. F. H. Adams, _for Freight,
      for Macon, Ga._                                          2.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            21.50
    West Suffield. Cong. Ch.                                   6.00
    Wethersfield. Geo. Stillman                                2.00
    Wethersfield. Sab. Sch. Class, by Jane C.
      Francis, _for John Brown Steamer_                       10.00
    Winthrop. Miss C. Rice, $2: Mrs. M. A. J., $1              3.00
    Woodbridge. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C.
    Woodbury. Mrs. C. P. Churchill, _for Indian M._            2.00
    Woodstock. E L. Snow                                     500.00


  NEW YORK, $12,895.25.

    Batavia. Mrs. A. D. L.                                     1.10
    Brighton Heights. S. I. Reformed Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           20.50
    Brooklyn. Henry C. Hulbert, $100, _for Student
      Aid_; A. J. Newton, $100; Cash, $1, _for
      Talladega C._                                          201.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Fernandina, Fla._                           25.00
    Brooklyn. Freedmen’s Helpers, $18, and Bbl. of
      C., _for Macon, Ga._                                    18.00
    Brooklyn. Park Cong. Ch., $20.52; A. S., $1               21.52
    Buffalo. Mrs. Wm. G. Bancroft, _for Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst._                                          50.00
    Buffalo. “I. M. S.,” _for John Brown Steamer_              1.00
    Cazenovia. Mrs. H. L. W.                                   0.51
    Chestertown. Fish St. Congregation, $2.27;
      Mill Brook Congregation, $3.27; Chester
      Wesleyan M. Congregation, $7.55, by Rev. S.
      H. Foster                                               13.09
    Coxsackie. Mrs. P. H. Silvester, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Floyd. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                     2.12
    Fredonia. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Presb. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                               2.75
    Greene. Mrs. W. H. B.                                      1.00
    Griffin’s Mills. Mrs. Theo. Olden, $2; Mrs.
      Theo. Olden, $2                                          4.00
    Hudson. A. S. P.                                           1.00
    Hughsonville. S. H. S.                                     0.50
    Jewett. Mr. and Mrs. Lucius North                         30.00
    Le Rey. Miss D. A. Phillips                               15.00
    Lockport. First Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                   46.83
    Lockport. Cong. Ch, and Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Millville. Cong. Soc.                                      4.37
    New York. “A Friend”                                  10,000.00
    New York. W. H. De Forest, $100; Anson Phelps
      Stokes, $50; “A Friend,” $1, _for Student
      Aid_; Henry G. De Forest, $100; Dr. John
      Hall, $25 _for Memorial Scholarships_; Chas.
      N. Taintor, $50; Ralph Wells, $25, _for
      Talladega C._                                          351.00
    New York. D. I. Carson, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     50.00
    New York. Bethany Sab. Sch., Mrs. S. T.
      Gordon’s Class, _for John Brown Steamer_                10.00
    New York. Rev. A. J. G.                                    0.50
    New York. American Bible Soc.; Grant of
      Scriptures; val., $76.50.
    New York. Taintor Bros. Merrill & Co., Package
      School and Hymn Books, _for Macon, Ga._
    Patchogue. Cong. Sab. Ch., _for Freight_                   2.46
    Penn Yan. W. M. Taylor                                     3.00
    Pitcher. Bellany Allen                                     5.00
    Port Leyden. Cong. Ch.                                     2.00
    Salem. B. C.                                               1.00
    Sandy Hill. Mrs. Susan Rogers, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        5.00
    Schroon Lake. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Sherburne. Chas. A. Fuller, _for Talladega C._            50.00
    Syracuse. W. E. Abbott                                    50.00
    Union Falls. Francis E. Duncan, $10; Mrs.
      Fanny D. Duncan, $10; Miss Margaret B.
      Duncan, $5                                              25.00
    Walton. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     25.00
    Windsor. Rev. J. S. Pattengill, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.00
    Yaphank. “A Friend”                                        5.00
                                                          —————————
                                                         $11,079.25

    LEGACIES.

    Bergen. Estate of I. M. Hitchcock, by A. E.
      Hitchcock, Ex.                                       1,000.00
    Bridgewater. Estate of Jane Turner, by Wm. C.
      Marsh, Ex.                                             500.00
    Kingsborough. Estate of Mrs. M. S. Judson, by
      D. B. Judson                                           116.00
    Randolph. Estate of Mrs. D. C. Bush, by Mrs.
      C. C. Fitch                                            200.00
                                                          —————————
                                                         $12,895.25


  NEW JERSEY, $141.50.

    Lakewood. By Rev. G. L.                                    0.50
    Montclair. Mrs A. F. Pratt’s Sab. Sch. Class,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          6.00
    Newark. C. S. Haines, $30; David Owen, $5                 35.00
    Newark. David Ripley, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Paterson. J. C. Ryle, $50; G. G. Tillotson,
      $25; _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                      75.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $317.21.

    Guy’s Mills. Randolph Cong. Ch. _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           16.10
    Guy’s Mills. S. O. F.                                      1.00
    Le Raysville. Cong. Ch., $9.33; Rev. J. R., 75c.          10.08
    Philadelphia. Central Cong. Ch. to const.
      BARTON F. BLAKE, HARRY P. BOWER, HARRY M.
      BOWDEN, JAMES R. DANFORTH, JR., LEWIS W. H.
      GIESE, EDWARD P. HALL, GEORGE HOBBS and
      FRANK P. PENDLETON L. Ms.                              280.03
    South Bethlehem. Mrs. H. D. Kitchell                      10.00


  OHIO, $528.87.

    Austinburg. First Cong. Ch.                               16.00
    Bellefontaine. Mrs. R. I. Lindsay, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           5.00
    Brookfield. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                9.00
    Bryan. S. E. Blakeslee                                     6.50
    Chagrin Falls. “Earnest Workers,” _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       10.00
    Cleveland. J. S., $1; A. R. B., $1; A. L. P.,50c           2.50
    Delaware. By Sarah Evans                                   2.50
    Hudson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    2.92
    Huntsburgh. Mr. and Mrs. Q. Phelps                         4.00
    Huntsburgh. Mrs. V. R. P. _for Indian M._                  1.00
    Jefferson. Ladies Miss’y Soc. _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       23.00
    Lenox. A. J. Holman                                       10.00
    Madison. Central Cong. Ch. and Soc., $59.87,
      and Sab. Sch., $64.59                                  124.46
    Madison. Ladies, Bbl. of C. and $4.15 _for
      Freight, for Selma, Ala._                                4.15
    Madison. Mrs. M. P. St. John, _for Freight_                2.00
    Madison. Ladies, Bbl. Books and Papers _for
      Summerfield, Ala._
    Mechanicsburgh. Mrs. M. K. H.                              1.00
    Mechanicstown. Mrs. S. M.                                  1.00
    Metamora. Mrs. M. S.                                       1.00
    Newark. Welch Cong. Ch.                                   12.80
    North Ridgeville. Cong. Ch. ($2.80 of which
      from Rev. J. B. Stocking)                                4.03
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., $90; Mrs. D. H. P.,
      51c.                                                    90.51
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of Second Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                     75.00
    Painesville. Rev. S. W. Pierson, $5; E. E. J., $1          6.00
    Peru. “Friends,” by Rev. H. Lawrence, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              55.00
    Pierpont. Mrs. S. W.                                       1.00
    Springfield. “Friend,” _for Student Aid.
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Springfield. W. A. F.                                      1.00
    Tallmadge. Miss Josephine Pierce, bal. to
      const. MISS JOSEPHINE M. WOLCOTT L. M.                   6.00
    Toledo. Mrs. Eliza H. Weed. $10; J. H. S., 50c.           10.50
    Unionville. Mrs. E. F. Burnelle                            5.00
    Wellington. Edward West ($10 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                    30.00
    Youngstown. “Mahoning”                                     1.00


  ILLINOIS, $2.659.52.

    Alton. Ch. of the Redeemer                                45.40
    Champaign. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                15.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., $164.25; Mrs. S. A. S.,
      $1; Mrs. F. E., 50c.                                   165.75
    Chicago. First Presb. Ch., _for Berea C._                100.00
    Chicago. C. B. Bouton, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     50.00
    Chicago. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               21.00
    Danville. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Presb. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         30.00
    Earlville. Mrs. Mary T. Murray                             2.00
    Elmore. Cong. Ch., to const. WILLIAM HUMPHREY
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Elmhurst. Seth Wadhams, _for Prof’s Home,
      Talladega, Ala._                                     1,550.00
    Freeport. L. A. Warner                                    25.00
    Galesburg. First Cong. Ch.                               100.00
    Galva. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   15.00
    Griggsville. Cong. Ch.                                    28.80
    Hutsonville. C. V. N.                                      1.00
    Lawn Ridge. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Lyonsville. Cong. Ch., in part                            11.00
    Lyndon. “A Friend,” $4; “A Friend,” $1, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      5.00
    Marseilles. Cong. Ch.                                     12.76
    Naperville. Cong. Ch., $7.30; A. A. Smith, $5             12.30
    New Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                     8.70
    Oak Park. Mr. Packard’s Class of Boys, Cong.
      Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid Talladega C._               14.25
    Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Peoria. Mr. and Mrs. J. L. Griswold, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                  100.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       30.00
    Port Byron. Mission Circle                                 8.00
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss, $15; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $6.25                                             21.25
    Princeville. Mrs. Olive L. Cutter                         10.00
    Providence. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Rochelle. C. H. Holcomb                                   20.00
    Rosemond. Cong. Ch. ($5.92 of which from Sab.
      Sch.), _for John Brown Steamer_                         19.97
    Seward. Cong. Ch., $18.10, and Sab. Sch., $12             30.10
    Sheffield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                               5.09
    Tolona. Mrs. L. Haskell, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    Tonica. F. A. Wood                                        10.00
    Western Springs. Union Meeting                             6.44
    Wethersfield. Mrs. A. B. Kellogg                           5.00
    Wheaton. Cong. Ch.                                        16.30
    Wilmette. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                            6.25
    Winnetka. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                18.50
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       4.66


  MICHIGAN, $467.87.

    Ada. Mrs. A. A. Morris                                     5.00
    Adrian. Plymouth Ch., $7.03; Benj. S. Allen,
      $2.97                                                   10.00
    Battle Creek. “J. E. W.”                                   5.00
    Birmingham. Mrs. E. B. A.                                  1.00
    Calumet. Cong. Ch.                                       252.61
    Covert. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch. (ad’l), _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Detroit. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Memphis, Tenn._                        50.00
    Detroit. “S. Z.,” 50c.; D. G. P., 50c.                     1.00
    Eaton Rapids. First Cong. Ch.                             20.45
    Imlay. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                                 8.00
    Milford. Mrs. E. G.                                        1.00
    North Lansing. Plymouth Cong Ch.                          37.81
    Pentwater. First Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of
      Books, _for Macon, Ga._
    Romeo. Mary A. Dickinson, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                50.00
    Saint Clair. S. F. H.                                      1.00
    Saint Josephs. Mrs. E. A. H. Grosvenor, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    Ypsilanti. Cong Ch.                                        5.00


  WISCONSIN, $386.75.

    Appleton. Mrs. S. R. Page, Box C. and $2.25,
      _for Macon, Ga._                                         2.25
    Beloit. African M. E. Sab. Sch, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       4.00
    Black Earth. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             3.25
    Bristol. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. and $1.50
      _for Freight, for Macon, Ga._                            1.50
    Cumberland. W. B. Hopkins, M.D.                           10.00
    Delavan. Miss E. E.                                        0.50
    Eau Claire. Cong. Ch.                                     38.00
    Eau Claire. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Emerald Grove. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       8.50
    Fort Howard. Mrs. D. C. Curtis, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Macon Ga._
    Fox Lake. William Dawes                                  200.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., $45, and 50 Vols.
      “Songs of Christian Praise,” _for Talladega
      C._                                                     45.00
    Milwaukee. Young Peoples’ Mission Circle, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              16.00
    Ripon. First Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls. C., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    River Falls. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.50
    Rosendale. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             0.25
    Saint Clair. F. M., _for Freight_                          1.00
    Sheboygan. First Cong. Ch., 2 Boxes Books and
      C. and $10 _for Freight, for Macon, Ga._                10.00
    West Rosendale. Mrs. A. Martin, $20, _for
      Student Aid, Lewis High Sch._; First Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Macon, Ga._                       20.00
    Westfield. C. C.                                           1.00
    Whitewater. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             3.00


  IOWA, $1,694.33.

    Anamosa. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            5.00
    Anita. $6.50; Eldora. Ladies of Ch., $10.83;
      Tabor, Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., $15; by Miss
      Henry L. Chase, _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._                                           32.33
    Burlington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                20.00
    Burlington. Miss M. L.                                     1.00
    Cedar Rapids. Mrs. R. D. Stephens, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 30.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           15.00
    Davenport. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           26.00
    Dubuque. Young People’s Benev. Soc., $50; Mrs.
      James Beach, $5.30, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           55.30
    Dubuque. W. C. W.                                          0.50
    Des Moines. James Callaman, $1,000; Ex. Gov.
      Samuel Merrill, $250, _for President’s
      House, Talladega C._                                 1,250.00
    Des Moines. “Ten Young Men,” $50; “Friends”
      $50, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                   100.00
    Grinnell. S. H. H.                                         0.51
    Keokuk. Mrs. M. W.                                         0.50
    Keokuk. ————, _for John Brown Steamer_                     5.00
    Lyons. Ladies’ Circle, _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       10.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Oldfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  9.08
    Osage. Cong. Ch.                                          18.00
    Quasqueton. Rev. W. S. Potwin, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.00
    Shenandoah. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        8.00
    Sioux City. Mrs. W. K. S.                                  0.51
    Tabor. Ladies, $12; Mrs. John Todd, $10, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               22.00
    Waverly. M. H. G.                                          0.50
    Wayne. D. C. S.                                            1.00
    West Liberty. Mrs. L. K. Sisson, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      22.50
    West Liberty. “Busy Bees,” Package
      Sewing-School Material, _for Macon, Ga._
    Winthrop. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                            6.60
    Wittemberg. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                5.00


  KANSAS, $4.50.

    Anthony. Rev. T. D. C.                                     0.75
    Cora. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown Steamer_            1.25
    Ridgeway. Cong. Ch.                                        2.50


  MINNESOTA, $128.79.

    Audubon. Cong. Ch.                                         3.50
    Clear Water. Cong. Ch., $3; C. M. S., 50c.                 3.50
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $20.33; Second
      Cong. Ch., $4.                                          24.33
    Minneapolis. E. D. First Cong. Ch.                        14.38
    Morris. A. A. S.                                           0.50
    Red Wing. Mrs. Julia B. Nelson.                           10.00
    Saint Paul. Plymouth Ch.                                  72.58


  NEBRASKA, $2.00.

    Wayne. G. H. S.                                            1.00
    Wheatland. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00


  MISSOURI, $9.80.

    Holden. “Mrs. S. E. H.,” _for ed. of Indians,
      Hampton N. and A. Inst._                                 3.00
    Saint Louis. Francis Whitney.                              6.80


  OREGON, $9.15.

    Forest Grove. Cong. Ch., $3.15; Mrs. M. R. W., $1          4.15
    Portland. Mr. H. Williams.                                 5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $10.00.

    San Bernardino. Mr. Emeline Smith, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Austin, Texas_               10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $2.36.

    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch.                           2.36


  NORTH CAROLINA, $214.00.

    Dudley. Public Fund.                                      30.00
    Raleigh. Cong. Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_               2.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                         177.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $289.25.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         279.25
    Charleston. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                            10.00


  TENNESSEE, $468.60.

    Chattanooga. Rev. J. W. White and Others, _for
      Mag._                                                    2.50
    Chattanooga. M. Blanche Curtis, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                        2.00
    Maryville. Rev. T. J. L., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Memphis. LeMoyne Sch., Tuition                           180.60
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              271.95
    Nashville. Miss’y Soc. of Fisk U., $10; Fisk
      U. Students, 55c., _for John Brown Steamer_             10.55


  GEORGIA, $836.41.

    Atlanta. Storrs’ School, Tuition, $245.40;
      Rent, $3.                                              248.40
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition                             231.59
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch. ($35.20 of which _for
      Student Aid, Storrs’ Sch._), $57; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., $4.50.                                            91.80
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           83.72
    Macon. Hon. James H. Blount, 155 Vols. Pub.
      Doc., _for Library, Macon, Ga._
    McIntosh. Tuition.                                        25.75
    Savannah. Beach Inst., $143.30; Rent, $11.85.            155.15


  ALABAMA, $503.87.

    Alabama Furnace. Cong. Ch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 3.25
    Anniston. Tuition.                                         5.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          2.50
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition                           152.80
    Mobile. Cong. Ch., $2; A. E., _for Emerson
      Inst._, $1.                                              3.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund.                                 175.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          43.15
    Selma. Mission Workers, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           11.50
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                         104.67
    Talladega. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            3.00


  LOUISIANA, $202.25.

    New Orleans. Straight University, Tuition                202.25


  MISSISSIPPI, $131.94.

    Jackson. R. F.                                             0.24
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo University, Tuition                   129.70
    Tougaloo. F. J. Webster, _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             2.00


  TEXAS, $192.20.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 190.75
    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                    1.45


  INCOME FUND, $455.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               355.00
    C. F. Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                        50.00
    General Fund                                              50.00


  CANADA, $9.50.

    Montreal. Rev. Henry Wilkes, D.D., $4; Charles
      Alexander, $2.; Theo. Lyman, $2, and “Juv.
      Miss. Box of the family,” $1.50                          9.50


  FRANCE, $30.

    Paris. Mrs. E. W. Hitchcock, _for Talladega C._           30.00


  CHINA, $1.50.

    Pao-ting-fu. Mrs. Isaac Pierson, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       1.50
                                                          —————————
      Total                                              $31,976.58
      Total from Oct. 1 to March 31.                    $132,022.55
                                                         ==========
         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    From Oct. 1 to March 31.                               2,191.73

         *       *       *       *       *

  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Conn. Watertown. “A Friend,” _for support of
      President of Talladega College_                      5,000.00
                                                         ==========

                                    H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                            56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    THE NEW CHURCH PRAISE BOOK.

                         WORSHIP IN SONG.

                          A SELECTION OF

         Hymns and Tunes for the Service of the Sanctuary.

                  By JOS. P. HOLBROOK, Mus. Doc.,

Musical Editor of “Songs for the Sanctuary.” “Baptist Praise Book.”
“Methodist Hymnal,” Author of “Quartet and Chorus Choir,” etc.
etc.

In this work Dr. Holbrook has put the mature results of long,
patient and careful study. His excellent judgment and taste, and
the great attractiveness of his compositions, and especially

                    HIS ADMIRABLE ADAPTATIONS,

have already been noted and appreciated by all who are familiar
with the former works edited by him. In addition to his own more
familiar compositions, as well as new tunes which now appear for
the first time, the author has drawn upon the store of ENGLISH
AND GERMAN TUNES, such as have already become dear to American
congregations. Where entirely new tunes appear, or such as are not
generally known, the chorister will always find an old “stand-by”
upon the same or opposite page. The book is thus adapted to both
the precentor and choir.

In the selection and arrangement of Hymns he has been efficiently
assisted by Rev. Dr. J. GLENTWORTH BUTLER who has been a life-long
student of English Hymnology.

The work contains 450 pages, in full cloth and burnished edges.

Correspondence solicited. Returnable examination copies sent to
Pastors or Committees. Specimen pages free to any applicant.

                        A. S. BARNES & CO.,
                       Publishers, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  [Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS, DIMINISHED
                         VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE
                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,
                         Providence, R.I.,
                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       Hood’s Sarsaparilla,

Has met success at home never accorded to any other proprietary
medicine. It has successfully combated the strongest competition,
and by its superior merit to-day commands the largest sale and
the greatest confidence wherever it has been introduced. It is a
skillfully prepared compound, concentrated extract by a process
peculiarly our own, of the best remedies of the vegetable kingdom
known to medical science as Alternatives, Blood Purifiers,
Diuretics, Tonics and Stomachics. These articles have been used for
years, and their medicinal value is appreciated by every mother in
the land. Time and constant use have proved their efficacy beyond a
question. The wonderful results from the use of Hood’s Sarsaparilla
prove more than we have ever claimed for it.

  C. W. CUMMINGS, a popular merchant of Meriden, N.H., writes:
  “I have sold Hood’s Sarsaparilla for two years, and have used
  it myself with wonderful results. Say all you can in praise of
  this valuable remedy, the medicine will _back_ it.”

  “I have never found anything that hit my wants as Hood’s
  Sarsaparilla. It tones up my system, purifies my blood,
  sharpens my appetite, and seems to make me all over.” J. P.
  THOMPSON, Register of Deeds, Lowell, Mass.


                        Hood’s Sarsaparilla

Sold by Johnston, Holloway & Co., Philadelphia; Fuller & Fuller,
Chicago; Richardson & Co., St. Louis; Redington & Co., San
Francisco; Strong, Cobb & Co., Cleveland, and New York and New
England druggists. Made by C. I. HOOD & CO., Lowell, Mass. $1; 6
for $5.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       STUDENTS AND TEACHERS

                         (MALE OR FEMALE),

                          CAN EASILY MAKE

                           $100 A MONTH

                              SELLING

                        HEADLEY’S NEW BOOK.

                      “PUBLIC MEN OF TO-DAY,”

A NATIONAL Volume of =800= large octavo pages. The more than
=300= life-like PORTRAITS will sell the book in every community.
Every State represented. All want the book. No competition. Terms
liberal; =500= more salesmen wanted; choice of territory given.
Apply at once to

                                      S. S. SCRANTON & CO.,
                                                HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


          [Illustration: THE Great American TEA COMPANY]

                         31 & 33 Vesey St.
                    P.O. Box 4235, =NEW YORK=.

Stores, Hotels, Boarding Houses, Restaurants, Club Agents, and
large consumers will find it to their interest to send Postal Card
to the above address, and get the latest terms.

N. B.——Beware of imitators.

                           ☞ NO HUMBUG.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           N.Y. WITNESS.


☞ There will be many important events occurring during the coming
year that you will not know about unless you take the WITNESS. Do
you know now, for instance, that a sober and Christian young man,
a private soldier of the U. S. Army, has been thrown into prison
and subjected to great privations and indignities by his superior
officers——treated worse than the miserable wretch Guiteau——for
writing a letter to the WITNESS——a letter which is of great
importance to all young men and all parents? There are many things
published in the WITNESS that other papers dare not print, for fear
of offending some rich and powerful corporation, and so losing
their patronage.

                 The price of the WITNESS is $1.50
                  a year, post-paid; club price,
                      five for $6.00. Sample
                          copy sent free.

Ministers, Missionaries, Evangelists of all Denominations, and
Teachers can have the WITNESS for One Dollar a year.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,

                     New York Witness Office,

                17 to 21 VANDEWATER St., NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

=Case’s School Furniture.=——Parties about to purchase School
Furniture are invited to correspond with us. Our work is all of
the most approved patterns, and is unequaled for strength and
durability.

=Camp’s Outline Maps.=——Set of 9 maps, with key. No. 1,
Hemispheres; No. 2, North America; No. 3, United States; No. 4,
South America; No. 5, Europe; No. 6, Asia; No. 7, Africa; No. 8,
Oceanica; No. 9, Physical World.

=Case’s Bible Atlas.=——Embracing 16 full-page maps, quarto size,
beautifully printed in colors, covering the whole ground of
Biblical Geography; also 16 pages of Explanatory Notes on the maps.
Sent by mail on receipt of price; bound in boards, $1.; cloth,
$1.50. _Agents wanted._

Circulars sent on application.

                   O. D. CASE & CO., Publishers

                                AND

                  School Furniture Manufacturers,

                        HARTFORD, —— CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          KELLY & JONES,

                  202 Greene Street, —— New York.

                       LOW AND HIGH PRESSURE

                               STEAM

                             AND OTHER

                        HEATING APPARATUS.


                      We make a Specialty of

             Steam Heating and Ventilating Apparatus,
                      for Churches, Schools,
                       Public Buildings and
                        Private Residences.

Plans and Specifications of the latest and most approved methods
furnished on application.


Our apparatus is in operation in the following buildings:

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.; Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Georgia; Third Judicial District Court House, New York City; Museum
of Art, New York City; Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.,
New York City; State College, near Bellefonte, Pa.; New York State
Reformatory, Elmira, N.Y.; Point St. School, Providence, R.I.;
Board of Education (Schools), Pittsburgh, Pa.; Van Wert Co. Court
House, Van Wert, Ohio; Mahoning Co. Court House, Youngstown, Ohio;
Washington Co. Court House, Washington, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                   THIRTY-SIXTH ANNUAL STATEMENT

                              OF THE

                        CONNECTICUT MUTUAL

                      Life Insurance Company,

                        OF HARTFORD, CONN.


  NET ASSETS, January 1, 1881                           $47,833,628.70
    RECEIVED IN 1881:
      For premiums                         $5,238,811.82
      For Interest and Rents                2,830,328.08
      Profit and Loss                          91,626.11
                                           —————————————
                                                          8,160,766.01
                                                         —————————————
                                                        $55,994,394.71

                 *       *       *       *       *

  DISBURSED IN 1881.

    TO POLICY HOLDERS:
  For claims by death and
    matured endowments        $3,718,646.87
  Surplus returned to Policy
    holders                    1,284,342.53
  Lapsed and surrendered
    Policies                   1,081,234.81
                              —————————————
      TOTAL TO POLICY HOLDERS              $6,084,224.21

    EXPENSES:
  Commissions to Agents         $286,797.05
  Salaries of Officers, Clerks
    and all others employed on
    salary                       103,541.93
  Medical Examiners’ fees         10,540.25
  Printing, Advertising, Legal,
    Real Estate and all other
    expenses                     276,607.84
                                ———————————
                                             $677,487.07
  TAXES                                       454,590.06
                                             ———————————
                                                          7,216,301.34
                                                          ————————————
    BALANCE NET ASSETS, DEC. 31, 1881                   $48,778,093.37

                 *       *       *       *       *

  SCHEDULE OF ASSETS.

  Loans upon Real Estate, first lien                    $18,037,201.12
  Loans upon Stocks and Bonds                               401,303.28
  Premium notes on Policies in force                      3,347,600.47
  Cost of Real Estate owned by the Company               12,657,974.92
  Cost of United States Registered Bonds                  4,618,853.10
  Cost of State Bonds                                       619,900.00
  Cost of City Bonds                                      2,572,300.84
  Cost of other Bonds                                     3,407,480.00
  Cost of Bank Stock                                        122,761.00
  Cost of Railroad Stock                                     26,000.00
  Cash in Bank                                            2,933,319.50
  Balance due from agents, secured                           33,399.14
                                                        ——————————————
                                                        $48,778,093.37
    ADD
  Interest due and accrued                   $925,583.50
  Rents accrued                                14,373.88
  Market value of stocks and bonds over
    cost                                      497,676.02
  Net premiums in course of collection——NONE.
  Net deferred quarterly and semi-annual
    premiums                                   43,058.08
                                             ———————————
                                                          1,480,691.48
                                                        ——————————————
        GROSS ASSETS, December 31, 1881                 $50,258,784.85

    LIABILITIES:
  Amount required to re-insure all
    outstanding policies, net, assuming
    4 per cent. interest                  $45,810,598.00
  All other liabilities                     1,060,614.87
                                          ——————————————
                                                         46,871,212.87
                                                        ——————————————
  SURPLUS, by Connecticut Standard, 4 per cent.          $3,387,571.98
  SURPLUS, by New York Standard, 4-½ per cent., about     6,500,000.00

                 *       *       *       *       *

  Ratio of expense of management to receipts in 1881    8.30 per cent.
  Policies in force December 31, 1881, 63,913,
    insuring                                           $159,039,867.89

                 *       *       *       *       *

  JACOB L. GREENE, President.
  JOHN M. TAYLOR, Secretary.
  W. G. ABBOT, Ass’t Secretary.
  D. H. WELLS, Actuary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


    Physicians have Prescribed over Half a Million Packages of

                      VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES,

And have found this BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD indispensable in the
treatment of all Diseases of Debility, and in all Mental or Nervous
Disorders.

It restores to the busy, active brain of man or woman the energy
and ability that has been lost by disease, worry or overwork. It
restores vitality where there has been debility and nervousness,
and prevents loss of memory and brain fatigue; it is a regenerator
of the tired brain and nerves.

In impaired vitality it restores to the system that which has been
wasted in excitement, in abuses, in excessive bodily or mental
emotions.

It _prevents_ consumption and other diseases of debility.

            F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Ave., N.Y.

        For Sale by Druggists; or by mail in P. O. order,
                  bill or postage stamps, $1.00.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     BALL’S HEALTH PRESERVING

                              CORSET

                      SOMETHING ENTIRELY NEW

[Illustration: EVERY CORSET WARRANTED SATISFACTORY OR MONEY
REFUNDED]

By a novel arrangement of fine coiled wire spring, which yield
readily to every movement of the wearer, the most =Perfect Fitting=
and comfortable corset ever made is secured.

Is Approved by the Best Physicians. For sale by all leading dealers.

                        Lady Agents Wanted.

                       Price by Mail, $1.50.

                       Manufactured only by

                        CHICAGO CORSET CO.,

                          Chicago, Ill.,

               and FOY, HARMON & Co., New Haven Ct.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil.
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil.
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed.
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         ESTABLISHED 1780.

[Illustration]

Set Complete in Terry, $58. Set complete in Plush, $64. Parlor,
Lodge and Church Furniture. No charge for packing. Send for
Illustrated Catalogue.

                        SHAW, APPLIN & CO.,
                                      27 Sudbury St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  Smith
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS
  ARE THE BEST.]


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 37 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Estey Organ]

  J. Estey & Co
  Brattleboro Vt.

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                Special attention is invited to the

                      ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT.

With a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly, in the best families
in the land, it becomes a valuable medium for the advertisement of
standard and reliable articles.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          [Illustration]

                              BABCOCK

                               FIRE

                           EXTINGUISHER


                   A Sentinel that Never Sleeps.


                          SIMPLE!

                            EFFECTIVE!

                                 DURABLE!


                          S. F. HAYWARD,

                          GENERAL AGENT,

                     407 Broadway, N.Y. City.



                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of Fencing.
Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.


                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_——In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia,
1; North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky,
7; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana,
18; Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.——_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.——8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.——11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.——Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.——In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa——a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.
Inconsistent small caps retained as printed.

Page number for Benefactions corrected in the Contents.

“Pesbyterian” changed to “Presbyterian” on page 150. (Presbyterian
Mission House)

“Talladaga” changed to “Talladega” in the Danville entry on page
155. (for Student Aid, Talladega C.)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 5, MAY, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.