Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

VOL. XXXVI.      JUNE, 1882.      NO. 6.

THE

American Missionary

“THEY ARE RISING, ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
matter.]




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                                                         PAGE.

  EDITORIALS.

    PARAGRAPHS                                             161
    COLORED JOURNALISM IN THE SOUTH                        163
    KIND OF UNIVERSITY MOST NEEDED IN THE SOUTH.
      BY PROF. HORACE BUMSTEAD, ATLANTA, GA.               164
    BENEFACTIONS                                           167
    GENERAL NOTES--Africa, Indians                         167
    CUT OF INDIAN MEDICINE MAN                             169


  THE FREEDMEN.

    AFTER THE SOWING, THE REAPING                          170
    THE ALABAMA CONFERENCE                                 172
    BITS OF FUN AND FACT                                   173
    MISSION WORK AT WILMINGTON, N.C.                       174


  AFRICA.

    MR. LADD’S JOURNAL                                     175
    WEST AFRICAN HABITATIONS (Cut)                         177


  THE CHINESE.

    CLIPPINGS FROM CORRESPONDENCE                          178
    SELLING PRAYERS IN A CHINESE TEMPLE (Cut)              179


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    TED’S TEMPERANCE SOCIETY                               181


  OBITUARY.

    MISS SARAH A. G. STEVENS                               183

  RECEIPTS                                                 183

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
be addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

              VOL. XXXVI.     JUNE, 1882.       NO. 6.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


The receipts for April were $29,519.61, an increase of nearly 38
per cent. over those of last year. The total receipts for the seven
months ending April 30, are $161,542.16, being $35,632.25, or 28
per cent. more than for the corresponding months last year. If
this ratio of increase is continued for the remaining five months
of the fiscal year, the $300,000 will be obtained, and we shall
close the year without a debt, notwithstanding the unusually heavy
expenses that the progress of our work has necessitated. These
cheering facts, we hope, will stimulate our friends to realize the
expectations of the annual meeting, and the pressing needs of the
field.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN F. SLATER, ESQ., of Norwich, Conn., has enrolled his name with
Peabody, Seney and others as the wise benefactors of mankind, by
the appropriation of a million of dollars for the education of the
colored people of America. This munificent fund he has entrusted to
the care of a Board of Trustees, made up of persons well known for
their patriotism and their philanthropy, and from whose honorable
character a wise administration of the trust may be expected.
Mr. Slater has not only shown his generosity in the gift, but
his wisdom as well in the broad and liberal instructions to his
trustees. The letter containing these directions is a model of wise
forethought, guarding against the limitations so often imposed on
executors and trustees, which, in changes of circumstances, often
render the gift well-nigh useless. This letter, we believe, will
have a salutary influence on other donors in this respect.

We have no means of knowing the benefit that may accrue to the
A. M. A. from the income of Mr. Slater’s benefaction, which will
probably amount to $50,000 or $60,000 per annum. We only know that
the Association has a large educational work among the people whom
Mr. Slater wishes to benefit, and we believe that the Board of
Trustees will wisely discriminate as to the amount to which we are
entitled. In any contingency, however, that amount will probably
not be so large as to release our friends from the responsibility
of continuing and even increasing their donations to meet the
demands of our constantly enlarging work.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN earnest effort is made in Congress to secure a large
appropriation for general education--the fund to be distributed on
the basis of illiteracy. Something of this kind is imperatively
needed to meet the demands of our growing and diversified
population, and especially of the six millions of blacks recently
emancipated and enfranchised, with nearly a million of their number
unable to read or write the ballot they cast. In addition to these,
about three-fourths of a million of the white population of the
nation are equally illiterate. If to these we add the Indians,
and the uneducated immigrants crowding to our country, we have an
illiteracy of startling magnitude demanding the most efficient
measures for its overthrow. There can be no question of the duty
of the nation in this respect. A very marked change in public
sentiment, especially in the South, is manifesting itself, and
there is a fair prospect of the success of some well-digested bill
for this purpose. The A. M. A. has taken an active part in pressing
this matter upon the attention of Congress. No bill can benefit our
schools directly, and the efforts we put forth are purely for the
advancement of intelligence among the people. Our work is mainly in
preparing educated and spiritual leaders, and the more rapidly the
masses can be elevated the more effective and wide-spread will our
efforts become.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. J. E. ROY, D.D., Field Superintendent, is again in the New
York office, where his assistance has been desired each summer
by the committee; serving also in the absence of Rev. Dr. Pike,
occasioned by sickness.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE Commencement of Berea College, Kentucky, will take place
Wednesday, June 21. College exercises in the forenoon. In the
afternoon an address from Rev. R. G. Hutchins, D.D., of Columbus,
Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. DR. HERRICK JOHNSON, of Chicago, has made a manly and
Christian fight against theatres. A little volume of 82 pages,
entitled “_Plain Talks about the Theatre_,” embodies his views, and
is entitled to a candid reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

THOSE of our readers especially interested in the establishment
of the Arthington Mission will be pleased to read in the African
notes, published in this number of the MISSIONARY, reports of
continued activity on the part of different organizations in the
vicinity of Khartoum.


COLORED JOURNALISM IN THE SOUTH

Our colored brethren have been by no means lacking in journalistic
ambition. Considering the short space of time they have had in
which to develop the literary talent, I think they have done
remarkably well. There have been many undertakings in this line,
and of course a good many failures. Having seen in the Western
States a great many ephemeral newspapers, which ran their course
briefly and then vanished away, I am prepared to say that the
percentage of newspaper failures is no greater among the negroes
than the whites. Newspapers are very frail and mortal creatures,
and to many of them it is appointed to die. Few of them can lay
claim to immortality; like the human race, most of them die in
infancy. Yet there are now more than fifty papers published by
colored men, mostly in the Southern States. The State of Georgia
has five; North Carolina has seven. As the general intelligence of
the people increases, the usefulness of these papers also enlarges.
There is a good deal of race pride among the colored people, and
they greatly enjoy the achievements of their race, whether in the
field of journalism or elsewhere. Of course they are not trained
to habits of close criticism and literary discrimination. Like
all whose education has not been very extensive, they delight in
high-sounding phrases and long, sonorous words. Most of their
editorials are somewhat open to criticism in this line, yet there
are not a few examples of crisp, clear, terse, vigorous English
which are refreshing to read in these pedantic days.

As a general thing these papers are edited by the younger
generation of men, graduates from the A. M. A. colleges or
elsewhere. No others have sufficient ability or perseverance to
make a success in this line. They are mostly Christian men, and
they print many articles upon temperance and other practical
virtues, which are sadly needed here both among black and white. So
these papers exert a widespread and generally beneficial influence,
going into many homes that have no other reading. Like his white
brother, the negro sometimes forgets to “pay the printer,” and
hence there is an occasional suspension for lack of funds. So there
is in the North as well.

More and more, as they increase in knowledge and in property, there
will be a greater demand for good newspapers. The schools and
colleges of the A. M. A. are calculated to have a wide influence
in this field, training up writers and thinkers who shall through
their periodicals exert a great deal of power. Besides preaching
and teaching, there is to be in the future of the Anglo-African a
vast field of usefulness in journalism. The power of thinking, and
of putting thought into effective words, is to be more and more
developed in these schools. Here then is a new argument for the
thorough and adequate maintenance of the church and school work,
to raise up men and women from among this patient race who shall
prove, even as many of them are proving now, that “the pen is
mightier than the sword.” The occasional crudity of expression, the
extravagant adjective and preposterous grammar, must and will give
place to true thinking and correct expression, under the steady
polishing and mental training of our schools. Fresh vigor, greater
power, wider and more salutary influence of the newspaper, will
follow the inexact and “scattering” articles which have more or
less prevailed, inevitably.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE KIND OF UNIVERSITY MOST NEEDED IN THE SOUTH.

BY PROF. HORACE BUMSTEAD, ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, GA.

A university, in the old-world sense of the term, is an institution
where all the branches of the higher education are taught,
and these alone. In our country the name is often adopted by
institutions as a prophecy of what they hope to become, while their
present work is almost wholly that of elementary instruction--a
work which they expect eventually to outgrow.

So far as the institutions of the American Missionary Association
are concerned, I am inclined to think that there is a nobler
ideal to be realized under the name of university than any feeble
imitation of older institutions. A field is open here in the South
for the development of an institution such as the world has not yet
seen, and which, in a somewhat new but not unnatural sense, would
justify its claim to be called a university.

The university which missionary effort can make most useful in the
South is one that shall represent, in their most perfect form,
all the successive grades of education from lowest to highest. It
should be prepared to train ordinary pupils of all ages rather than
extraordinary ones of mature age only. It should also provide ample
facilities for normal and industrial training, now so much needed
in all the South. But especially it should magnify and dignify
the work of primary instruction, regarding this as a permanent
feature of its work, and not as an unavoidable evil to be shaken
off as soon as possible. It should neither undervalue nor neglect
the higher education. This should be held up as a worthy object of
aspiration for all who show themselves fitted to receive it, by
thorough work lower down. Such an institution would present, under
one management, a kindergarten, or something like it, a graded
school, a normal school, an industrial department, an academy, a
college, and in course of time the professional schools.

In favor of such a university several reasons may be given. In
the first place, the interests of the higher education would be
better served by such an institution than by one devoted to the
higher education alone. It is taken for granted that the Freedmen
and their descendants, for whom largely our institutions are
established, should, like all other people, have the opportunity
of the higher education given them to the extent of their ability
to receive and use it. The welfare of the masses demands that we
train up leaders of intelligence and principle. That this work is
not being overdone at present is evident from the fact that only
ninety-one college students are reported in all the institutions of
the American Missionary Association put together, and only about
fifty in all have ever been graduated from our college courses
since our work in the South began. Now, the principal reason why
our work in the higher education has been so limited, has been the
great scarcity of suitable material for college classes; and the
reason of this scarcity has been that our preparatory departments
have not been able to get hold of their pupils early enough. Pupils
come to us heavily handicapped by a lack of proper training, moral
and intellectual, in early childhood. Now, who can doubt but that
the universities that are going to have the best college classes
twenty years from now, and do the best work, will be those that
soonest put the kindergarten, or some equivalent of it, underneath
all their present courses of study, and thus manipulate the
entire education of their pupils from the age of five onward? A
thoroughness and symmetry of training could be realized by such an
arrangement which would be scarcely possible under any other.

But a second reason in favor of such a university is the invaluable
help it would render to the cause of general education. Here let
it be explained that it would not be the purpose of the proposed
institution to take the work of preparation for college out of
the hands of preparatory schools elsewhere; nor would it expect
to carry all its own beginners through to the end of its higher
courses. It would, however, if properly manned and equipped, expect
to show what might be called _specimen work_ from the bottom to
the top of an education. Such work would be a stimulus to all
other schools of whatever grade, and the methods employed in these
schools would gradually come to be patterned after those in vogue
at the university. The more the lower work of the university was
duplicated elsewhere, the more would its own recruiting ground for
the higher courses be enlarged, and the wider would its influence
become.

A third reason in favor of such a university concerns the
association of normal and industrial departments with the
collegiate. It should be our aim to cultivate manhood and womanhood
rather than mere scholarship. The culture we give must be guarded
from selfishness. The practical uses of all education must be kept
prominently in view, and especially the urgent need of trained
teachers and artisans. The dignity of labor must be emphasized. On
the other hand, our normal and industrial work should be guarded
from the narrow and materialistic spirit into which such training
is sometimes apt to fall. Now, the association of all these
departments under one general management will surely bring to each
from the others some salutary restraint or broadening influence.

In connection with the practical aim of such a university, I
desire to specify two features which should characterize it, both
of them rendered necessary by the same cause--the almost entire
lack of true homes among the people we are seeking to uplift. In
consequence of this deplorable lack, two duties press upon us:
first, to obviate the difficulties arising from this cause in our
present educational work, and second, to remove the cause.

The first of these duties suggests the kindergarten, already
proposed. I use this term for the lack of a more convenient one;
contending simply for _some_ system of training for children
under the usual school age. Among cultivated people, and even the
intelligent farmers and artisans of cultivated communities, every
home is a kindergarten--a preliminary training-school for the eyes,
hands, brains, and hearts of toddling and prattling humanity.
Very few such are to be found among the poorer classes of the
South. Hence arises the necessity of beginning our work earlier
than elsewhere, and using appliances which elsewhere might seem
superfluous. But it will not be enough to have the kindergarten
composed entirely of day scholars from the neighborhood. There
should be a special building for a children’s home, with an able
matron and assistants in charge of it. Into this could be gathered
from a wider territory as large a number of little boarders as
might be thought desirable. The inestimable advantage of this
arrangement would be that a considerable number of children
would thus be separated from their unfortunate surroundings for
twenty-four hours each day instead of six, and for seven days in
the week instead of five. From this number, in after years, would
undoubtedly come our best material for the college and normal
classes.

But a second pressing duty is to help the growth of true homes
among these people. This must be done largely through the girls who
come under our care. For this also a separate building should be
provided as a housekeeping school. It should be constructed like an
ordinary dwelling-house, with such conveniences within and around
it as civilized people aim to secure. It should not be too large,
lest the coziness of home be lost. It should have a parlor with
pictures and books. It should have a garden with flowers and shade
trees. Above all it should have the most commodious and convenient
kitchen and pantry that can be arranged. Let a dozen girls together
occupy this house for a fortnight at a time--all those in the
university taking their turn in the course of the year. Let some
good woman, as near like Mrs. Cornelius or Marion Harland as can
be found, be put at the head, and let her teach these girls how
to cook, sweep, dust, make beds, set the table, wash the dishes,
and in general how to make home as attractive as our Christian
civilization knows how.

Finally let it be observed that such a university would be simply
an expansion of what is now being done in our present higher
institutions, and which the force of circumstances has compelled us
to do. Why should we not accept it cheerfully as the mission which
Providence has given us, and by a deepening and broadening process
convert our present universities into something that shall bring
new honor to the cause of Christian education?

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

The late Thomas M. Reed, of Bath, Me., bequeathed $3,000 to Bangor
Theological Seminary.

Mr. Reed, of Boston, has given $5,000 to the Hampton N. and A.
Institute.

Mr. Ahok has given £10,000 towards the Methodist College in Fuh
Chou.

Sir Erasmus Miller has given £10,000 to endow a pathological chair
at an institution in Aberdeen, Scotland.

Yale College is to receive $50,000 for a laboratory from Messrs.
Thomas and Henry Sloan, in honor of their father, William Sloan.

Thomas McGraw, of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., has given $50,000 for the
endowment of the President’s chair at Amherst College.

Mr. Holloway, of England, has conveyed to the trustees of the
Enghaman Institution, for the higher education of women, £400,000
for endowment purposes.

Iowa College has received $1,500 to be known as the Ellingwood
Scholarship Fund for the education of ministers.

Hackettstown Seminary, N.J., has received $15,000 from Mr. Geo.
I. Seney, of Brooklyn, N.Y., for the liquidation of its debt of
$36,000, which is now entirely provided for. The property of the
institution cost $175,000.

Mr. John F. Slater, of Norwich, Conn., has given $1,000,000 to a
Board of Trustees, the income of which is to be applied for the
education of the recently emancipated race in America.

_We are happy to report that our appeals for endowment for
Talladega College have met with additional responses since the
statement given in our February number. One friend has given $5,000
towards the endowment of the President’s Chair, and another has
pledged $5,000 for the Theological Department._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

--W. F. Mieville has been appointed English consul at Khartoum.

--Ambassadors from Abyssinia have gone to Cairo to regulate the
question of the frontiers and to seek the appointment of consuls of
the two countries--of Egypt and of Abyssinia.

--After working with an indefatigable zeal to gather the means
necessary to the establishment of a new mission, Mr. Coillard will
set out with his wife in May to found a station between the Zambeze
and Lake Bangueolo.

--Mgr. Taurin Cahaque, apostolic vicar, has made from Harrar an
excursion among the Gallas and founded a station around which he
hopes to gather a Christian colony.

--The council of ministers at Cairo has decided upon the complete
abolition of slavery in Egypt. Abdelkader Pasha has been nominated
Governor of Soudan. A special administration of the Soudan has been
created at Cairo with the purpose of making out the statement of
receipts and expenditures of that province and of re-organizing
the military service with a view of maintaining order upon the
Abyssinian frontier. It will take measures for the complete
suppression of the slave trade.

--A company with a capital of 150,000 livres sterling has been
formed under the name of River Gambia Trading Company, to develop
commerce on the Gambia, which is navigable for 640 kilometers.

--The Church Missionary Society has established at Lokodja, near
the confluence of the Niger and the Bénoué, a school to teach the
native instructors the English language and the language spoken
along the lower Niger.

--Mgr. Lavigerie, promoter of the missions of Algeria, has
transferred to Malta the college which was formerly at St. Louis,
to prepare a medical faculty for the Negroes of Equatorial Africa
and the Soudan.

--A dispatch from Tripoli to the _English Journal_ announces
that 600 native Algerians of the Chambas tribe have proceeded to
Ghadamès to demand the punishment of the Touaregs who assassinated
the missionaries and ill-treated the Chambas.

--In a war between the tribe of the Paums and that of the Veys,
sustained by the government of Liberia, the latter have been beaten
and in part massacred, and the survivors have fled to Cape Mount,
where help has been given them by the American missionaries. The
government of the United States has sent the ship Essex to aid the
troops of Liberia against the Paums who intercept communication
between Monrovia and the northwest whence they obtain palm oil.

--Dr. Krapf, one of the pioneers of missionary work in Central
Africa, has just died. Entering the service of the English missions
in 1837, he sailed on the Tiger, the Choa and the Amhara. Not
being able to enter the country of the Gallas by the north, he
conceived the project of attacking the continent by the east, and
in 1844 commenced with his friend Rebmann the mission of Mombas.
His travels gave impulse to the discoveries of the last 25 years.
Since 1856 he has been living at Wurtemberg, occupying himself with
literary works upon the languages of eastern Africa.

[Illustration: INDIAN MEDICINE MAN.]


THE INDIANS.

--The Superintendent of the Indian School at Caddo recently
prepared a concert exercise with an illuminated Jacob’s Ladder. The
sides and steps were covered with tissue paper of different colors.
On each step were five wax tapers which lighted up cornucopias
filled with candies. A lecture was given on Jacob’s Dream,
accompanied with appropriate music, etc. Over 80 Indian children
were in attendance. The occasion is said to have been a grand
and beautiful one, cheering beyond thought to the heart of the
Christian workers.

--Rev. S. G. Wright, of Leech Lake, Minn., writes: Our school was a
real success. Several of our scholars began a life of prayer during
the winter, and all were much improved. The Christian women who
were converted when we were here before still regularly sustain a
prayer meeting. We have just buried one of our staunch Christian
men. His daily life in all places was a living testimony to the
power of the Gospel to save even this poor despised people. In his
long sickness of five months he exemplified the patience of the
Gospel.

--Tindestak, Alaska, is a Chilcat village of 16 houses and 162
people. Each of the houses cost the Indian owners over a thousand
dollars. Their desire, however, for the Gospel was so great that
the whole population left the village last October and moved to
the new mission station at Willard that they might have school and
church privileges.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.


AFTER THE SOWING, THE REAPING.

BY SUPERINTENDENT ROY.

It was at Athens, Ga., a city whose classical name has had
associated with it the University of the State. Sixty-five years
ago, my father’s pastor at Basking Ridge, N.J., Dr. Robert Finley,
left there a church of 600 members and an academy in which he had
trained Theodore Frelinghuysen, Senator Dayton and other such men,
to come and serve a church of only a score of members, and the
University as its President. I look up here his sepulchre and learn
of the savor of his godly influence.

In 1867 the Knox Institute is built, a large two-story frame
structure, with four school-rooms in it. For four years this is
occupied by our Northern teachers. Meantime students are going
forward from the “Knox” to Atlanta University; and then some of the
advanced students of the latter institution are sent one by one, to
serve as principals with colored assistants. In this way came S. B.
Morse, John McIntosh and J. G. Hutchins. The last-named receives an
appointment to a clerkship in Washington, and a recent graduate of
the University, Paul E. Spratlin, is appointed as Principal with
three lady assistants. Morse has now a position in the Custom-House
at Savannah, and McIntosh is a representative of Liberty County in
the legislature.

The Superintendent finds that the time has come to start a church.
The building is repaired and one of its rooms fixed up for a
chapel. Mr. George V. Clark, a student of the “Atlanta” and a
graduate of the Theological Department of the Howard University, is
secured. He, with his yoke-fellow Spratlin, starts a Sunday-school,
a prayer meeting and preaching services. Affinity draws to them
friends who are longing for something more quiet, orderly and
intelligent in church life. Then a revival this spring adds eight
disciples to the nine who are ready to come into a new church
by letter. And so a Council meets here on the 14th of April to
recognize the church and ordain the pastor. They find everything
in an orderly condition. There are present from Atlanta Prof. C.
W. Francis, Pastor Evarts Kent and his delegate, Deacon A. J.
Delbridge and Superintendent Roy; from Marietta, Pastor E. J.
Penney; from Macon, Pastor S. E. Lathrop; from Orangebury, S.C.,
a delegate; also Rev. Dr. C. W. Lane, Pastor of the Presbyterian
Church in this city. Professor Francis is made moderator and Rev.
E. J. Penney, scribe. The church process and the examination of the
candidate are heartily approved.

By the courteous invitation of the African M. E. Church, the
public services are held at night in their house of worship,
which is packed with an assembly of 500 people. The sermon is an
eloquent portrayal of the Apostle Paul’s desire and prayer to God
for Israel that they might be saved. The moderator propounds the
Confession and Covenant and gives to the new church the right hand
of fellowship. Mr. Lathrop then presents a royal octavo Bible
printed in Boston in 1822 and bearing in gilt letters on the
front cover the inscription “Mary Walker, 1828,” who has herself
now reached the age of four-score and five. The book seems to be
good for another fifty-four years of service. Mr. Lathrop also
presents from the Congregational Church at Chagrin Falls, Ohio,
a communion set in good condition, although it has been used by
that body of believers for forty years. Deacon Delbridge makes
the best suggestion, namely, that as they are now enjoying the
fruit of the prayers and labors of the abolitionists, of whom
at the time they had known nothing, so now the new church is to
enjoy this hallowed service for the Lord’s table which has come to
them from Christian friends whom they had never known. Professor
Francis states that Rev. Mr. Walker, who at the University had
taught some of these same members, had come from that church in
Chagrin Falls, and so had doubtless used these same communion
vessels before them. The crowning gift of the occasion is that of
Mr. S. D. Smith, of Boston, of one of his American organs, which
is used for the first time on this occasion. It would do him good
if sometime he could catch the voice of these lowly poor as they
bless God for his thoughtful and abounding beneficience in this
line. The prayer of ordination as offered by Rev. Evarts Kent is
apposite and touching. The charge is delivered by Prof. Francis,
who, alluding to his having led this man to school, to Christ and
along the paths of learning, says that it is no new thing for
him to be charging this candidate, but as this is about his last
chance he must improve it well. The right hand is given by Mr.
Penney, a cousin and schoolmate of the new pastor. The address to
the church is delivered by Dr. Lane. His venerable appearance, his
cordial manner and his gracious words are a benediction to the
occasion. Dr. Lane having been baptized by Dr. Edward Payson, was
thirteen years of age when he was removed with his father’s family
from Portland, Me., to Georgia. When I first came to look up this
matter, I went to him for advice and found him ready with sympathy
and co-operation. When Mr. Clark came the Doctor offered him the
use of his library, gave him judicious counsel, and, by a writing,
turned over to him a monthly appointment three miles out, in a
house which his church had built as a union place of worship for
the colored people.

On the Lord’s day, the eight who come by profession receive baptism
at the hand of the pastor by immersion in the Oconee, which flows
by the city. At night I have the privilege of participating with
the church at their first communion season, when the ancient
vessels of the Lord’s house, new to this band of disciples, enter
upon their new round of service.

After the sowing, the reaping. The Knox School and the Atlanta
University have been growing the timber for this house of the Lord.
Several of the members have had that training and the teachers were
thus prepared. It takes time to raise up a native ministry. A few
years ago a boy who was a porter in an Atlanta hotel was started
on his way to school, and now the same comes along the Christian
pastor, ripened under the sun of our Southern institutions, an
able minister of the Word. Much of our fruitage has been gathered
into other churches. Now we garner up something of our own harvest.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ALABAMA CONFERENCE.

BY MRS. H. W. ANDREWS.

The day came at last for our annual pilgrimage to the Mecca of
Congregationalism in Alabama--our Congregational Conference. It was
perfect, as Southern spring-days are apt to be--woods and fields
bright with flowers and merry with bird songs. The pastors and
delegates, filing from many directions, met at depots, their very
greetings the happy premonitions of a good time. Selma seemed to be
the place of rendezvous, and the cars from thence to Marion were
quite well filled, as in the latter place the conference was to
convene.

I regret to mar my recital here by that which alone I take no
pleasure in writing. Some otherwise excellent railroad officials
thought we were anxious to ride in the same car with our pupils,
teachers, and church members, _because_ they were black,
while really the young people were only asking for what their
_first-class tickets_ called for. I would like to raise a question
here. What can be done about these _first-class_ tickets sold to
colored people, compelled to take passage on them in second-class
cars? We missionaries are most heartily in favor of a peaceable
solution of this question. A quarrel takes time and nerve, and
hinders Christian development and progress; yet some apt person has
said, “If you have got to have one, there is nothing like it.” I
hope that we shall be wise enough not to have one.

Once at Marion, how cordial and hearty the greetings! We forgot our
tribulations by the way in the warm hearts and friendly tones of
co-laborers. The houses of some of our Southern friends were open
to us for entertainment, and we very much enjoyed their sincere and
graceful hospitality.

The Sunday-school Convention, held previous to the Conference,
but in connection with it, was opened by a sermon from Rev. G. W.
Andrews; text, “The word of the Lord is tried.”

To do justice to the interest of the Convention on Saturday would
require all of the space allotted me. Sunday-school reports given
by delegates from the various schools were never more interesting.
The work of temperance in all the schools was a chief feature. One
colored brother expressed it pithily, if not grammatically, when he
said, “Dere seems to be a skim ober de eyes of mos’ of my brederen
on dis gret subjec.” In the temperance work among the children, to
save them we must keep this “skim” from forming.

In the afternoon an interesting map-lesson, “The Journeys of our
Saviour through the Holy Land,” was given by a colored brother,
though of the Anglo-Saxon race. If a query arises in the minds of
my readers, it may help to make it clear when I say that though
black he is white.

The Conference opened Saturday night with a glowing and effective
sermon by our Field Superintendent, Dr. Roy. How easy it seemed,
while listening to him, to make sacrifices for the dear name that
every Christian loves.

In the much regretted absence of President DeForest, of Talladega
College, Rev. G. W. Andrews filled his place, and as it was
communion Sabbath, spoke from the words, “I am the bread of
life.” That it satisfied the hunger of many new disciples was
evidenced before us by the nineteen who were taken into the church
that morning and partook for the first time of this emblem of
the life-giving power of our Saviour. The beating rain without
only made the comfort, security and sweet peace within the more
precious. As we looked into one and another of the formerly hard
faces of these new travelers in the narrow way we felt how great
the reward of the faithful laborers who have been instrumental in
putting the new song into their mouths. It added to our personal
interest in them that the pastor and wife had told us of the
especial efforts on the behalf of each one.

Sabbath afternoon was given to the children, but the rain kept them
at home and also hindered the night service. Rains in Alabama are
surely as emphatic as Miss E. B. Emery with her impressive pen,
claims they are in Boston, and this season the disposition of each
rain is to develop a flood.

On Monday, after the very spiritual devotional exercises which
preceded the beginning of each morning session, the business
of organization was attended to, followed by reports from the
churches. I have wondered why it is that these reports so often
considered “dry” in the North, should in this Southern work always
be so full of interest. Is it that the Spirit here is “poured out
like water”?

An interesting paper upon “What caused the intellectual darkness
of our ancestors and how shall we avoid a like repetition?” by Mr.
Y. B. Sims, was well spoken of by all as thoughtful, earnest and
suggestive.

Next there came a masterful paper by Rev. O. W. Fay, of Montgomery,
on the “New Revision, its excellencies and defects.” Some of us had
listened to Dr. Schaff on this subject of the revision last summer
at Chautauqua, and we felt that the Dr. Schaffs were multiplying.
The remainder of the afternoon was spent in examining three
candidates from the Theological Department of Talladega College
for licensure. As it was not my privilege to hear the examination,
I noted the words of a very competent judge who said that their
careful and correct answers showed the thoroughness of their
theological training. The harvest is plenteous and the laborers are
multiplying.

Another feast of the meeting was enjoyed at night in the address
of our Field Superintendent, Dr. Roy, upon the “Geography of
missionary work in the United States, more particularly in the
Southern field.” Capt. C. W. Lovelace, of Marion, a warm friend
of the work, requested a repetition of a portion of it on the
following night and brought with him several of his white friends
to hear it. They expressed satisfaction and profit at so much
information. Some hearts among our Southern friends are evidently
taking hold of the work with us; now what should hinder their hands?

Tuesday morning was given to pastoral work and ministerial culture,
and the question how to promote revivals was participated in by all
the brethren, who were limited to ten minutes in their speeches.
Some thought this the richest morsel of the feast.

Rev. O. D. Crawford, of Mobile, gave a paper in the afternoon,
subject, “Obedience to the law, evidence of saving faith,” which on
account of absence I regret not being able to report.

The “Praise Meeting” at night, the last of the four days’ session,
was indeed such in spirit and in fact. I was never in a meeting
that seemed so to flow with Divine love as did this one. The spirit
of God seemed to envelope us like a great mantle, and out from its
rich folds were _felt_ the praises to His all-glorious name.

The warmth of our reception, the care and attention bestowed upon
our comfort during our stay, made us regret, on departing, that our
good-bye must be said for five years.

       *       *       *       *       *


BITS OF FUN AND FACT.

MISS L. A. PARMELEE, MEMPHIS, TENN.

After reading the grave columns of the last MISSIONARY I am tempted
to offer it a few bits of sense and nonsense out of my notebook of
current events at Le Moyne.

From one day’s spelling papers I cull these specimens: “Destroy;
to make away with. She destroys biscuits.” “Deviate; to wander. I
deviate along the Mississippi.” “Deliver; to set at liberty. He
will deliver a sermon.” “Detention; the act of detaining. The man
was a detention man.”

A youth fresh from the wilds of Arkansas defines squall as “an
Indian woman,” and is puzzled to understand why the class laugh at
his words. He is a good Bible student and laughs in turn when he
hears a debater at Literary Society clinch his argument in these
words: “When Adam was turned out of the garden of Eden wasn’t he
told to earn his bread by the sweat of his eyebrows?” A visitor
in my Bible class recently objected to our Lord’s answer to the
Sadducee’s question of whose wife shall she be. “Christ ought not
to have answered as he did. He ought to have said she shall belong
to the first man or the last man. His answer has caused a great
deal of confusion in men’s minds.” It is a pity the objector cannot
join the theological class.

A regular member of my class lately asked me to find the verse
in the Bible where it said that “A man is more dear to God than
a woman is.” I had never heard of such a passage of Scripture,
but it seems that people in this country often have. The question
reminded me of a remark made in Literary Society: “This school
ought to draw in bad characters and trust in God to straighten
them.” We trust some are being straightened. The first of the year
came Miss Anna Gordon with a charming temperance talk and object
lesson of burning alcohol. Her remarks made a decided impression.
Several young people at once abandoned the use of toddy, egg-nog
and similar drinks. The temperance text-book and temperance charts
have deepened the convictions and the gracious wave of religious
interest carried some wayward hearts up to the Rock that is higher
than we.

One of our last year’s graduates has charge of a school in Fort
Smith. We have just heard that a revival in her school numbers
thirty converts. When she first went there in July she induced a
band of young people to visit the jail and read and sing to the
prisoners. Five men under sentence of death wrote a note of thanks
for the kindness shown them. The letter is so remarkable for its
neatness and beauty of penmanship, as well as for its pathos, that
I copy it verbatim:

                             U.S. JAIL,                      }
                             FORT SMITH, Ark., Sept. 2, 1881.}

To Miss Willie Phillips and Miss Emma Walker, Committee Young
Ladies’ Bazar:

LADIES: Allow us to thank you for your kindness, and to assure you
that our hearts appreciate your sympathy, as hearts bowed down with
a weight of woe only can.

It shows us that the world to which we are about to bid a long and
last farewell is not all evil, that amid the Sahara of careless
thought there bloom some oases of kindness for fallen, erring man,
some flowers of sympathy to perfume the pathway to the grave.

Accept then a tribute of respect wafted back to you from the
portals of the grave.

                                   [Five signatures appended.]

       *       *       *       *       *


MISSION WORK AT WILMINGTON, N.C.

MRS. A. E. FARRINGTON.

During this month I have held my weekly meeting with the women,
taught my Sunday-school class, sometimes numbering fifty, all
under ten years of age, held sewing schools for a part of our
school-girls, made twenty-five calls and arranged a library of
nearly three hundred books, which have been sent to me from various
places at the North. These are none of them new books, but are
such as I think will interest and instruct the children and young
people. Tuesday evenings I open my mission room for a reading room,
having papers and books for them to read while there and take to
their homes. By the kindness of friends at home last summer I
obtained the “Library of Universal Knowledge,” which the older
scholars use and appreciate highly; and those outside the school
are learning to consult it also as they come in Tuesday evenings.

We are rejoiced by the conversion of two young men of much promise,
one of whom will unite with our church next Sabbath. The other
is sick now and has been for weeks. We hope he may be spared to
do good among his people, but fear he may not. Both have been in
our Sunday-school for years. The work here seems to us to go on
very slowly, but I feel that the truth is taking deep root in many
hearts, and the fruits will yet be seen in upright Christian lives.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. LADD’S JOURNAL.

_Friday, Dec. 16._--“Mourgan! Mourgan!!” Before it is fairly light,
the stars still shining brightly, everybody yells “Mourgan!”
Breakfast is the first thing thought of. At 7 o’clock we are
mounted, and on our way. It takes about two hours every morning to
get ready. The desert all the morning has been wider. As we emerge
from the narrow pass of Hashmilbal we come upon the dry bed of a
river. All along here the guides have set up numerous landmarks.
There are a number of apparent graves. We have passed the bodies
of hundreds of dead camels. We pass over a thousand a day. There
are more than ten thousand lining the desert-route from Korosko to
Aboo-Hamed! whose bones lie bleaching in the sun. If one lost the
way he could easily find it again by the carcasses that mark it.
We lunched at Hashmilbal. Then we left the mountains and launched
out upon the boundless desert, an ocean of sand. The mirage is now
all about us. Lakes in all directions, and not a drop of water to
drink, except what is in our “boot-legs” and skins. To say that it
is hot does not begin to express the truth. It is blazing hot! like
a fiery furnace! The sand shimmers and glows in the scorching rays.
We can see the heated air rising in great waves. Now we know what
a desert is! The doctor has a hard headache, but we push on and he
stands it bravely. We pass a mountain with a hole right through it.
We have made fully three miles an hour to-day, and do not stop till
we have been at it 12 hours. We go into camp about 7 o’clock at a
place called _El Mahdood_. The water holds out well. I am feeling
remarkably fresh.

_Saturday, Dec. 17._--Started at 6.40 this morning. We are still
on a boundless desert, and the heat is fearful. Mirage all about
us. Meet the mail and send back postals written on our camels. We
make an unusually long morning stretch of it in order to reach a
rock, under whose refreshing shade we take our lunch. This region
is named _Bahr El Hattab_. A slight breeze in the P.M. makes the
intense heat a little more endurable. The mountains in the horizon
do not seem to grow nearer. Our camels now have to be whipped and
urged along. About 4 P.M. we sight the tops of the mountains in the
region of Murrat. On and on we go in the darkness and silence of
the night, till finally, after about 13 hours of hard riding, we
pitch our camp in a sort of valley called _Ettella_. Mousa is about
used up, and is found crying.

_Sunday, Dec. 18._--We started at 6.50 this morning, and soon
entered a region of high mountains. Here we saw a number of green
bushes. Then we came out on a magnificent gravel plain. Mirage.
Toward noon we came to a partial oasis, where are a number, about
200, of palms bearing a fruit peculiar to this one locality. Then a
gorge. Then another valley with a few palms. Then passing a narrow
defile we entered, what for a fitting name I called the “valley of
lost souls.” Terrible heat. Slate mountains. On and on. No rest--no
lunch till we reach Murrat. It was nearly 4 P.M. when at last we
did arrive, and glad enough we were to throw ourselves down and
rest the remainder of the day. The camels must have water and
rest, too. There are 15 holes dug in the ground. Only three of them
contain water that can be used for camels, and that is not fit to
drink. Six men live here and keep the wells open. They also keep
goats and crows and a half-dead donkey, which the crows already
feed upon. After dinner, we had a pleasant chat with our Arab guide
and others. For now, with the help of signs, we are getting so that
we can talk quite a little Arabic. My Turkish is a great help, as
many words are the same. The camels’ backs are so sore that they
have to be seared with a hot iron. This is Sabbath eve, and I have
had one quiet hour all to myself out on the sand under the stars.

_Monday, Dec. 19._--We left the wells of Murrat at about 7 A.M.,
and came out into a vast plain. We met a party at the wells who
were eight days from Aboo-Hamed. We expect to make it in four. We
pass a region of immense granite boulders, one of them looking
exactly like a large cannon--sight and all. Mirage. We lunch
without shelter on the burning sand, in a region called _Bergat
Allouan_. In the afternoon, meet a party of three. We make for a
mountain pass, but it is dark before we reach it. But we push on
in the darkness. The camels are tired, and have to be whipped to
their work. One is quite used up, and his load is taken off and put
upon others. At last we camp in a mountain gorge, called _Cub El
Gorphas_. High wind. It is toward 9 o’clock before we stop for the
night. We have been at it over 13 hours to-day, and have made about
40 miles.

_Tuesday, Dec. 20._--It blew a hurricane all night. At 2.30 A.M. I
got up and dressed me for fear the tent would blow away. The high
wind prevented our getting ready for the start before 7.30 A.M.
Lunched again on the sand under the shelter of our camels, but the
wind was so great that our lunch consisted chiefly of sand. The
name of the place was called _El Aderaweb_. Soon after we started
we had quite a sand-storm. Passing a rocky gorge and a number of
huge boulders, we came to Gebel Afreet, or Spirit Mountain, where
in former times strange noises were heard. Make 35 miles, and camp
at the foot of two rock mountains called _Gournabat_.

_Wednesday, Dec. 21._--High wind and cold. I wake up the boys with
an iron pan for a gong. Meet two droves of camels. Cross an immense
plain covered with small stones and sand. Another sand-storm, the
wind blowing a gale. Lunch behind our camels at “_Faroot_.” Pass a
peculiar high hill that looks like a camel’s back. Now we are on
a boundless plain covered with bits of alabaster. We meet several
caravans, and pass various boxes of goods that caravans have been
obliged to leave behind. Camped at 7.30 in a part of the desert
called _Aboo-Enteshat_. It is very cold as we get into our cots,
and blowing a gale.

_Thursday, Dec. 22._--Started at 7.45. Every morning the guide
invokes the aid of “Sheik Abdel Kadir,” the patron of the desert.
Cold wind--sandy plain. Make a pass between two hills called _Gebel
Mougram_, where we lunch. Mirage. After lunch the guide gave the
word and we started off on a fast trot for Aboo-Hamed, leaving the
baggage train to come on behind. We trotted all the afternoon over
a long flat, seemingly endless. At last we saw the palm trees by
the river. On and on we went, then all of a sudden we saw the river
to the right of us. How beautiful the _real_ water looked! As we
neared the town we fired a salute, and came in in fine style. We
arrived at 5 P.M., and the baggage train came in at 8 P.M. I have
met a very friendly officer here, who talks Turkish. A mud hut near
the river stood ready for us, and we entered into possession at
once. But the river! How beautiful to our eyes! We had a good drink
and a good wash.

[Illustration: WEST AFRICAN HABITATIONS.]

_Friday, Dec. 23._--The men insisted that this day must be spent
here in rest; that they needed it, and must have it. We said
“All right,” and after cleaning up our guns and pistols, we
went over to the beautiful island of Mokrat, where we were told
that game abounded, to see what we could get for our table. We
crossed in a crazy log boat that threatened every moment to go to
the bottom. Here, after bagging game enough for a day or two, an
accident happened. As I was running through some bushes I suddenly
became lame, and thought that a serpent had bitten me; but it
afterward proved to be a thorn driven into the ankle clear to the
bone. Doctor said it was in the worst possible place, and did not
dare to cut for it. But the pain soon became so great that it
was unbearable, and the foot could not be touched to the ground.
It nauseated me, too, and was altogether proving itself so much
more than expected, that he determined to probe for it. Twice he
attempted it, working half an hour or so each time and sinking the
forceps over half an inch and all he dared, and finally, to ease
the pain, he cut the nerve. My chief consolation is that I am not
the first man who has had a “thorn in the flesh.”

_Saturday, Dec. 24._--We were up early. I was for starting, but
the Doctor was afraid of inflammation in my ankle, and all things
considered we determined to wait till noon; but the men were
drunk, our guide especially, and we were not able to get off till
2 P.M. With a sling I managed my ankle quite comfortably. Soon
after leaving Aboo-Hamed we passed a region where the ground was
covered with most beautiful stones of many colors, red, green and
black. When we had made about 10 or 12 miles we went into camp,
as much to let the men get sober as anything. The spot we chose
was a lovely one on the bank of the river, sheltered by a grove of
palms. Christmas Eve on the Nile! Was there ever a more beautiful
one? When the afterglow of a rich sunset had faded from the sky,
the moon rose and looked down at us through the palm branches. We
had the desert stretching away to the rear, and the winding river
with its fringe of palms in front of us. We lay on the floor of
our tent thinking of home and telling stories of the happy days of
“auld lang syne” till we were warned that it was time to turn in.
We are now in the region of crocodiles. We have seen one, and the
guide to keep us from the water has told some most fearful stories.
He has even tried to make us believe that a crocodile will catch
and devour two camels at once. The name of our camping place is
_Moushra Adehaish_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


CLIPPINGS FROM CORRESPONDENCE.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

Our readers may possibly remember that we have been making an
experimental effort to plant a mission at Point Pedro, a Chinese
fishing village, on one of the headlands making out into San
Francisco Bay, about twenty miles from this city, and at least five
miles from any American village. The work resembles, as to its
difficulties, that which would be encountered in any village in
China itself, and the teacher--Miss Mary C. Waterbury--is almost
as much alone there as she would be if at work in China. One
American family--a gentleman and his wife--reside at the point,
having charge of the ranch and collecting the ground rents due
from the Chinese fishermen, and in this family she has her only
opportunity for free conversation in her native tongue. I make
the following extract from a letter from her, giving an account
of a “Moon Festival,” observed there by the Chinese. “It was a
never-to-be-forgotten scene. I only wished that every Christian in
this land could have looked upon it. This day has been a general
holiday; no fishing, no work of any kind. These poor, tired men,
who ply the oar and draw the net seven days in the week, early
and late, day and night, are resting. They are to have a good
dinner and a good time generally; and, in connection with it, are
observing the oldest form of idol-worship this dark world has
ever seen. This--not in China, or in Ethiopia, but right here in
Christian America, under the very sound and light of the glorious
gospel of the Light of the World. Under the clear shining of a
bright, full moon a table is spread with the very best the offerer
can afford, and then his guests come out, and, one by one, bow down
to the moon and worship--worship, ‘not the one who carries the
lantern,’ as a Christian Chinese said, ‘but the lantern itself.’
This is about all there was of it--and it does not make much of a
story,--but nothing ever impressed me more deeply. I had read of
idolatry before, but now I was looking it square in the face. Not
many days ago a poor old man died here. Ever since, his daughter
and her husband and the grand-children have been worshiping his
spirit with all sorts of votive offerings; not from love to him,
not to express their reverence for his memory, but from fear of
his ghost. And so, right here in America, there is growing up a
generation of idolaters.”

[Illustration: SELLING PRAYERS IN A CHINESE TEMPLE.]

Mrs. Langdon, of Stockton, writes: “Since Lee Pak Un came (the
Chinese helper) two of our boys have joined the association.
We have one pupil who attended school for some time, then
absented himself for months, and has now returned. He can
read understandingly, is a good Chinese scholar, and is very
intelligent, but when approached on religious matters cannot be
made to know what I am talking about. The inability, however, is
evidently moral. Lee Pak Un says: His friend, surname brother, says
he will not be a Christian while his father lives; he is afraid
of him. ‘If any man cometh unto me and hateth not his own father,
* * * he cannot be my disciple.’ How often these hard sayings of
our Lord find illustration in our missionary work! How many of our
believing Chinese have been obliged to take the position of one
_hating_ father and mother--to do what is interpreted by them and
others as acts of hatred, in order to be Christ’s disciples! How
often, after returning to China, have they been obliged to stand
unmoved by a father’s threats and curses and a mother’s tears, or
else bow down to idols and deny their Lord!”

I have not often, in the last two or three years, made mention
in the MISSIONARY of our Petaluma school. It has been one of the
smallest of our missions, with comparatively little occurring,
month by month, to interest our readers or to encourage us. But
for several months past, under the care of Miss Carrie L. Jones,
daughter of Rev. Dr. R. G. Jones, pastor of the Congregational
Church in that city, and through the faithful service of our
helper, Wong Ock, new interest has been developed, the attendance
has almost trebled, and the harvest seems to be close at hand.
One of the pupils, not yet an avowed Christian, writes to Miss
Jones as follows: “I come to school every night at 7 o’clock to
learn to read and write. I go to meeting Wednesday and to church
Sunday-school. Some China boy would like to love Jesus Christ
and God. My good friend Wong Ock is a good boy, and I like him
very much. California is a good country. Good-bye.” From Wong Ock
himself I have several letters on file, from which I give the
following extracts: “I feel much comfort and happiness in my heart
when I try to do God’s will. I hope I may be faithful at all times
and trust in Him, so He may help me, and I may bear much fruit
in His name. Charlie, one of our boys, has joined the Christian
Association in the last two weeks. Now I find him very good. He
seems to have entirely left his old habits, and has given his heart
to serve the Lord Jesus.” Again, “I feel very contented, as I
have made acquaintance with my Lord and Saviour. I am willing now
to give up all I have for His name’s sake, for His righteousness’
sake. But I often shed many tears for those around us who have
not known the gospel. For my part (_i. e._, so far as I myself am
concerned), I am thankful for those who love Jesus and teach me so
well in his name. I hope the reward of my Lord be multiplied to
them, so they may know to lead His flock back to His fold. But you
know how many of the hearts have been discouraged on account of the
bad actions of some Chinese. Nevertheless, we must be faithful.
Then I think everything will be well done in the Lord’s sight.”
What he means is this: that if we are faithful our Lord will be
pleased and will accept us, even though many of those for whom we
labor and pray refuse to give up their opium, their gambling, their
hatreds, and refuse to become Christians, because they would, as
Christians, be obliged to abandon these things. Some months since I
proposed to Wong Ock, as I could not afford, considering the size
of the school, to pay him the full salary of a helper (_i. e._,
$25 per month), to seek work for part of the day in some family,
as several of our helpers do, or else to go to Point Pedro with
reference to making a thorough experiment in the work there. To
have accepted either proposition would have increased his monthly
income by at least $10, or 66 per cent. This is his reply: “I
prayed to God, and He has shown me the right way, I think. No
matter to me in what place I work, only for Jesus Christ. But I
think I am useful here; also can study myself. I need but little
money, only enough to keep me, and you can give what you think
best. I do not wish to leave here, nor work in family, as I get too
tired to study; not feel very strong. The question is, What use am
I to God? Because not our will, but His, be done. If we can be of
use to God, we ought to be satisfied, whether we dwell among the
savages or become poor and suffer as Job did, for even our Christ
the Lord left the holier and happier place and came to this dark
and sinful world to die for our sins. Now, I am sorry if a man
drive a hen away, if the eggs she set upon have not time enough
to be hatched. My dear brother, if I feel so for the hen, shall I
leave the boys whom I have preached to and cared for ever so long,
and some of them nearly come to be Christians? I think not. Still I
wish to do right.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE

       *       *       *       *       *


TED’S TEMPERANCE SOCIETY.

A TRUE STORY.

BY AN ATLANTA TEACHER

Between you and me Ted isn’t his real name, but, since I cannot
tell you the name which his father and mother gave him, I suppose
Ted will do for a boy as well as anything else. The fact is I do
not want that you should think so much of the name as of the boy;
for I assure you Ted is a boy worth thinking about, even if he is
only nine years old, and if he hasn’t a very great superabundance
(Did you ever see or hear such a big word?) of money, and doesn’t
own a horse, nor a dog, nor a velocipede, nor a bicycle, nor a
hundred other things that money will buy. I can tell you though
that Ted has ever so many things that money--no, not all the money
that Vanderbilt, nor Jay Gould, nor any other man has--can not
buy. I mean Ted’s father and mother and two little brothers, and
a cunning little sister with eyes like stars, and cheeks like a
peach-blossom, and a mouth like a ripe cherry. Then Ted knows a
good deal about ever so many things. Of course he got a great deal
of this knowledge from his father and mother, as any boy can who
has a good father and mother, and what is a boy going to do who
hasn’t both?

Ted knows the men and women in the Bible just like a book; better
too. He knows them just as well as he does the people living around
him, and he can go to the map and find all those places mentioned
in the New Testament.

The father, and mother, and Ted, and the little sister (I wish I
might tell you her name), made that map, and some day, perhaps, I
shall tell you how they did it. Ted’s baby brother, two years old,
can name some of the places, too, though Ted says it is very hard
for him to say _Cappadocia_, and I think it is no wonder, for that
is a dreadful word for a child to say.

Well, as I said before, Ted has all these rich possessions of
family friends and knowledge, and better than all, he has, I think,
the love of God in his heart just as earnest, and true, and tender
as if he were a grown-up man. I do not think that one has to wait
to be a grown-up person to love God, do you?

Because of this love, Ted has a great love for human beings, and
wants to do all he can to help them, and make them better. He knows
that he is a small boy, and cannot do a man’s work, but he does
not sit down and say he will wait till he is a man, but he does a
little boy’s work as well as he can. Now I will tell you what he
has done within the last few months. He has formed a temperance
society, and ever so many little boys and girls have joined it.

No one can be a member of this society until he has promised not to
drink beer, nor egg-nog, nor anything that has alcohol in it, and
he must say he will not use tobacco, nor swear, nor say bad words
of any kind.

The way he began was, one day a little boy came into the yard,
I mean Ted’s father’s yard, to split wood. He was just a little
fellow, not much larger, I believe, than Ted himself, and, if you
can believe me, he was smoking!

Of course Ted was shocked, and he thought it must be stopped, so
he talked to the little boy, and after some persuasion got him to
promise not to touch tobacco again, and _that_ was Ted’s society.
Well, the little boy began to help Ted to persuade other little
boys to join the society. And so they found plenty. You see there
are ever so many people everywhere ready to be good and wise if
they only had some one to show them how. So it came about that
one after another the little boys went to Ted’s house to sign the
pledge. Ted’s mother, who is one of those mothers that can be in
many ways a great comfort to a boy, helped about getting cards for
the children, and bits of blue ribbon to wear as a sign that they
belonged to Ted’s society.

Well, little girls began to join too. Of course Ted’s little sister
did so the first of all, for she does not like to be behind her
brother in doing right things, and then other little girls came.
Why, one evening I went to Ted’s house, and there were seven little
people who had just been in to sign the pledge. Of course they
carried a great deal of mud into the house. (It is a very muddy
place where Ted lives. Oh, my! Sometimes I think there is more mud
than anything else there.)

Ted, and his mother and father, were there, looking just as happy
as if nothing could make them so glad as to have the carpet all
covered with muddy prints of little shoes; but I do not think they
were so very glad about the mud as they were to see that the small
attempt to do good promised to become a great work, and that, with
God’s blessing, Ted might be the means of helping those little boys
and girls to become good men and women.

Ted has more than one hundred little people in his society now, and
he still keeps working to get in more.

I think I forgot to tell you that Ted lives among the colored
people in the South, and that his society consists of colored
children; but, never mind, isn’t it just as good to know it now, as
if I told you at first?

Yes, his father and mother are missionaries, and if it were not
such a large name to give a little boy, I should say that Ted is a
missionary too.

       *       *       *       *       *




OBITUARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miss Sarah A. G. Stevens, for 14 years a teacher among the Freedmen
under the commission of the A. M. A., the last three of which were
spent in Fisk University, was called to her rest, from the home of
her brother in her native place, St. Johnsbury, Vt., on April 5th.
She entered the service of the Association in the fall of 1866, and
retired at the close of the school-year in 1880, with health and
strength so impaired that the rest and change of climate, which she
subsequently sought, brought no real improvement. These years of
faithful service had been cheerfully and enthusiastically given.
The thought of them gave her great comfort and satisfaction during
the months of weariness and suffering which preceded her death. Her
recovery was hoped for by herself and friends up to the beginning
of the new year. In January her physician sent word to Miss E. M.
Barnes, a teacher in Fisk University, that there were developments
of a fatal disease, and that death was but a question of a few
weeks, possibly months.

Miss Barnes had been associated with Miss Stevens for ten years
as a teacher in the South, and had been her most intimate friend
and companion. She owed her life under God to the faithful nursing
and care of Miss Stevens, when attacked by yellow fever during the
prevalence of that scourge in the city of Memphis, Tenn., in the
fall of 1873, at which time three teachers of the Mission Home
lost their lives. Miss Barnes resigned her position and hastened
to the bedside of her sick friend. The following extract from her
letter, announcing the death of her friend, will best illustrate
the peacefulness and beauty of the closing weeks of her life:

“The messenger came for her Wednesday morning, April 5th. Yesterday
we laid her body away to its last rest. Rest--how much that means
to her; it had been so long since she had known rest. She had
failed very rapidly during the week, and yet death came suddenly
in the end. Tuesday afternoon, after some hours of great pain and
suffering, a change came, and, breathing peacefully as a child,
she passed away with an upward look, as if the joys of Heaven were
already bursting upon her sight. During the last days of her life
she spoke confidently and calmly of her hopes of the future. Often,
when suffering the most intensely, nothing would soothe and quiet
her so quickly as reading from the Bible. I never remember a murmur
against her suffering during all her illness. Allusion was made at
her funeral, by her pastor, to her work in the South; that such an
example of self-denial and devotion to the Master’s work among the
lowly was a legacy to any community.”

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR APRIL, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $2,594.67.

    Blue Hill. N. A. F.                                       $1.00
    Brewer. First Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Brunswick. First Cong. Ch., _for Freight_, by
      Mrs. J. D. Lincoln                                       4.50
    Dennysville. Peter E. Vose, $5; “A Friend,” $5            10.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             68.05
    Gardiner. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              27.33
    Gorham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                35.26
    New Gloucester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        75.55
    Portland. “S. A. M.,” $100; Ladies’ Circle,
      High St. Ch., _for Freight_, $8.48                     108.48
    Portland. Mrs. Chas. Andrews, _for Student
      Aid_, _Straight U._                                      2.00
    Portland. Abyssinian Ch. Sab. Sch., Box Books,
      _for Wilmington, N.C._
    South Berwick. “Friends,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    South Waterford. Mrs. C. D.                                1.00
    Waldoborough. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     8.50
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               12.00
    Yarmouth. Rev. A. L.                                       1.00
                                                              —————
                                                            $364.67

    LEGACIES.

    Bath. Estate of Chas. Clapp, Jr. ($200 of
      which _for Lady Missionaries, Wilmington, N.
      C._ and _Selma, Ala._),                              2,200.00
    Waterford. Estate of Rev. J. A. Douglass, to
      const. MISS H. E. DOUGLASS L. M.                        30.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,594.67


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $234.27.

    Alstead. Third Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        15.00
    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc., bal. to const.
      JAMES KNIGHT L. M.                                      15.00
    Concord. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         50.00
    Durham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 7.34
    Hanover. “Friends,” _for Atlanta U._                      10.00
    Hillsborough Center. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $3;
      O. C., $1                                                4.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              14.67
    Langdon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. DEA. TAYLOR G. SWEAT L. M.                       63.10
    Mason. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          26.65
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. of. C., _for
      Straight U._
    Orford. A. E.                                              0.51
    Temple. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   21.00


  VERMONT, $390.98.

    Cambridge. M. and C. Safford                              46.52
    Charlotte. Mrs. M. E. E.                                   0.50
    Chelsea. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.77
    Clarendon. Mrs. N. J. Smith                                5.00
    East Poultney. A. D. Wilcox, $5; J. M., 50c.               5.50
    Manchester. Miss Ellen Hawley, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Newbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               38.80
    Newport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                7.80
    North Craftsbury. Individuals, _for Mag._                  2.00
    Rutland. Cong. Ch.                                       138.09
    Sharon. Mrs. A. F., $1; Miss S. P. F., $1                  2.00
    West Brattleborough. Mrs. F. C. Gaines                     4.00
    Westminster West. Mrs. Z. D.                               1.00
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.00
    Woodstock. Hon. Frederick Billings, _for
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    ——. “Ex-Teacher”                                           5.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $7,942.56.

    Abington. RICHARD VINING, to const. himself L.
      M.                                                      30.00
    Amesbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              13.00
    Amesbury. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., and $1.50
      _for Freight, for Washington, D.C._                      1.50
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch., $50; Second Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $10.10                                    60.10
    Andover. Francis H. Johnson                              100.00
    Andover. Sab. Sch. of College Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Andover. George Ripley, $50, _for Talladega
      C._; Ladies’ Aux. and Sab. Sch., $40; _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              90.00
    Arlington. Orthodox Sewing Circle, Box of C.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Ashburnham. M. W.                                          1.00
    Athol Center. Mrs. E. E., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Bolton. “A Friend,” _for Atlanta U._                       9.00
    Barre. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               5.00
    Belchertown. Mrs. R. W. Walker                             5.00
    Bernardston. “Friends,” by Mrs. P.                         5.00
    Blandford. Miss H. M. H.                                   1.00
    Boston. Central Church and Soc., $910.55; S.
      D. Smith, Organ, $200; Mrs. E. C. Ford, $25;
      Mrs. B. P., 50c                                      1,136.05
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Assn., _for
      Lady Missionaries_                                     272.63
    Bradford. Pupils of Academy, _for Atlanta U._             35.39
    Brimfield. Second. Cong. Sab. Sch., bal. to
      const. EDWARD BLISS L. M.                               15.00
    Brockton. L. C. Sanford, _for Tougaloo U._                 1.32
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc.                          104.94
    Buckland. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. M. C. Coll.                    13.13
    Charlemont. E. G.                                          1.00
    Charlton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  5.86
    Chelsea. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._           10.00
    Cohasset. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                           6.20
    Concord. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $31.16;
      Mrs. S., $1                                             32.16
    Curtisville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.00
    Curtisville. Mrs. M. L., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Danvers. Sab. Sch. of Maple St. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   20.00
    Danvers. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   2.50
    Dorchester. Miss E. P., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    East Bridgewater. Union Cong. Ch.                         34.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               60.00
    Feeding Hills. Cong. Ch.                                   5.30
    Fitchburgh. Sab. Sch. of Rollston Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Fitchburgh. “Mrs. C. W. H.”                               10.00
    Florence. Florence Ch.                                    26.65
    Framingham. Young Ladies’ Mission Circle,
      Bundle of C.
    Georgetown. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      29.27
    Gilbertville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          15.12
    Hadley. G. W. A.                                           1.00
    Haverhill. Miss S. E. M.                                   0.50
    Holden. M. A. Perry                                        4.00
    Hubbardston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           33.00
    Lancaster. MRS. C. S. BALLARD, _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._, and to const. herself L.
      M.                                                      30.00
    Lawrence. “E. F. E.”                                       1.00
    Lee. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                      75.00
    Leicester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       67.90
    Leominster. Primary Dept. O. C. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 5.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           24.50
    Littleton. Rev. Wm. Sewall, Bundle of C.
    Longmeadow. G. M. McQ.                                     0.50
    Lowell. High St. Cong. Ch.                                76.33
    Lunenburgh. Lettie Wilson, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            30.00
    Lynn. B. V. French, $25; Central Cong. Ch. and
      Soc., $17                                               42.00
    Malden. Miss Kent, Bbl. of C., _for
      Wilmington, N.C._
    Malden. Miss M. K.                                         1.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   40.00
    Marion. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                    5.00
    Maynard. “J. D. F.”                                        1.00
    Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      54.25
    Milford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         99.66
    Monson. Cong. Ch., to const. REV. E. H.
      BYINGTON L. M.                                          30.05
    Monson. G. W. Andrew’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      3.00
    Montague. First Cong. Ch.                                 18.02
    Newburyport. _For freight, for Washington,
      D.C._                                                    2.35
    Newburyport. “A Friend,” _for Freight_                     2.00
    Newburyport. “A Friend,” Bbl. of C., _for
      Charlotte, N.C._
    Newton. Eliot Ch.                                        170.00
    Newton. Ellen D. Jackson, Package Bibles, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   35.45
    Newton Center. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Newton Center. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Newton Lower Falls. M. A. M.                               0.50
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.60
    Northampton. A. L. Williston, $630; Edwards
      Ch., $66.53                                            696.53
    Northampton. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    North Truro. Rev. Chas. Morgan, Box of Books,
      _for Wilmington N.C._
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          31.31
    Orange. Central Ch. and Soc.                              12.00
    Peabody. South Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         96.00
    Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      50.00
    Prescott. A. M. B.                                         0.50
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          23.50
    Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                       16.30
    Royalston. Joseph Estabrook, $15; First Cong.
      Sab. Sch., $5                                           20.00
    Salem. Primary Dept. of Tab. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         20.00
    Sandwich. Mrs. H. H. N.                                    1.00
    Somerville. Franklin St. Ch. and Soc.                    139.22
    Southborough. Pilgrim Evan. Ch. and Soc.                  30.00
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    25.00
    Spencer. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        121.26
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch., $82.56; South
      Ch., $52.85                                            135.41
    Springfield. G. & C. Merriam, one Dictionary,
      extra binding, _for Atlanta U._
    Sudbury. Union Ch. and Soc.                               22.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               30.00
    Tewkesbury. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Hampton N. &
      A. Inst._                                               10.00
    Ware. East Ch. ($100 of which from Hon.
      William Hyde, _for John Brown Steamer_), to
      const. ISAAC JEFFRIES, S. B. WETHERELL,
      HENRY P. PERKINS, MRS. A. W. BOWEN, FLORENCE
      STURTEVANT and MARTHA YALE L. Ms.                      409.20
    Walpole. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. REV. FRANCIS J. MARSH L. M.                      40.60
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C., _for Marion,
      Ala._
    Watertown. Phillips Ch. Sab. Sch., $6.17; Mrs.
      E. F. F., 50c.                                           6.67
    Watertown. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. of Phillips Ch.,
      2 Bbls. of C., _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Westborough. Miss S. M. H.                                 0.50
    West Boxford. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Lewis High Sch., Macon, Ga._                            12.00
    West Brookfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const.
      MISS ALICE WHITE L. M.                                  35.00
    Westhampton. Cong. Ch.                                    33.00
    West Roxbury. A. Wiswall, to const. MISS
      FANNIE H. WISWALL L. M.                                 50.00
    West Springfield. “Mission Band,” _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      50.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             12.34
    Winchester. Stephen Cutter, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           24.00
    Woburn. L. B. Soc., Bbl. of C., _for Atlanta
      U._
    Worcester. Central Ch. and Soc.                           87.46
    Worcester. Ladies of Central Ch., Package of
      C., by Mrs. Alphonso Wood, _for Tillotson C.
      & N. Inst._
    Yarmouth. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      C., _for Talladega C._
    ——. Bbl. of C., for Rev. A. W. Curtis.
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $5,407.53

    LEGACIES.

    Newburyport. Estate of Sarah W. Hale, by Isaac
      H. Boardman, Trustee                                $1,977.03
    South Hadley. Estate of Addison Gridley                  100.00
    Watertown. Estate of Mrs. Hannah Shephard, by
      Abiel Abbott, Ex.                                      100.00
    Westhampton. Estate of Miss Submit Bridgman,
      by L. Bridgman, Ex.                                    200.00
    Westhampton. Estate of Mrs. Sophronia
      Bridgman, by L. Bridgman, Ex.                          158.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $7,942.56


  RHODE ISLAND, $10.50.

    Newport. Rev. Thatcher Thayer, D.D.                       10.00
    Providence. S. L. H.                                       0.50


  CONNECTICUT, $3,243.96.

    Ashford. Wm. D. Carpenter, $5; A. Peck, $2                 7.00
    Avon. Mrs. A. P. Case                                      3.00
    Bethlehem. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Marion, Ala._
    Birmingham. Cong. Ch. ($100 of which from
      William E. Downs)                                      133.35
    Bolton. Cong. Ch.                                          9.00
    Bridgeport. S. C. Kingman, _for Tillotson C. &
      N. Inst._                                               15.00
    Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                                     17.03
    Chester. T. A. C. C.                                       1.00
    Collinsville. Chas. Blair, _for furnishing
      room, Stone Hall, Talladega C._                         35.00
    East Hampton. Cong. Ch. ($1 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                         47.45
    East Hampton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    East Hampton. Dea. Samuel Skinner, _for
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    East Hartland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         17.00
    East Haven. Cong. Ch.                                     13.00
    Essex. Young Ladies, Bbl. of C.
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. Quarterly Coll.                     54.81
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                       10.74
    Georgetown. Cong. Ch.                                      7.17
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Ch.                               39.54
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    Hartford. Mrs. S. E. Perkins, $300; “Mrs. L.
      C. D.,” $100; E. F. M., $1                             401.00
    Hartford. Rev. Wm. Thompson, D.D., _for
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Harwinton. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from Mrs.
      Hilpah Watson, _for John Brown Steamer_)                53.80
    Kent. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Marion, Ala._
    Litchfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., 2 Bbls. C., _for
      Marion, Ala._
    Litchfield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Lyme. Grassy Hill Cong. Ch., $13; J. L., 50c.             13.50
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       7.00
    Mansfield. Bbl. of C., _for Straight U._
    Mansfield Centre. First Cong. Ch.                          9.00
    Meriden. Center Cong. Ch., $14.75; Mrs. E. E.
      Leonard, $5                                             19.75
    Middletown. First Cong. Ch. ($4 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                    40.02
    Middletown. “L. C. B.,” $10; Miss M. H., $1               11.00
    New Britain. “South Ch., a Friend,” $10; Mrs.
      N. H., $1                                               11.00
    New Britain. C. B. Erwin, _for President’s
      House, Talladega C._                                    61.75
    New Britain. Maria S. and Julia A. Kelsey                  5.00
    New Haven. Center Ch., $126.36; Davenport
      Cong. Ch. $102.70; Howard Ave. Cong Ch.,
      $10.37; J. E. B., $1                                   240.43
    New Haven. E. L. De Forest, _for Yale Library
      Fund, Talladega C._                                     25.00
    New Milford. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of C., _for
      Marion, Ala._
    New Preston. Cong. Ch., by Miss J. M. Averill
      ($10 of which from “Two Friends,” _for
      Rebuilding Emerson Inst._)                              67.75
    New Preston. Rev. Henry Upson                             10.00
    Norfolk. Mrs. T. T. Cowles, $20; Joseph R.
      Cowles, $20; “D.,” $2                                   42.00
    North Coventry. Cong. Ch.                                 40.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    North Haven. Cong. Sab. Sch., $50; Miss M. D.,
      $1, _for John Brown Steamer_ and to const.
      MRS. LUCY A. HEMINGWAY L. M.                            51.00
    North Haven. Cong. Ch., to const. EDWARD L.
      LINSLEY, JARED B. BASSETT and FREDERICK C.
      BRADLEY L. Ms.                                         111.26
    Norwich. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., Box of
      C., _for Atlanta U._
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch.                              200.00
    Plantsville. Cong. Ch. ($9 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                        291.02
    Plantsville. Cong. Sab. Sch. (ad’l), _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          12.88
    Plantsville. Mrs. Mary Hotchkiss, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                      5.00
    Plymouth. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      45.00
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.10
    Sherman. Cong. Ch.                                        16.66
    Somers. Cong. Sab. Sch., 2 Bbls of C., _for
      Marion, Ala._
    South Coventry. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           15.24
    South Glastonbury. Mrs. B., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    South Glastonbury. Cong. Sab. Sch.                         5.00
    Southport. “A Friend”                                     30.00
    Thomaston. “A Friend”                                      1.00
    Unionville. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                 44.21
    Washington. “Z,” _for Indian M._                           1.00
    Waterbury. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     474.00
    West Hartford. D. G. P.                                    0.50
    West Hartford. “E. W. M.,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Westport. Charles Scofield                                 5.00
    Whitneyville. Cong. Ch.                                   25.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch.                                        75.00
    Windsor Locks. Cong. Ch.                                  70.00
    Woodbridge. Bbl. of C., by E. C. Newton, Supt.
      Cong. S. S.
    Woodbury. Mrs. Wyckoff, _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                      2.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $3,043.96

    LEGACY.

    Stanwich. Estate of Mary A. Brush, by J. H.
      Brush, Ex.                                             200.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $3,243.96


  NEW YORK, $2,678.55.

    Bangor. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $10; Dea. R.
      H. Farr, $10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                20.00
    Berkshire. Chas. T. Leonard, $2; Mrs.
      Sophronia Miller, $2                                     4.00
    Brooklyn. Church of the Pilgrims, $454.35; “A
      Friend,” $10                                           464.35
    Brooklyn. $5, _for Student Aid, Howard U._;
      “Friends,” Bbl. of C. and $1, _for Freight,
      for Washington, D.C._                                    6.00
    Binghamton. J. D. Wells                                   23.00
    Buffalo. First Cong. Ch.                                  34.86
    Camden. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           30.30
    Churchville. Union Cong. Ch. and Soc., $40;
      Mrs. M. M. W., $1                                       41.00
    Dansville. Mrs. Fanny C. Noyes, Box of Papers
    Evans. Mrs. R. P. R. Camp                                  2.00
    Fairport. Mrs. C. H. Dickinson                           200.00
    Fredonia. Sab. Sch. of Presb. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Fredonia. Mr. Hubbard, _for Student Aid, Lewis
      High Sch., Macon, Ga._                                  10.00
    Hopkinton. Mrs. T. H. Laughlin                            13.00
    Hudson. “S. A. M.”                                         7.00
    Kiantone. Mrs. G. C. Frissell                              2.00
    Lincoln. J. D. Dewey, $5; James Newhall, $5;
      Mrs. M. J. Newhall, $5                                  15.00
    Morrisville. A. B. De Forest                              10.00
    Munnsville. T. B. Rockwell                                 5.00
    New York. Broadway Tabernacle, $820.34; S. T.
      Gordon, $250 and 3 Packages “New Song;” “A
      Few Friends,” by John T. Rockwell, $50; F.
      P. Sherman, $5; National Temperance Soc.,
      Illustrated Temp. Papers                             1,125.34
    New York. Hon. Wm. E. Dodge, $100; Jacob D.
      Vermilye, $50; Edgar S. Auchincloss, $50;
      John Sinclair, $50; John Paton, $25, _for
      Memorial Scholarship Fund_; Rev. D. Stuart
      Dodge, $100, _for Yale Library Fund_; John
      Gibb, $100; N. Currier, $25; Cash, $10;
      Cash, $5, _for Talladega C._                           515.00
    New York. J. R. Anderson, Pkg. Books, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Oneida. Edward Loomis, $3; “Money Found,” $2               5.00
    Owego. L. H. Allen                                        10.00
    Paris. Mrs. A. Pierce                                     10.00
    Prattsburgh. “A.”                                          5.00
    Riverhead. Mrs. Geo. Miller                                5.00
    Schenectady. A. W. V.                                      0.50
    Sing Sing. “A Friend,” Box of C., $2 _for
      Freight_                                                 2.00
    South Granby. JUSTUS T. GERE, bal. to const.
      himself L. M.                                           20.00
    Spencerport. Sarah Vannest, $10; Mary Dyer,
      $5, _for Straight U._                                   15.00
    Syracuse. “S. J. W.”                                      20.00
    Syracuse. Mrs. Clara C. Clarke                             7.20
    Troy. “Desert Palm Mission,” M. & M. F. C.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 1.00


  NEW JERSEY, $388.04.

    Bound Brook. Cong. Ch.                                    10.10
    Camden. Mrs. J. T. C.                                      2.00
    East Orange. Cong. Ch.                                    56.67
    Englewood. Chas. Taylor                                   11.00
    Lakewood. A. F.                                            0.50
    Lyons Farms. “C.”                                          3.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch.                                 150.56
    Newark. MRS. S. S. SICKELS, $100, to const.
      herself L. M.; First Cong. Ch., $54.21                 154.21


  PENNSYLVANIA, $2,148.06.

    Clark. Mrs. E. Dickson and Miss Eliza Dickson,
      $5 each                                                 10.00
    Centre Road. J. A. Scovel ($10 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                    15.00
    East Smithfield. Miss Lucy Gerould, _for
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Philadelphia. Friend’s Book Store, Box of
      Books; R. & J. Beck, Microscope, val., $5,
      _for Macon, Ga._
                                                            ———————
                                                             $35.00

    LEGACY.

    Washington. Estate of Samuel McFarland, by
      Abel M. Evans, Ex.                                   2,113.06
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,148.06


  OHIO, $863.56.

    Ashtabula. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Burton. Cong. Ch. ($10 of which from Ladies’
      Miss. Soc., _for work among Women_)                     49.82
    Chagrin Falls. “Cheerful Workers,” _for
      Tougaloo U._                                            10.00
    Chagrin Falls. Cong. Ch., Communion Set and
      Box of Papers and Books, _for Macon, Ga._
    Cincinnati. Mrs. Betsey E. Aydelott                        5.00
    Cleveland. Rev. P. Kimball                               300.00
    Columbus. First Cong. Ch.                                116.03
    Cuyahoga Falls. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.              13.06
    Fremont. “Do Something Missionary Band,” _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               13.00
    Geneva. Mrs. S. Kingsbury, in memory her
      deceased husband, Samuel Kingsbury                     100.00
    Greenwich. Wm. M. Mead                                    10.00
    Hartford. S. C. Baker, $2.50; Mrs. R. H. P.,
      $1; Mrs. H. J., $1; Others, $2.50; Burg
      Hill, J. M. J., $1; S. G. B., $1; H. B.,
      50c.; Brookfield, E. F., 50c.                           10.00
    Kelloggsville. Mrs. Pliny Kellogg, _for
      Emerson Inst._                                           5.00
    Madison. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for Tougaloo U._            25.00
    North Kingsville. D. C. Caughy, $5; Miss Eliza
      Comings, $5, _for Emerson Inst._                        10.00
    Norwalk. Frederick Upson                                   5.00
    Oberlin. Sab. Sch., in Farror Neighborhood,
      $2; J. T. B., $1, _for John Brown Steamer_               3.00
    Plymouth. E. A.                                            1.00
    Sandusky. First Cong. Ch.                                108.65
    Savannah. J. A. Patterson                                  5.00
    Sheffield. Cong. Ch., $18; Cong. Sab. Sch. $5             23.00
    Steubenville. “Young Missionaries” of First
      Cong. Ch., $10; Woman’s Soc., $5, _for Lady
      Missionary, Topeka, Kansas_                             15.00
    Sylvania. Cong. Ch.                                        7.00
    Tallmadge. Miss H. W. C.                                   1.60
    Toledo. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                      1.00
    Wellington. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              15.00
    Youngstown. “Thank offering”                               2.00


  ILLINOIS, $608.89.

    Aurora. First Cong. Ch.                                   19.25
    Avon. Cong. Ch., $20; Mrs. E. C., 50c.                    20.50
    Brighton. First Cong Ch.                                   6.10
    Chandlerville. Cong. Ch.                                  12.00
    Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch., $83.15; Mrs. H.
      H. B., $1                                               84.15
    Chicago. James W. Porter, _for Atlanta U._                20.00
    Chicago. H. B. Cragin, $10; “A Friend,” $1.11,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         11.11
    Chicago. Miss Belle Dunham, _for Straight U._              5.00
    Creston. Cong. Ch.                                         9.20
    Emington. Two Classes in Broughton Sab. Sch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                15.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. ($30 of which to const.
      MRS. T. S. SNYDAM L. M.)                               111.15
    Galesburg. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of Brick Cong.
      Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_                           10.00
    Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
    Glencoe. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Jacksonville. Joy Prairie Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch.                                       47.50
    Kewanee. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., _for Tougaloo U._           20.50
    Kewanee. Mrs. Ruth Shaw                                   10.00
    Lawn Ridge. A. Crawford                                   10.00
    Lyndon. J. M. Hamilton                                     5.00
    Moline. Thomas Jewett, _for Tougaloo U._                  50.00
    Moline.——-, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     5.00
    Northampton. R. W. Gilliam                                 5.00
    Oneida. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.75
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
    Princeville. Wm. C. Stevens                                5.00
    Quincy. L. Kingman                                        10.00
    Winnebago. Cong. Ch.                                      17.68
    ——A Friend, $10, _for Student Aid, Tougaloo
      U._, and $5 _for John Brown Steamer_                    15.00


  INDIANA, $5.50.

    Versailles. J. B. Rebuck, $3; J. D. Nichols,
      $2.50                                                    5.50


  MICHIGAN, $4,241.81.

    Battle Creek. Cong. and Presb. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              12.00
    Calumet. Robert Dobbie                                    30.50
    Clio. Cong. Ch.                                           10.00
    Covert. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                11.00
    Edwardsburgh. U. E.                                        0.50
    Grand Rapids. E. M. Ball                                  15.00
    Hancock. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Olivet. Y. M. C. A., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           60.00
    Manistee. First Ch., to const. MRS. B. M.
      CUTCHEON L. M.                                          31.45
    Muskegon. “The Little Coral Workers,” by Miss
      A. K. Fairfield, _for John Brown Steamer_               10.00
    Northport. Cong. Ch.                                       4.94
    Romeo. Mrs. M. A. J.                                       1.00
    Vermontville. Cong. Ch.                                   34.42
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00
    Ypsilanti. J. H.                                           1.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $241.81

    LEGACY.

    Kalamazoo. Estate of William A. House                  4,000.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $4,241.81


  WISCONSIN, $400.93.

    Arena. Ladies Miss’y Soc., $2.50; Mrs. W. B.,
      $1. Beloit. Ladies Miss’y Soc., $63. Ladies
      Miss’y Soc. of 2d Cong. Ch., $11. Eau
      Claire. Ladies Miss’y Soc., $30.80. Elk
      Grove. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $1.50.
      Lancaster. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $15.
      Mazomanie. Ladies Miss’y Soc., $2.30. Ripon.
      Ladies Miss’y Soc., $18. Stevens’ Point.
      Mrs. Montague, $3. Waupun. Young Ladies of
      S. S., $10. Ladies Miss’y Soc., $5;
      Whitewater. Ladies Missionary Soc., $20.65;
      _for Lady Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                 183.75
    Beloit. The Eclipse Wind Engine Co., Windmill,
      _for Atlanta U._
    Kaukauna. Cong. Ch., $7.06; Sab. Sch., 50c.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 7.56
    Kenosha. Thomas Gillespie, M.D.                            5.00
    Milwaukee. “Mission Circle,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           16.00
    Monroe. H. E. Boardman, M.D. ($7.25 of which
      from “Our Family Missionary Box”)                        7.75
    New Richmond. First Cong. Ch.                             13.55
    Oshkosh. First Cong. Ch.                                  65.32
    Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch.                                      90.00
    West Salem. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00


  IOWA, $322.56.

    Atlantic. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Big Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Creston. First Cong. Ch.                                  21.00
    Decorah. G. C. Winship                                    10.00
    Des Moines. A. Y. Rawson                                  25.00
    Dunlap. Cong. Ch.                                         23.26
    Gilman. Cong. Ch.                                         11.50
    Grinnell. Samuel F. Cooper, _for Fisk U._                 50.00
    Grinnell. First Cong. Ch.                                 17.30
    Hampton. “Friends”                                         3.50
    Magnolia. Cong. Ch.                                       16.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” Box of C., val.
      $20, _for Straight U._
    Marion. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    McGregor. Cong. Ch.                                       16.25
    Miles. Cong. Ch.                                           7.25
    Monticello. Mrs. H. D. S. and Mrs. H. F. P.                1.00
    Preston. Cong. Ch.                                         5.25
    Traer. Cong. Ch. ($10 of which _for John Brown
      Steamer_, and $10 _for Lady Missionary, New
      Orleans, La._), to const. A. J. BROWER L. M.            30.00
    Tipton. Cong. Ch.                                          7.00
    Wilton Junction. A. C. H.                                  1.00
     Iowa City. “Friends,” $15.20; Grinnell,
      “Friends,” $2; Waterloo, “Friends,” $5;
      Wilton, “A Friend,” $1; Cedar Rapids, “A
      Friend,” $1; Grinnell, “A Friend,” $4;
      Davenport, “Friends,” $2; Muscatine,
      “Friends,” $4.80, _for furnishing a room in
      Stone Hall, Talladega C., in memory of Mrs.
      Mary S. Thatcher_                                       35.00
    Ladies of Durant, $10.25; Ladies of Waverly,
      $5; Ladies of Clinton, $5; by Mrs. M. G.
      Phillips, _for Lady Missionary, New Orleans,
      La._                                                    20.25


  KANSAS, $13.00.

    Burlington. John Morris                                    3.00
    Lawrence. Cong. Ch.                                        1.50
    Ottawa. First Cong. Ch.                                    8.50


  MINNESOTA, $192.94.

    Belle Prairie. E. T. A.                                    1.00
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      2.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 33.12
    Minneapolis. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                              50.00
    Minneapolis. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Atlanta U._                                             28.60
    Rushford. Cong. Ch.                                        3.14
    Shakopee. Mrs. R. P. Riggs                                 1.00
    Winona. Cong. Ch., $30 of which to const. M.
      J. LAIRD L. M.                                          51.25
    Zumbrota. First Cong. Ch.                                 22.83


  NEBRASKA, $23.00.

    Beatrice. Mrs. B. F. Hotchkiss                             5.00
    Crete. Cong. Ch. Bbl. of C., _for Marion, Ala._
    Nebraska City. “A Thank Offering”                         10.00
    Omaha. “K. & C.”                                           8.00


  MISSOURI, $76.36.

    Index. W. B. Wills, $10; F. P. M., $1; Others,
      $1.25                                                   12.25
    Kansas City. First Cong. Ch.                              64.11


  CALIFORNIA, $20.50.

    Oakland. Mrs. J. T. A.                                     0.50
    San Francisco. “Friend of Missions”                       20.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $38.49.

    Washington. Mrs. A. N. Bailey                              5.00
    Washington. “Willing Workers” of Lincoln
      Mission, $20, _for Mendi M._, $2; _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          22.00
    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Cong. Ch.                    10.19
    Washington. “Friend,” _for Washington, D.C._               1.30


  MARYLAND, $10.00.

    Emmittsburg. David Gamble, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $193.80.

    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00
    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition                       188.80


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $275.00.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         265.00
    Charleston. Plymouth Ch.                                  10.00


  TENNESSEE, $755.10.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        250.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Inst.                                  196.60
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              263.50
    Nashville. Missionary Soc. of Fisk U., _for
      Student Aid, Mendi M._                                  25.00
    Nashville. Cash                                           20.00


  GEORGIA, 767.83.

    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition, $239.45; Rent, $2          241.45
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                            240.70
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition                           89.58
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         18.85
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $135.35; Rent,
      $11.40                                                 146.75
    Stone Mountain. E. M. M.                                   0.50


  ALABAMA, $497.55.

    Anniston. Tuition                                          7.00
    Marion. Tuition, $5.75; Cong. Ch., $4                      9.75
    Mobile. Emerson Inst. Tuition, $153.40; Cong.
      Ch. $1.35                                              154.75
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund, $175; Cong. Ch., $60            235.00
    Montgomery. Miss M. Blanche Curtis, _for
      Atlanta U._                                              9.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          78.05


  LOUISIANA, $270.55.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition, $219.55;
      Friends, $1; Central Ch., $50                          270.55


  MISSISSIPPI, $111.75.

    Hazelhurst. E. E. S. and N. R. R., 50c. each               1.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $97.75; Miss
      K. K. Koons, $10; Miss F. J. Webster, $3               110.75


  TEXAS, $140.90.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 140.40
    Whitmans. Mrs. I. H.                                       0.50


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $2.

    Sumner. Mrs. Eliza Taylor, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.00


  INDIAN TERRITORY, $1.

    Vinita. Calvary Union Ch.                                  1.00


  DAKOTA TERRITORY, $3.

    Bethel. Rev. L. Bridgman                                   3.00


  CANADA, $12.

    Lenoxville. A. Spaulding                                   2.00
    Ontario. “A Friend,” by Mr. Loudon, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00


  FRANCE, $20.

    Paris. Rev. Edward W. Hitchcock, D.D., _for
      Yale Library Fund, Talladega C._                        20.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $29,519.61
        Total from Oct. 1 to April 30                   $161,542.16
                                                        ===========


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Rehoboth, Mass. Cong. Ch.                                 $5.70
    New Haven, Conn. Howard Ave. Cong. Ch.                    12.00
    Plantsville, Conn. Cong. Ch.                             100.00
    Income Fund                                              175.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                               $292.70
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1 to March 31        2,191.73
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                             $2,484.43


  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Watertown, Conn. Estate of Benjamin De Forest,
      by Leman W. Cutler, Ex., _for Support of
      President of Talladega C._                          10,000.00
    New York. N.Y. Railway Bond from William
      Belden, _for Scholarship Fund, Talladega C._         1,000.00
                                                         ——————————
        Total                                            $11,000.00
                                                        ===========

                                      H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                                 56 Reade St., N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




WANTED, Agents.--Startling as the pages of romance--from
the lowest depths of slavery to a position among the first in the
land. “Life and Times” of =FREDERICK DOUGLASS=, written by himself;
18 full-page illustrations; price $2.50. Outrivals “Uncle Tom’s
Cabin” in thrilling and romantic interest, with the added charm
that everything is true. A marvelous story most graphically told,
and of great historical value. This volume will be eagerly sought
for by the hundreds of thousands who have watched the remarkable
career and have been thrilled by the eloquence of this wonderful
man. Extra terms to Southern agents.

                         PARK PUBLISHING COMPANY, Hartford, Conn.


                 *       *       *       *       *


           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.

                 *       *       *       *       *

It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

          Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the
                     Ox-Brain and Wheat-Germ.

          Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.

              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.

        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       STUDENTS AND TEACHERS

                         (MALE OR FEMALE),

                          CAN EASILY MAKE

                           $100 A MONTH

                              SELLING

                        HEADLEY’S NEW BOOK.

                      “PUBLIC MEN OF TO-DAY,”

A NATIONAL Volume of =800= large octavo pages. The more than
=300= life-like PORTRAITS will sell the book in every community.
Every State represented. All want the book. No competition. Terms
liberal; =500= more salesmen wanted; choice of territory given.

Apply at once to

                                     S. S. SCRANTON & CO.,
                                               HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE GREAT AMERICAN TEA COMPANY]

  31 & 33 Vesey St.
  P.O. Box 4235, =NEW YORK=.


Stores, Hotels, Boarding Houses, Restaurants, Club Agents, and
large consumers will find it to their interest to send Postal Card
to the above address, and get the latest terms.


  N. B.--Beware of imitators.

  ☞ NO   HUMBUG.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE

                         CARPENTER ORGANS.

On page (192) will be found a rich and beautiful illustration of
one of the world-famous Carpenter Organs. The secret of success
in my business lies in personal supervision of the details of
that business. The superlative excellence of the Carpenter Action
is due to the vigilant personal oversight of the inventor. The
sweetness and evenness of tone, combined with the durable and
massive elegance of external finish in these organs, recommend
then to all lovers of music. At the Worcester works (the largest
Action Manufactory in the world) more than 100 different styles are
made, ranging in price from $20 to $2,000. The moral and religious
influence of a sweet-toned organ in a family is incalculable.
The subdued harmonies and mellow persuasiveness of organ-music
tranquilize and elevate the whole nature.

  When through storied windows bright
  Falls the dim religious light,
  Enhuing all the air with Iris sweet,
  Then with mellow thunder deep
  Let the ocean-throated organ speak;
  Let its rolling billows sweep
  Through our souls with might, with might!

  ’Tis not the voice of puny man
  That issues from these Pipes of Pan,
  Nor yet some yearning spirit of the air--
  Rather we seem to hear from out the skies,
  Now low, now loud, through opened gates of Paradise,
  The deep-toned viol, and the golden trumpet’s blare,
  And far hosannas from the innumerable caravan!


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           N.Y. WITNESS.

☞ There will be many important events occurring during the coming
year that you will not know about unless you take the WITNESS. Do
you know now, for instance, that a sober and Christian young man,
a private soldier of the U. S. Army, has been thrown into prison
and subjected to great privations and indignities by his superior
officers--treated worse than the miserable wretch Guiteau--for
writing a letter to the WITNESS--a letter which is of great
importance to all young men and all parents? There are many things
published in the WITNESS that other papers dare not print, for fear
of offending some rich and powerful corporation, and so losing
their patronage.

                 The price of the WITNESS is $1.50
                  a year, post-paid; club price,
                      five for $6.00. Sample
                          copy sent free.

Ministers, Missionaries, Evangelists of all Denominations, and
Teachers can have the WITNESS for One Dollar a year.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.,

                     New York Witness Office,
                17 to 21 VANDEWATER St., NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

=Case’s School Furniture.=--Parties about to purchase School
Furniture are invited to correspond with us. Our work is all of
the most approved patterns, and is unequaled for strength and
durability.

=Camp’s Outline Maps.=--Set of 9 maps, with key. No. 1,
Hemispheres; No. 2, North America; No. 3, United States; No. 4,
South America; No. 5, Europe; No. 6, Asia; No. 7, Africa; No. 8,
Oceanica; No. 9, Physical World.

=Case’s Bible Atlas.=--Embracing 16 full-page maps, quarto size,
beautifully printed in colors, covering the whole ground of
Biblical Geography; also 16 pages of Explanatory Notes on the maps.
Sent by mail on receipt of price; bound in boards, $1.; cloth,
$1.50. _Agents wanted._

Circulars sent on application.

                   O. D. CASE & CO., Publishers

                                AND

                  School Furniture Manufacturers,

                         HARTFORD,--CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          KELLY & JONES,
                  202 Greene Street, -- New York.

                       LOW AND HIGH PRESSURE
                               STEAM
                             AND OTHER
                        HEATING APPARATUS.


                      We make a Specialty of

                  Steam Heating and Ventilating
                 Apparatus, for Churches, Schools,
                   Public Buildings and Private
                            Residences.

Plans and Specifications of the latest and most approved methods
furnished on application.


Our apparatus is in operation in the following buildings:

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.; Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Georgia; Third Judicial District Court House, New York City; Museum
Of Art, New York City; Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.,
New York City; State College, near Bellefonte, Pa.; New York State
Reformatory, Elmira, N.Y.; Point St. School, Providence, R.I.;
Board of Education (Schools), Pittsburgh, Pa.; Van Wert Co. Court
House, Van Wert, Ohio; Mahoning Co. Court House, Youngstown, Ohio;
Washington Co. Court House, Washington, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         ESTABLISHED 1780.

[Illustration]

Set Complete in Terry, $58. Set Complete in Plush, $64. Parlor,
Lodge and Church Furniture. No charge for packing. Send for
Illustrated Catalogue.

                        SHAW, APPLIN & CO.,
                                       27 Sudbury St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                           _IF YOU WANT_

“The most popular and satisfactory Corset as regards Health,
Comfort and Elegance of Form,” be _sure_ and get

                      _MADAME FOY’S_ IMPROVED

                              CORSET

                         SKIRT SUPPORTER.

It is particularly adapted to the present style of dress. For sale
by all leading dealers. Price by mail $1.30.

Manufactured only by

  FOY, HARMON & CO.,
  New Haven Conn


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

  For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
  For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
  And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
  And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

  Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
  The half risen sun every package should bear;
  For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
  And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.


OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.--Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.--Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.--The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.--To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                           HENRY STOKES,
                                                    President.

  J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

                               SMITH
                             AMERICAN
                              ORGANS
                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            CARPENTER,

“LIBRARY ORGAN.” Containing the Celebrated Carpenter Organ Action.
Something Entirely New! The Æsthetic Taste Gratified! This is only
one of one hundred different styles of organs.

[Illustration]


This effective and beautiful design in the modern Queen Anne Style
is intended to meet the demands of those desiring an instrument of
special elegance, and in harmony with the fittings and furnishings
of the Study or Library Room, combining as it does, in a
substantial and tasteful manner, the Organ, the Library cases, and
the cabinet for bric-a-brac and articles of virtu.

It is well adapted to find favor in homes of culture and
refinement, and will be championed by the music lover and
connoisseur.

The composition is one of well balanced proportions, chaste
subordination of ornamentation, and of artistic arrangement in
constructive details, imparting to the design a rich simplicity and
substantial worth.

[Illustration: CARPENTER]

This beautiful organ contains the Celebrated Carpenter Organ
Action. The action is to an Organ what the works are to a watch.
The merits of the Carpenter Organ were fully proved on page 158 of
the _Youth’s Companion_ of April 20, to which special attention is
directed.

A beautiful 100-page Catalogue, the finest of its kind ever
published, is now ready and will be sent free to all applying for
it.

Nearly all reliable dealers sell the Carpenter Organs, but if any
do not have them to show you, write to us for a Catalogue and
information where you can see them. DO NOT BUY ANY ORGAN UNTIL YOU
HAVE EXAMINED “THE CARPENTER.” In writing for a Catalogue always
state that you saw this advertisement in the AMERICAN MISSIONARY
MAGAZINE.


   Address or call on E. P. CARPENTER, Worcester, Mass., U.S.A.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

Estey Organ

J. Estey & Co Brattleboro Vt.

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.

                             WEBSTER’S
                            UNABRIDGED.

[Illustration]

See =Webster’s Unabridged=, page 1164, giving the name of each
sail--showing the value of

Defining by Illustrations.

The pictures in Webster under the =12= words =Beef=, =Boiler=,
=Castle=, =Column=, =Eye=, =Horse=, =Moldings=, =Phrenology=,
=Ravelin=, =Ships=, (pages 1164 and 1219) =Steam engine=,
=Timbers=, define 343 words and terms far better than they could be
defined in words.

  GET    =Webster=--it has =118,000 words=,
         =3000 Engravings=, and a New
         =Biographical Dictionary=.

  THE    Standard in Gov’t Printing Office,
         =32,000= copies in Public Schools,
         sale =20 to 1= of any other series.
  BEST   aid to make a =Family= intelligent.
         =Best help for SCHOLARS=,
         =TEACHERS= and =SCHOOLS=.

        =G. & C. MERRIAM & CO.=, Pub’rs, Springfield, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of Fencing.
Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_--In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia,
1; North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky,
7; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana,
18; Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.--_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.--8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.--11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.--Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.--In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa--a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.
Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the multiplicity of
authors.

Page number for Miss Sarah A. G. Stephen's Obituary corrected
in the Contents.

“Steet” changed to “Street” on the inside front cover. (56 Reade
Street)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 6, JUNE, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.