Produced by Ian Crann, Joshua Hutchinson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









                             APRIL, 1887.


                       The American Missionary


                              VOL. XLI.
                                NO. 4.




                               CONTENTS


  EDITORIAL.

    FINANCIAL,                                                   97
    CONSECRATION OF WEALTH,                                      98
    NEW PASTOR PARK ST. CHURCH,                                  99
    DECISION OF SUPREME COURT REGARDING
      THE CHINESE,                                              100
    CHINESE INDEMNITY BILL,                                     101
    TREATMENT OF THE INDIANS,                                   102
    THE COLOR QUESTION AGAIN,                                   103
    PARAGRAPHS,                                                 104
    HENRY WARD BEECHER,                                         105
    THE NEGRO ON THE NEGRO,                                     106
    RELIGIOUS DOGGEREL,                                         109


  THE SOUTH.

    NOTES IN THE SADDLE. Supt. C. J. Ryder,                     111
    REVIVAL AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY,                              113
    VISIT TO MT. HERMON,                                        114
    DEDICATION OF LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH,                      115
    EVIDENCES OF PROGRESS,                                      116


  THE INDIANS.

    OUR DEACON,                                                 117


  THE CHINESE.

    FROM REV. A. F. NEWTON,                                     118


  BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

    HOW TO ORGANIZE AND CONDUCT A LADIES’ MISSIONARY
      SOCIETY––SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE COLORED PEOPLE,       120


  FOR THE CHILDREN.

    THE WAY TO DO IT,                                           122


    RECEIPTS,                                                   123

                   *       *       *       *       *


                               NEW YORK:

           PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                         Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                   Price, 50 Cents a Year, In Advance.

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N. Y., as second-class matter.

                   *       *       *       *       *




                    American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *

             PRESIDENT, Hon. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


  _Vice-Presidents._

    Rev. A. J. F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
    Rev. F. A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
    Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. D. O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
    Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, Mo.


  _Corresponding Secretary._

    REV. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  _Associate Corresponding Secretaries._

    Rev. JAMES POWELL, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._
    Rev. A. F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  _Treasurer._

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  _Auditors._

    PETER MCCARTEE.
    CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


  _Executive Committee._

    JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
    A. P. FOSTER, Secretary.


    _For Three Years._

      S. B. HALLIDAY.
      SAMUEL HOLMES.
      SAMUEL S. MARPLES.
      CHARLES L. MEAD.
      ELBERT B. MONROE.


    _For Two Years._

      J. E. RANKIN.
      WM. H. WARD.
      J. W. COOPER.
      JOHN H. WASHBURN.
      EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.


    _For One Year._

      LYMAN ABBOTT.
      A. S. BARNES.
      J. R. DANFORTH.
      CLINTON B. FISK.
      A. P. FOSTER.


  _District Secretaries._

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, D.D., _21 Cong’l House, Boston_.
    Rev. J. E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington Street, Chicago_.


  _Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

    Rev. CHARLES W. SHELTON.


  _Field Superintendent._

    Rev. C. J. RYDER, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._


  _Bureau of Woman’s Work._

    _Secretary_, Miss D. E. EMERSON, _56 Reade Street, N. Y._

                   *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; those relating to the collecting fields, to
Rev. James Powell, D.D., or to the District Secretaries; letters for
“THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,” to the Editor, at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters or post office orders may be sent
to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment of
thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of –––– dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in –––– days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the ‘American
Missionary Association,’ of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

                   *       *       *       *       *




                                  THE
                           AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                   *       *       *       *       *

      VOL. XLI.               APRIL, 1887.                  No. 4.

                   *       *       *       *       *


                    American Missionary Association.

                   *       *       *       *       *


OUR RECEIPTS FALLING BEHIND.

It is with great regret that we call the attention of our readers to
our diminishing receipts. We have been cherishing the hope that we
would be spared this necessity. But the receipts in February are so
much below the receipts of the corresponding month of the previous
year, that unless the loss is quickly retrieved we shall be embarrassed
all the rest of the year. In February, a year ago, we received
$21,897.74. Last February we received only $12,389.79. This is a loss
of $9,507.95. Until February we were well ahead of last year. But the
drop is so great that our total receipts up to the first of March are
$3,438.16 less than they were at the same time the preceding year. In
church collections and individual donations, we are behind $5,389.31!
We earnestly ask the attention of all the friends of the American
Missionary Association to these facts. What is the reason for so heavy
a falling off? Are we failing to keep the necessities of our work
before the churches? In our thought that the Association was getting
nicely out of the woods, have we relaxed our efforts and allowed
other things to slip in and crowd the Association out? Something has
happened. That during the month of February––which ought to be one of
the best months in the year––only a little over $12,000 should find its
way into our treasury, is occasion for anxiety. We have had our bills
to pay and we have borrowed the money and _paid_ them. In so doing
we have incurred a debt. We could not avoid it without leaving our
missionaries unpaid. We must speedily be reimbursed, or else back again
into the hated bondage and hindrance of financial embarrassment we
inevitably fall. We appeal to our friends to spare us this humiliation
and vexation. We ask this favor, namely: Will pastors and individual
friends please take this question of our outlook upon their minds and
hearts and make an earnest effort to increase contributions to our work
from this time forward? Will they try, during this month and the months
intervening before summer vacation, to secure so much to our treasury
that during the summer months we shall be spared the agony of special
appeals and special efforts? “A prudent man foreseeth the evil and
hideth himself.” We are urged to be prudent now by the very unpleasant
memories of what we have been obliged to do every summer, for several
years past. Will you join us in foreseeing the evil and help us to
avoid it?

       *       *       *       *       *

We are from time to time reminded that the old abolition friends of
the A. M. A. are rapidly passing away. They will soon all be gone.
There was something in their friendship that challenges our admiration.
They gave the Association such a hearty support that there could be no
question but that prayer and gifts went together. So also they have in
many instances shown the wisdom of giving generously during life. The
recent death of Mr. Lewis S. Swezey, of Rockford, Ill., gives emphasis
to these thoughts. He helped organize the Liberty Party, and was one of
a few who first voted in the town of Rockford for Birney for President.
Though his whole estate did not amount to more than $10,000, he gave
to the Association a one thousand dollar bond in 1885, and another
amounting to seven hundred and fourteen dollars in 1886. At his death
he left the Association a life policy of $2,000, and $500 in his will.
He made the A. M. A. his residuary legatee, from which our treasury
will probably realize about $5,000. His sympathy for the colored people
may be seen in the fact that one of the last acts of his life was to
give a poor old colored woman in Rockford a hundred dollars to repair
her house. When dying he said to his wife, “This seems like crossing
the river,” and in response to the question, “How does it look on
the other side?” replied, “Very bright, very bright.” And no wonder.
He had laid up his treasures where neither moth nor rust corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal. Money given to the
Lord during life is followed with no regrets at the dying hour. Were
Christians thoroughly possessed of the conviction that such work as
the A. M. A. is doing must be prosecuted and sustained as a religious
duty, we believe their offerings would be far more generous than they
are. A sense of duty as expressed in their gifts would be accompanied
by a sense of delight. Our prayer is that the surviving old abolition
friends may be long spared us, and that the places of those who have
fallen may be speedily filled with worthy successors.

       *       *       *       *       *

“It is with pleasure I assist you. I have made several of our young
ladies life members during the past few years, to get them interested
in the A. M. A. Anything I can do to help on the good work, be sure and
call on me for, and I will do all I can for you.”

“I think the placing of the work of the Association before individual
church members is productive of good results, as I find that only those
well informed of the Society’s needs contribute regularly and liberally
to its support.”

“We are to make a careful canvass of our congregation, with a view to
increasing our missionary offerings, and securing a larger number of
regular readers for our missionary magazine. Can you send us ten or
a dozen copies of THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY to be used by our district
visitors?”

“My gifts to the A. M. A. have been necessarily reduced to meet my
change in circumstances. I gave five dollars at our last collection,
which was the price of a cushion in my pew. I believe that under the
circumstances the hard side of a board will be softer than the soft
side of a cushion. There is no special merit in it, but I feel that it
is an encouragement to the workers to know that many in the churches
are willing to give up little comforts for the sake of them and the
cause.”

                                                EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new pastor of the Park Street Church, Boston, Rev. David Gregg, in
his first sermon after installation, discussed the duties of the Pulpit
and the Pews. One who heard it said at the close, “Well, that was a
sermon that would please the secretaries of our benevolent societies as
well as the rest of us.” Depend on it, that any sermon of which such
testimony can be borne has two things characteristic of it: One is, it
must be a gospel sermon, and another is, it must be interesting. It has
been our privilege to read the sermon as reported in the Boston daily
papers. It fills the bill. It is full of the gospel, and a thrill of
interest runs all the way through it. Speaking for the Secretaries of
the A. M. A., we can say they are pleased, intensely so. Here are two
brief extracts that sufficiently justify their pleasure: “Is it the
duty of Park Street pulpit to accept the service and co-operation of
the Park Street pews? The pulpit here and now solemnly performs its
duty, and declares its acceptance of co-operation and service. I have
come among you for this very purpose. I come to beseech you to throw
yourself for all you are worth into the work of the church, I come to
command you in the name of the Lord that you love, not for yourselves.
I greet your locked-up wealth, and ask it to come forth from the vaults
of the bank to meet me and to join me in the work of Christ. I promise
you to be the most liberal man in the world in dealing out your money
from your pocket-books, and in accepting and in giving away your time.
I am willing that every righteous and needy cause under the broad
heavens shall call upon you for aid. I come among you to tell you that
you have the same obligations before God to consecrate yourselves and
all you have to the gospel that Jesus Christ had when he lived his
sublime and devoted life. I put a gospel mortgage this day upon the
pastor and people of this church, and upon all that we have, by way of
brain and heart power, and gold and trade, and time and business, and
natural endowment and acquired attainment. Park Street pews, you can
offer no good thing to the pulpit of this church, in order that you may
glorify Christ and build up his cause here, that the pulpit will not
take and publicly credit. This pulpit welcomes to the service of Christ
every agency filled with the spirit of Christ.” * * * * * * *

“If we are to realize the possibilities open to us as pastor and
people, we must keep a constant eye upon the land and age in which we
live. Our age and our country speak to us to-day. Because our lot has
been cast in them, they have a claim upon us, and their voice should be
heard. Our age is an age telling of ages, and it commands us to meet
the duties of the hour. No relations in life ought to be more helpful
for this than our church relations. There is no place for mediæval
fossils outside of a museum. The demand of the hour is for living
men and living women. Our age is a pivotal age, a cardinal age, a
burning age, a crucial age. Let us not forget that we are living under
the westering sun of the 19th century, and that this lays us under
obligations to be 19th century Christians.

“While we forget not the age, we must not forget the land in which we
live, and which expects an outcome of good from our church relations.
America is the land where the battles of the future are destined to
be fought. In push of discovery and of civilization there is no land
beyond this. The fields of America are the outer rim of the earth, and
here the nations of the world, crowded out of the old lands, meet, and
here all the great problems and questions of ages must be debated and
settled. Our land cries for help, and we can help it. We can give it
the gospel of Jesus Christ and that is what it needs above all things.
The gospel alone carries in it the principles which can solve with
safety and finality the social and political questions which are coming
to America to stay.”

       *       *       *       *       *

BY TREATY STIPULATIONS the Chinese in this country are guaranteed the
same rights and privileges as are accorded the most favored nations.
One Thomas Baldwin was arrested by a United States Marshal for driving
out with force and violence a number of Chinese residents from the town
of Nicolaus, California. The circuit court refused to discharge him
upon a writ of habeas corpus. An appeal was taken to the United States
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court looked the matter through and found
that while the United States Government has the _power_ to provide
for the punishment of those who deprive the Chinese of their treaty
rights, there is no statute law by which it can exercise its power!
The decision of the circuit court was therefore reversed. Justices
Field and Harlan dissented. In a separate opinion, Justice Field held
that if the Chinese could not be protected in their treaty rights,
neither could the subjects or citizens of any other nation. This is a
beautiful attitude for the great United States to be placed in before
the eyes of the world. Making treaties when it has not power to compel
its own citizens to observe them! What a farce. Is it to be supposed
that if this were understood nations would go to the trouble of making
treaties with us? Were the questions at issue about the Chinese raised
in regard to subjects of Great Britain or Germany or any of the first
or even second-class powers of Europe, is it to be supposed that any
such a decision would have been formulated and promulgated by our
Supreme Court? We do not question the ability nor the integrity of our
justices. The probability is that in the _strict_ construction of the
law they are right. But even judges, when put to it, can sometimes find
such latitude in the field of interpretation as to warrant them in
setting aside mere technicalities rather than to allow justice to be
defeated.

That such eminent jurists as Field and Harlan found interpretations
that justified them in dissenting; that the circuit court in California
found reasons for refusing to release Baldwin from custody, would
certainly indicate that the decision is fairly challengeable. It is
a national humiliation. It ought to be so felt by the people. It
would be so felt if regard for right and justice were supreme in the
national heart and conscience. It is to be hoped that this matter
will be brought by the proper authority, as soon as practicable, to
the attention of Congress, and that the United States Government will
speedily be clothed with statutory power to enforce its own treaties.
If this decision shall have the effect of getting us out of the painful
predicament that it reveals our Government to be in, we may reluctantly
accept it as a means of grace. Meanwhile even China is on record as
being far more Christian in her treatment of our people than Christian
America is in its treatment of hers.

       *       *       *       *       *

MONEY COMPENSATION is a very poor return as an offset to outrage.
Congress passed the bill appropriating $147,750 to indemnify the
Chinese sufferers from the Rock Springs riots. Hon. Wm. Walter Phelps,
representative from New Jersey, spoke words upon its passage for which
every Christian in the country must feel grateful. Said he:

“I want to pay this amount because the Chinese Government asked for
that sum. The sum represents only the property destroyed. The Chinese
Government knows that our Government never likes to pay a claim in
full, so it wisely presents its bill only for the property destroyed,
and says nothing of 28 men murdered––nothing of 15 men wounded––nothing
of 700 Chinese hunted for ten days with club and rifle like rabbits,
until they were dispersed into the wilderness and their village was
made an ash heap.

“In the time when Great Britain was at war with China, an American
citizen named Edwards was arrested by mistake as an Englishman,
imprisoned from sunrise to sunset, and then released. The Chinese
Government paid $31,600 for the injury done to his person and to the
dignity of the United States. There were 700 Chinese who suffered
at Rock Springs––all of them more than this man. We hesitate to pay
them $200 each. Recall the familiar story of heathen generosity––how
China once gave us $700,000 and said: ‘Take it and pay the claims of
your citizens.’ We took it; we paid the claims with twelve per cent.
interest, and there was enough left to return $200,000 to the Chinese
Government.

“If this seems ancient history, long after the Rock Springs massacre
there was a riot in Ching King. The rabble destroyed property
belonging to the American Methodist Missionary Society. The Chinese
Government has already paid $25,000 for these losses; and also, since
our discussion on this bill, a riot, under similar circumstances, at
Shanghai, destroyed other missionary property. The Chinese Government
has paid this bill too, $5,000.

“I have no heart to speak of the obligations founded in the
international law. I don’t want even to refer to the treaty, where we
pledged ourselves to exert all our powers to devise measures for the
protection of Chinese subjects in this country. It is not on the ground
of legal, but of the moral obligations that I prefer to rest this
claim.”

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR TREATMENT of the Indians is very much like the way a kindly parent
allows his judgment to be at the mercy of the pranks of his mischievous
boy. The boy takes a stick, and chasing a dog, pokes it and pounds it
till the maddened brute turns upon his tormentor and bites him. This
enrages the father, who forthwith takes his gun and shoots the dog.
In strict justice he ought to have taken the stick and applied it to
the back of the boy. The good man had no ill will whatever toward the
dog, nor would he ever have thought of shooting it had the poor brute
been let alone and not tantalized into biting the boy. But the dog
having been enraged so as to become dangerous, there was nothing left
but to destroy it. White men––some of them not even citizens of the
United States––in violation of law enter the Indian reservation, steal
the Indians’ ponies, drive off their cattle, shoot down a few of the
Indians for resisting them, or perhaps for the mere fun of the thing.
The Indians, maddened by the wrongs inflicted upon them, go on the
war-path. The savage stirred with anger strikes back, and the innocent
with the guilty––if indeed the guilty do not go scot free––are made to
suffer. Had the Indian been let alone he would have remained peaceful
and quiet and friendly. But by desperadoes he has been maddened to go
on the war-path in vengeance, to retaliate for wrongs he has suffered.
Then follow the blood-curdling stories of ambuscade and massacre.
Popular indignation is roused. Extermination of the Indian is demanded.
There is nothing left now for Uncle Sam to do but to send his army and
put the Indian down. A pity that the chastisement cannot be inflicted
on those whose wickedness started the mischief.

BISHOP WHIPPLE bears the following testimony to the good effect of
making the Indians feel the responsibility of individual distinctive
effort for themselves by vesting them with individual rights of
property and by compelling them to live by their own labor:

“Twenty years ago we began with a small number of Indians at White
Earth Reservation. They were wild folk, used only to savage life. Now
there are 1,800 people living like civilized beings. They have houses
built by themselves. They are self-supporting. It is an orderly,
law-abiding, peaceful community. In religion they are about equally
divided between the Episcopalian and Catholic churches. The laws are
administered by an Indian police. This year they raised 40,000 bushels
of wheat and 30,000 bushels of oats. They have a herd of 1,200 or
1,500 cattle, several hundred horses, swine, sheep and fowls. They
are proud of their homes and of living in them like white people.
They are as neat and orderly as old-fashioned Dutch housekeepers.
They are excellent cooks, too; they never need to be shown twice how
to cook anything. Their sewing is the most beautiful I ever saw; it
is impossible to see the stitches. They have made all the carpets and
bedding I have in my house. The contrast, therefore, between these
White Earth people and the scattered bands of Chippewas shows plainly
what can be accomplished with them by adopting right methods. The
latter are utterly degraded.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the February MISSIONARY we commented on the causes which had
led the Executive Committee of the Freedmen’s Aid Society of the
Methodist Episcopal Church to direct the Trustees of the Chattanooga
University to ask Professor Caulkins for his resignation. This the
Trustees refused to do, and, in view of a current expectation that
colored students would again seek admission, they have passed a series
of “whereases” affirming that the University was designed for white
pupils, and not intended to be a mixed school; that well-equipped
schools for colored pupils were easily accessible; that to admit
colored students would injure the school, defeat the object for which
it was established, alienate the races and prove especially detrimental
to the interests of the colored people; that the General Conference had
declared the question of mixed schools to be one of expediency “to be
left to the choice and administration of those on the ground, and more
immediately concerned,” and then wound up with a resolution declaring
that they deemed it inexpedient to admit colored students to the
University, and instructed the Faculty to administer accordingly.

Such action on the part of the trustees could not be permitted to pass
unnoticed. The Executive Committee of the Freedmen’s Aid Society called
a meeting of the Board of Managers, and submitted for consideration
the above-noted “_whereases_” and “_resolution_.” The whole subject
received full consideration. We have not space to publish the report in
full, but it is all summed up in the last resolution, as follows:

“_Resolved_, That if the Chattanooga University fail to secure the
resignation of Prof. Wilford Caulkins, to take effect at a date not
later than the close of the present school term, and to so modify
its action as not to exclude from instruction in that institution
students on account of race or color; _i. e._, if the said university
fail in either of these particulars, we hereby instruct our Executive
Committee to secure, by agreement, if possible, with the Trustees of
said University, the immediate termination of the contract between the
Chattanooga University and the Freedmen’s Aid Society; and, in case a
termination of said contract be not secured by mutual agreement, in
either of the contingencies named above, to notify the Trustees of
the Chattanooga University, within sixty days from this 24th day of
February, 1887, of the termination of the contract as provided in the
same.”

This brings matters to an issue. We congratulate the Board of Managers
of the Freedmen’s Aid Society upon the stand taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

WRITES a teacher in Georgia: “With the close of 1886 many left our
school, some to teach in the public schools and others to engage in any
work that they could find. Over thirty schools have been supplied with
acceptable teachers from our schools.” We have here an illustration of
what is taking place more or less in connection with all our schools.
We are supplying teachers for the public schools of the South. Reports
that tell only of what our missionaries are doing among those whom
they personally reach, fall far short of that larger work, which,
through their scholars, they are doing all over the South. Think of the
difference between a school taught by a Christian teacher and one under
the care of a godless teacher. The A. M. A. is sending out Christian
teachers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Charleston _News and Courier_ is authority for the statement that
one thousand and fifty-seven colored people of that city have deposits
in the local savings banks amounting to $124,936. The person who has
the largest deposit, $6,747, to his credit, is a pure-blooded African,
but a born financier. He has recently bought a valuable plantation
for $10,000, and has paid $7,000 of the purchase-money. The _News and
Courier_ adds: “There are thousands of active and thrifty colored men
in the State who have bought land since the war, and who are steadily
collecting about them the comforts and many of the luxuries of life.
Comparatively few of the colored people entertain decided notions
of economy or have any faith in Government savings banks, but the
wealth they have hidden away in old stockings and the money they are
investing from year to year in lands and houses, if it could be rightly
estimated, would prove a pleasing revelation.”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE END OF A DISTINGUISHED LIFE.

The death of Rev. Henry Ward Beecher has evoked a widespread expression
of interest. His funeral was more like that of some distinguished
statesman, over whose bier all political and religious differences are
forgotten and only the good connected with his life remembered. It was
certainly a most remarkable demonstration.

And why all this? Because he had worked himself into the popular
thought as the faithful champion of reforms and measures that touched
the popular heart. His pulpit power, as an orator, made Brooklyn
famous the world over. His splendid victory in turning the tide of
British opinion on the side of the Union as against secession by his
marvelous speeches in England, challenged and won the admiration of
his countrymen who were loyal to the integrity of the republic. But
what more than anything else created an affection that his death
has resurrected, and that will make his name famous so long as its
memory remains, was his fearless and uncompromising Abolitionism.
Plymouth pulpit was a battery whose shot and shell made continuous
breaches in the defenses of slavery during the days preceding the
great conflict, and when the conflict came, it was heard as a voice
in trumpet tones calling the people to battle and steadying them in
courage and determination. The preacher saw with prophetic eye not only
the preservation of the Union as the issue, but the emancipation and
enfranchisement of the slaves. Mr. Beecher was, therefore, always the
friend of the American Missionary Association. For eleven years he was
one of its vice-presidents. At Lawrence, Mass., in 1870, he preached
its annual sermon. Its representatives have always been welcome to his
pulpit, and its work has always been sustained by the contributions
of his people. It was fitting that the same man who had been the
undertaker for John Brown and Owen Lovejoy should perform the same
service, as he did, for Mr. Beecher. It was fitting that a Virginia
Confederate general and former slave-holder, and a Massachusetts
colored commander of the William Lloyd Garrison Post of the Grand
Army of the Republic, should march arm in arm, as they did, at the
head of the procession when the body was carried to Plymouth Church
under escort of the 13th N. Y. Regiment, of which Mr. Beecher was the
chaplain. It was fitting that the last letter Mr. Beecher wrote, and
which he left unfinished, should be, as it is, about a colored man and
the word of God.

And it is fitting that THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY should join, as it does,
with the tens of thousands who testify to the wonderful power, the
marvelous achievements, the great value of the varied ministrations of
this justly distinguished and remarkable man, and who thank God that
the transcendent wealth of his great mind, and tender, sympathetic
heart was consecrated to the service of the loving Father, who bestowed
it, in behalf of liberty, justice, equity and right.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEGRO ON THE NEGRO.

The New York _Independent_, always on the alert for information
concerning the colored people, and fearless in its championship of
those people’s rights, has published under the above caption seven most
interesting articles.

A circular was sent to two hundred representative intelligent colored
men and women in the several Southern States, “to ascertain the
prevailing opinions and feelings of the colored people themselves about
the relation of the races and the outlook of the colored race.” The
seventh article, which is a summary of the answers received, we take
great pleasure in publishing:

“_Material Prosperity and Ambition of the Negro._––There is a
practically unanimous opinion (the dissenting opinions coming from
a few communities which have abnormal hindrances) that the colored
people are becoming home owners with great rapidity. The proportion
of families who own their own homes is variously estimated, and
no estimate is trustworthy for statistical uses. But all the
correspondents report an ambition to accumulate property, and the
accumulation of more and more every year. The great mass of the
blacks are not real estate owners. The great mass of black families
are yet tenants; but the progress making in the acquisition of land
seems to be satisfactory. In most Southern communities, land is yet
very cheap, and the mere ownership of land does not argue material
prosperity to any great extent; but the ownership of homes does argue a
social advancement that is exceedingly significant. There is reported
from some communities a lingering opposition by the whites to the
disposition of land to Negroes. But this has had the natural effect
to make the Negroes the more ambitious to become land-owners. In most
communities this opposition seems to have disappeared, or at least to
have taken the modified shape of opposition to the Negroes’ acquisition
of the most desirable land for residences. The race is indisputably
laying the foundation for all healthful progress.

_The System of Wages, Credit, etc._ There is very general complaint
of the credit system which prevails in most Southern communities. The
most grievous shape this takes is the payment of wages in supplies,
whereby an oppressive interest is exacted, and by the nature of the
system generally made necessary. By such a system the thrifty are
taxed to make up for the thriftlessness of the rest. It is at this
point, in fact, that the industrial servitude which yet lingers as a
relic of slavery obtrudes itself most oppressively. The abolition of
this system is necessary for the material advancement of the South––of
both races alike; necessary for the elevation of the laborer and for
the promotion of his efficiency; necessary as a corollary to the
Emancipation Proclamation; and necessary as a means of freeing the
whole system of Southern labor (the employer as well as the employee)
from inefficiency. No conceivable amount of extraneous capital invested
in the South would so add to material prosperity as the abolition of
the credit and supply system. The labor problem there is to effect this
emancipation. As for wages, they are low, but their lowness is not
itself a cause of distress. It is the system which keeps them low and
keeps labor inefficient and taxes thrift and skill, and puts a premium
on thriftlessness and untrustworthiness, that does the damage. The gist
of the whole problem is here.

_The Races and the Laws._––The statutes of the Southern States are
not a matter of complaint, except the bastardy and marriage laws; but
there is a very general opinion that in the execution of the law,
race prejudice appears. One correspondent lays great stress on a fact
which several others mention, that many ignorant blacks often fancy
that they are the victims of injustice when they are not. The opinion
of the colored practitioners of law is practically unanimous that a
Negro tried for certain crimes is more likely to be convicted than a
white man for the same crimes, and likely to pay a heavier penalty
where the penalty is discretionary with the court or jury. The marriage
and bastardy laws of several Southern States at least concentrate the
pressure to crime at the weakest social point, and do not give the
Negro woman a fair chance, nor the same protection or reparation that
the white woman has.

_Schools and Churches._––In the answers to the inquiry whether the
Negroes themselves prefer separate or mixed schools and churches, a
peculiar state of feeling was made plain in this regard––that “union”
or “mixed” schools were opposed by the colored teachers because the
white teachers would then have a monopoly of the business of teaching.
This implies a belief that the Southern whites would teach Negro
schools if it were made profitable. The dominant sentiment of the
colored people is decidedly in favor of the present system of separate
schools and churches; but they prefer them because mixed schools
and churches would emphasize and provoke the race prejudice. As an
independent question, apart from the difficulty of readjusting a plan
now almost universally adopted, they would prefer mixed schools and
union churches. The most intelligent of these correspondents, even
as things are, favor mixed congregations and schools as a means of
eradicating race prejudice.

It is worthy of notice that several correspondents declare that the
separation of the congregations of the same creed on the color line
has had much to do toward causing the blacks to doubt the sincerity of
the religion of those who, though they teach that their religion is
universal in its application, allow it to yield to race feeling. This
is a significant confession for colored men to make; and it is worthy
of the attention of the Southern churches.

“_Civil Rights._”––There is a unanimous protest in these letters
against the discrimination made between the races on public
thoroughfares, and at places of amusement. The desire of the colored
people for the obliteration of the color-line in these places seems to
be universal and is strong.

_The Most Pressing Need._––In answer to the inquiry, “What is the
greatest hindrance, and the most pressing need of the race?” the
Negro’s appreciation of instruction, and his ambition to be educated,
were forcibly expressed. “Education is the greatest need,” is the
answer in substance of every correspondent. In the replies it was made
plain that the race is prepared for an important prohibition movement.
Drink is thought to be the greatest hindrance by a large number of the
colored lawyers and teachers, as well as preachers. This points to a
probably early agitation of prohibition over a wide Southern area.
The colored man himself appreciates, too, the necessity of practical
instruction, instruction in the trades.

_Morality and the Mixture of Races._––A general moral improvement is
what the Negro himself believes his race is making; and this belief is
in itself strong evidence that this judgment is sound. But the dominant
opinion is that the black race is already perceptibly disappearing.
Colored men are everywhere reported to prefer light-colored women.
There is a race pride on the Negro’s side as well as on the white man’s
against intermarriage. But the Negro has, nevertheless, reached the
conclusion, if these letters are representative of the race’s opinion,
as they are believed to be, that the pure African will become rare in a
very few generations, and that he is doomed to extinction.

It remains to be said that the letters which have been received in
answer to these inquiries show not a little mature thought. They show,
too, a profound interest in all phases of the subject. The Negro is at
least seriously thinking over the problems that his presence presents.
Many of these correspondents have expressed great interest in this
investigation, and have put themselves to no little trouble to make
it full and fair. The sincerity and frankness of these letters have
spoken for themselves. A deep moral purpose pervades most of them that
is impressive. They emphasize the conviction that the race is making an
heroic struggle, according to its opportunities for advancement. That
the Negro is true to his race, moreover, is a fact of some importance.
The educated are working to educate the rest.

It is noteworthy, moreover, that out of all the answers received only
two displayed bitterness of race feeling. The Negro’s temper, as shown
in this correspondence, is the temper of a patient, charitable worker
for a great purpose. And, above all, the Negro has faith in the Negro.
It has not occurred to a single correspondent to express doubt of the
continued advancement of the whole race.”

                                                    N. Y. INDEPENDENT.

       *       *       *       *       *


RELIGIOUS DOGGEREL.

_The Sweet Songster_ is the name of a little hymn book published in
Catlettsburg, Ky. It contains verses composed, compiled, altered or
amended, according to the sweet pleasure of one Edward W. Billups, D.D.
There are some old familiar hymns scattered through the book, but often
sadly marred by omission, alteration or addition. Some of the original
effusions are ludicrous in the extreme. The poet shows his estimate of
education as he describes the Christians of old:

    Small learning they had, and wanted no more;
    Not many could read, but all could adore.
    No help from the college or school they received,
    Content with his knowledge in whom they believed.

Calvinism has to take it hot and heavy. The sweet singer lets sweetness
take a vacation, while he pours forth his wrath in song:

    There is a reprobated plan,
      Say how did it arise?
    By the predestinated clan
      Of horrid cruelties.
    The plan is this––they hold a few
      Who are ordained for heaven,
    They hold the rest a cursed crew
      That cannot be forgiven.

    *       *       *       *       *

    If all things were fore-ordained,
      Or finally decreed,
    I would like to know why mortal man
      Is responsible for his deeds?
    If Calvinism thus be true,
      And all things fore-decreed,
    The Lord has been very kind
      Unto the devil indeed.

     *       *       *       *       *

    But we do say God’s Holy Word
      Doth no such doctrine teach,
    For if it do, then why do you
      Attempt His word to preach?
    For if God has fore-ordained
      All things to be just so,
    Then we do say, all cease to pray,
      And to a-fishing go;
    But, my friends, all on you I call
      To mind this doctrine well,
    It has its birth, not on this earth,
      But in the pit of hell.

A vision of the judgment day swept the poet’s high-strung sensibilities
and the fires of Parnassus caused him to warble:

    I dreamed I was out to the east––cast mine eye––
    The atmosphere calm, and serene was the sky,
    So calm, still and awful––tremendous the sight––
    I thought the last judgment was drawing to light.

    The dead all arose immediately then,
    And covered the earth with both women and men
    All standing together––’tis hard to indite
    The aspect most shocking––surprising the sight.

    A pavement of blue from the cloud did go forth,
    Extensively reaching from South to the North,
    On which holy angels stood almost complete,
    And glorified spirits in harmony sweet.

    The next I heard Jesus say come you up here,
    When all the blessed nations up gently did steer,
    And quitting the globe with sweet pleasure did sing
    A song that had never before tuned a string.

    Then in the sweet transport my feet left the ground,
    Without any motion of body or sound;
    My joys were unspeakably full of delight,
    So loud was the music it wakened me quite.

We were pleased in the perusal of these hymns to notice that the
poet’s theology took in apparently all men in its broad sweep. We said
here is a man who does not recognize the color line in his thought
of God’s redeeming love. It takes poetry to expand the soul above
prejudice and caste––when lo, we stumbled across the following:

    Roll forward, dear Saviour, roll forward the day
    When all shall submit and rejoice in thy sway,
    When _white_ men and Indians, united in praise,
    One vast hallelujah triumphant shall raise.

We were mistaken. The colored brother has no recognition. White men and
Indians are to have a monopoly in the vast hallelujah! How the wings
of our poet drooped as he essayed this loftiest of flights. We are
thankful, however, that he did let the Indian come in for a part in the
hallelujah. The war-whoop would not at all be out of harmony in his
_kind_ of a hallelujah chorus! That this “sweet singer in Israel” D.D.
should make some of his songs take on the form of Scripture exposition
is what we might expect, as witness:

    There was a man in ancient times,
      The Scriptures doth inform us,
    Whose pomp and grandeur and whose crimes
      Were great and very numerous.
    The man fared sumptuously each day
      In purple and fine linen;
    He ate and drank, but seemed to pray––
      Spent all his time in sinning.

    Poor Lazarus lying at his gate,
      To help himself unable,
    Did for the fragments humbly wait
      That fell from his rich table,
    But not one mite would he bestow,
      Would the rich worldling give him;
    The dogs took pity––licked his sores––
      More ready to relieve him.

    At length death came, the poor man died,
      By angel hands attended;
    Away to Abra’ms bosom hied,
      Where his sorrows all are ended.
    The rich man died––was buried, too––
      But, O! his dreadful station;
    With heaven and Lazarus in view,
      He landed in damnation.

The above are samples of versification that we have selected from this
_Sweet Songster_, that our readers may see for themselves the kind of
Christian instruction some _white_ people in certain portions of our
country receive. These selections are certainly ludicrous, yet they
have also a serious aspect––they point to duty. It would be useless to
denounce such incompetent leadership as is here revealed. It would be
folly to argue either with the leaders or the people whom they lead. We
must plant schools and educate the children. Preach the Gospel in its
simplicity, and let the people hear the truth. The light will destroy
the darkness. It will reveal the deformity and ugliness of error. It
will rebuke the assumptions of ignorance. It will lead the people in
their soul-hunger to turn away from husks and to demand that in song
and sermon their poets and preachers shall give them the bread of life
or else keep silent. There is a wide field here to be cultivated. It
lies open before us. We have entered it. Rich has been our harvesting
so far as we have gone. Earnest and numerous are the invitations that
come to us for more workers and enlarged efforts. These invitations are
an appeal to the churches more liberally to supply us with means, that
we may be able to respond and go in to possess the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SECOND VOLUME of Ben. Perley Poore’s Reminiscences, published by
Hubbard Bros., Philadelphia, is out. The Reminiscences are brought down
to the Cleveland administration. The colloquial style in Mr. Poore’s
writing makes the volume like its predecessor, interesting reading.
With the men of prominence at Washington, Ben. Perley Poore has been
brought in contact, and concerning them all he has something to say. A
carefully prepared index is contained in the second volume, which adds
to the value of the work for reference.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.


       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES IN THE SADDLE.

BY FIELD SUPERINTENDENT C. J. RYDER.

The following word reached me recently from a part of the field that I
have not yet been able to visit since mounting into the saddle of the
A. M. A. Superintendency. It comes from Romona Indian School in Santa
Fé, N. M. The writer has been a teacher in New England for many years.
He writes: “Perhaps I shall not be believed if I state the case too
strongly, but it is a fact that the Indian girls of the Apache tribes
are very bright and are more docile and make more rapid progress than
any equal number of white children I have ever seen in the course of
more than twenty years’ experience in teaching.”

There are 447 of these Apache Indians held as prisoners of war in the
old Spanish fort at St. Augustine, Florida. They are idle, and cannot
be otherwise. They spend their time foolishly, or worse, as idle people
always do. As I looked upon these men, women and children, crowded
together like cattle in a pen, and remembered the stirring words of
Prof. Whipple, prophetic of such grand possibilities for this people, I
wondered if our Government were making the wisest use of these Apaches
in holding them in this confinement, that must result in increased
viciousness. A Christian lady, after looking at these Indians, said:
“Why, the very sight makes me blush for my country!”

An extended trip through Florida brought to me most encouraging
evidences of the prosperity of the work already entered upon by the A.
M. A. in that State, and impressed the imperative need of more work.
Doors are opening in many directions. Schools are crowded to their
utmost capacity. At St. Augustine, in a school-room seating fifty
pupils, ninety-six were packed together.

The flourishing little church at Orange Park is pushing energetically
towards the completion of its building. It now ranks in its membership
the fourth Congregational church in Florida.

       *       *       *       *       *

Are the colored people accumulating property? This is a question often
asked by the interested friends of the A. M. A. work. Let two facts
emphasize the affirmative to this question. In Oaks, N. C., the colored
people have purchased more than five hundred acres of land and built
their comfortable cottages around the A. M. A. school and church. When
we remember that the average wages of a working man in that region is
not above ten dollars a month, and that the average colored family is
not fashionably small, the purchase of this real estate proves that
they have carefully economized their scanty earnings. Take another
fact: In Thomasville, Ga., the colored people paid taxes on three
thousand one hundred dollars worth of property in 1880. In 1885, this
same people paid taxes on ninety-five thousand six hundred and six
dollars worth of property. In five years they had multiplied their
taxable property more than thirty times. This represents no unhealthy
“boom” in real estate, but an actual increase in the accumulations of
the colored citizens of this flourishing and beautiful Southern city.
The colored people have been given a fair chance in Thomasville, and
this is the use they have made of it. The readers of this magazine
will remember the generous gift of Judge H. W. Hopkins, Mayor of
Thomasville, of a beautiful site for buildings of the Conn. Industrial
School. A fine building has been erected upon this site and in a few
weeks it will be ready for occupancy. There is intense interest in the
community and surrounding neighborhood in this new school. It will
doubtless be crowded as soon as opened. It is to be an industrial
school for girls.

    “Far removed from arts æsthetic,
      Crewel-work and peacock fans,
    Are the studies dietetic
      Carried on mid pots and pans.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A trustworthy friend overheard the following remark, made by a lawyer
in the office of a Southern hotel: “I have seen a miracle to-day,”
said this lawyer. “I have actually seen a white man convicted of
murder and sentenced to be hanged for killing a nigger. I never
expected to witness such a thing in this State.” What a fearful
comment on the injustice of these courts of justice in the past! What
horrible suggestiveness of unpunished crimes! But there is in it, too,
hopefulness for the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Lewis Normal Institute, Macon, and at Storrs School, in Atlanta, the
number of pupils is limited only by the capacity of the school-rooms
to hold them. In Macon, Bro. Wharton, whom I left in Savannah, when I
pushed southward into Florida, was holding special services under the
direction of the pastor. God’s spirit was blessing his efforts and
many were daily seeking the way of life. It has been a year of great
religious awakening throughout our entire field.

       *       *       *       *       *

A beautiful gold locket was put into my hands by an earnest Christian
woman, a very saint of God, as her gift to the work of the A. M. A.
Blindness had come upon her slowly, month after month, and she could no
longer see the picture-faces in the locket, so she had them removed,
and gives the locket into our treasury. Who will redeem it, that this
touching sacrifice may accomplish for God’s poor that which she who
made it prayed it might?

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIVAL AT ATLANTA UNIVERSITY.

Not since 1881 have we enjoyed in this institution so thorough and
satisfactory a work of grace as during the last few weeks. Indeed, on
only one or two occasions in its history have so many been reached and
been led to enter upon the better life. The special interest began
during the week of prayer which was observed by holding a meeting each
evening, and a spirit of inquiry was early manifested and a goodly
number promptly confessed Christ as their Saviour.

Much personal work was done by teachers and older pupils and many who
had been negligent and careless, made confession and renewed their
covenant. Short meetings were continued for a few days longer, and
the seed-sowing and the harvest went on together, and every day some
gain was made, and one after another came to a decision, until nearly
all the students in the family and many of the day pupils were deeply
interested, while some who had withstood many good influences for a
long time yielded to the claims of Christ and took up his service.
There was a quiet and gentle influence manifested in all our meetings
so that without noise and confusion and without protracted services,
the work was done and the blessing came as the dew or the rain from
Heaven. No strangers were called in to help, and no unusual means were
employed, and only ten extra meetings of a general character, most of
them of less than an hour’s duration, were held.

Thus far the new converts, over thirty in number, and representing
about twenty-five different towns, have stood the test well, and most
of them are proving by fidelity in daily duties the reality of their
religious experience. Absent pupils have been reached by the same good
influence, as well as some former students, and the scholars have
been encouraged to write to parents and friends, and thus it will be
easily seen how far a light kindled here may shine and how valuable
and precious a reviving at this center may become. We hope that a few
who resist may be softened, that the timid and halting may be brought
in and the great company of day pupils may be affected and the
neighborhood toward which we are reaching out more than we have, will
be blessed. We are very grateful for these blessings, to the giver of
all good, and very humble in view of our unworthiness, and very hopeful
for larger and continued gifts.

                                                        C. W. FRANCIS.

       *       *       *       *       *


VISIT TO MT. HERMON UNDER DIFFICULTIES.

TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.

On Saturday, the 19th of February, President Pope set out to fill his
regular monthly appointment to preach at Mt. Hermon Seminary for Young
Ladies, whose head and founder, Miss Sarah A. Dickey, was a pioneer in
this Mississippi work, and has passed through such trials and hardships
as those who enter at this stage of the work will rarely, if ever, have
to encounter, and who is now reaping a measure of the respect and honor
she so richly deserves.

Clinton is twelve miles or so distant, and the windows of heaven were
just being opened after a remarkably dry winter, so that when Mr. Pope
said to one of the teachers who had not been at Mt. Hermon for four
years and had only heard of the enlargement of the work there, “Will
you go along?” she cried out, “What––in this rain?” but finally decided
to venture.

Had not Mr. P. been belated an hour in starting, all would have been
well, for they were within four miles of their destination when
darkness and tempest settled round them so densely and drenchingly
that the last third of the way consumed three hours of time, since it
was frequently necessary to stop a few minutes and wait for a flash of
lightning to reveal the road.

The faithful horse was bewildered, and persisted in veering to the
right, as if to get nearer the driver. This finally led to the complete
overthrow of the buggy, the right wheels running up a bank and striking
a projecting root. Mr. Pope was out in an instant and at the horse’s
head, his companion disentangling herself and scrambling out more
slowly, stepping into several inches of soft clay and leaving an
overshoe, which must be pawed for in the darkness, and, upon securing
it, taking her place at the horse’s head. It was found necessary to
take poor Rob out of the shafts, when he gave one or two scrambling
leaps up the slippery bank and stood with his head close against Miss
K.; all the time Mr. P. labored to right the buggy. And how it rained!
’Twas “sic a night” as “Tam O’Shanter” took the ride in.

While Mr. P. was tugging at the prostrate vehicle, with its two wheels
in the air two men on mules were seen by a broad glare of light
hurrying along the opposite high bank. In response to Mr. P.’s halloo
for help, they called out, “Who are you?” and hastened on. The priest
and the Levite having passed by on the other side, it was hoped that
the good Samaritan would appear next, but he had not done so, when
Mr. P. succeeded, unaided, in getting the buggy up and the wet, muddy
cushions, blankets and passengers into it and setting forward.

After a time the darkness seemed to thin a little and the rest of the
way was passed without accident, though the water was deep in all
the low places. How cheering were the light and warmth of the deep
fireplace and the cordial welcome of the Christian teachers to these
muddy, wet and supperless travelers when at last they reached Mt.
Hermon!

The next morning, after Miss Dickey had conducted Sunday-school,
as usual, Mr. Pope preached, making use of the preceding evening’s
experience to help inquirers in the way; urging them to move forward,
taking advanced ground with every flash or even glimmer of the light of
truth in their minds and hearts, not waiting to see all the way mapped
out before them, and pointing to the safe arrival at the heavenly
home––the light, the welcome, the rest.

At their request, Mr. P. has organized a branch, or class, of the
Tougaloo church in this school, and at the communion service in the
afternoon two additional members were received. Then they turned
homeward, and in retracing their course and observing where they
had driven, in the unconsciousness of utter darkness, on narrow
and washed-out ridges between ditches deep enough to make an upset
dangerous, they could but be grateful that in their little experience
of itinerating they had fared so well.

                                                             ⁂

       *       *       *       *       *


DEDICATION OF LINCOLN MEMORIAL CHURCH.

The Lincoln Memorial Congregational Church of Washington, D. C., was
dedicated Sunday, January 2, with appropriate services. Secretary Beard
preached an able and practical dedicatory sermon on “The Struggles of
Life,” from the text, “He that overcometh shall inherit all things.”
The dedicatory prayer was offered by the pastor.

In the afternoon another large audience gathered at the Young People’s
Service, which was addressed by Rev. S. M. Newman, pastor of the First
Congregational Church, and others. In the evening Rev. T. G. Steward,
D. D., pastor of the Metropolitan A. M. E. Church, preached an able
sermon on “The Strongholds of Faith.”

The church was organized a few years ago with only eleven members,
including the first pastor, Rev. S. P. Smith. It now has an enrollment
of over eighty and a flourishing Sunday-school. This was the _second
Congregational church_ organized at the National Capital in the midst
of a large, needy and growing population; four other churches have been
since organized, so that our polity is now represented by six churches.

The building, which is large and commodious and centrally located,
has been altered and renovated, and now presents a very attractive
appearance. The repairs which were begun ten weeks ago have cost to
date $1,300. Over eleven hundred dollars of this amount have been
raised and expended. The lower floor consists of the audience room,
which serves as chapel, with a seating capacity of six hundred and
fifty, with spacious Sunday-school rooms adjoining, which will seat
three hundred and fifty. The upper floor has been neatly fitted up for
a parsonage and school-rooms.

In addition to the religious services, a sewing-school for girls, a
night school and a kindergarten are carried on in the building.

The Women’s Missionary Society, music and the industrial work, are
under the direction of Mrs. G. W. Moore. The dedicatory services were
reported in all the Washington daily papers and several weeklies. The
church has a large field of usefulness and a bright outlook.

                                                      GEORGE W. MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *


EVIDENCES OF PROGRESS.

The A. M. A. workers in the South have many discouragements. Our
work is generally ignored by the whites, and often unappreciated by
the blacks, but such letters as the following show that many fully
appreciate the efforts that are made to purify and elevate the race. We
have recently organized a “Social Purity Society,” and have already the
names of over sixty women and girls on our “White Shield” pledge. After
one of our meetings, at which earnest words of warning and advice were
given by several of the teachers, the following letters were received
from two of the mothers:

Miss ––––: I will say sumthing a bout the subjeck it is to great for me
to hold my peace I will call upon all the teachers poticler I belive
they are chosen that the blessed lord has call to show the slave race
the true way for me myself cannot say much but my deser are great I
belive I can see your butful light and understand all your blessed
words I will praye to the blessed lord to help all the blind race to
see your white shell (shield) work and understand your butif words
Mothers and fathers are cring about the disgrace the young race are
bringing upon them I will beg you once more please don’t get werry
weary I belive the blessed lord will help you.

Miss ––––: I will take great plesure to write you a fee lines a boutt
subject consern the miss acshon in riten them colar boys and the white
men It was very great you cannot speak too much about that subjet
that princlbum are a bout to cover the citty in that low degree with
our colar girls please to study the stronges subjet that your brains
can hold and tounge can utter I umbel beg for jeus sake I belive the
lord will help you and bless the many words you speak this is my heart
desirer I umbel beg all the teachrs to help this is a great subjet very
much needen with the scool girls I will do all I can in the name of the
blessed lord.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.


OUR DEACON.

“Young men, never despair of the hardest case,” were the words which
were spoken to some of us, while in Hartford Theological Seminary,
more than fifteen years ago, by a missionary from Africa, and he gave
us some illustrations to prove his point. I was forcibly reminded of
this a few weeks ago as we elected two Indians to serve as deacons,
the first Indians ever chosen to fill that place in the history of
this church, for during the first eleven years of its existence there
have been white men connected with it who have filled that office
acceptably. Some time ago, however, the last one left us, and after
waiting a while in vain to see if some other men would not come, who
would serve in this capacity, we decided that it was best to choose
Indians for the place.

One of these has had a remarkable history. About thirty years ago or
more he was baptized a Catholic, but when, after a short stay, the
Catholic priest left these Indians, not to return again, he, with the
rest of these Indians, relapsed to their heathenish ways.

Twelve years ago he was noted for drinking and for the sly ways in
which he could procure his liquor. In 1876 he had great trouble with
his wife and wished to leave her, but the Agent would not allow it. A
long trouble followed, in which the Agent and prominent Indians tried
every way they could think of to make them live peaceably together. One
day the Agent with two friendly Indians went to arrest him, but, with
the help of his uncle, he knocked down the Agent, broke out a window
and got away. He was pursued all day, but was not taken, and at night
was helped off by his relations, and he ran a long way off. For this
his relations were locked up in jail, which brought them to terms, and
they induced him to return so that they could be let out, and he served
six months in jail.

After that he secretly left his wife, took another, and went to another
reservation, sixty miles distant, but in time, with the help of another
Agent and two soldiers, he was again taken and conveyed to Fort
Townsend, where he worked six months more, with a soldier and bayonet
to compel him to do so.

A year or two afterwards he returned to Skokomish. He said that he had
reformed, but was still a Catholic, and he held some Catholic services
at his own house. For a year or two, however, they did not amount to
much, as hardly anybody attended them. In 1881 affairs changed, and
through the death of a prominent Indian, the Catholics became quite
strong, mingling with their teachings spiritualistic revelations from
the dying man, and he was their priest.

The next year another Indian professed to die, receive revelations,
and come to life again, and he originated a religion which was
composed of Protestantism, Catholicism, spiritualism, the old Indian
religion, and a nervous twitching, similar to the jerks prevalent in
the Southern and Western States fifty years ago, and which gained for
them the name of Shakers. For a few months they carried things with a
high hand, and he was an acknowledged leader. The Catholic religion,
however, grew to be a very small part of their services, while the
shaking grew to be very large, so that their heads and hands were
sometimes shaking night after night, six hours at a time. To save
them from becoming crazy, with the advice of the physician, the Agent
put a stop to this, but told them they might continue their Catholic
services, if they wished, as he had no right to interfere with their
religion as a religion. But they gave up everything, and asked me to
teach them. I gladly did so, and a year afterwards, in the fall of
1884, he united with our church. Thus he has been by far the most
troublesome Indian of any here, both to Church and Government. For
more than two years he has done well in the church, and now, with my
approval and with the unanimous consent of the members of the church,
he has been chosen their deacon.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I write, an Indian sits before me dressed in leggins with two
blankets around him, and a comforter tied over his head. He has come
to get his horses shod, and as the blacksmith is away, he has to wait.
He has sat stolidly most of the day, his horses out in the cold––the
thermometer is about 12 or 14 degrees below zero. As he has sat here
without an expression of a single emotion passing over his face, he
has occasionally drawn a deep sigh. He knows his life is wretched, and
yet it would take almost a miracle to arouse him to activity enough to
render his life comfortable. As I contrast him with my own boys and
girls, with the emotions aroused by mental activity chasing each other
over their faces, I feel that their lives will be happier and, I hope,
better than his.

                                             TEACHER AMONG THE PONCAS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


Several articles savagely anti-Chinese having appeared in a Knights of
Labor paper published in Marlboro, Mass., Rev. A. F. Newton sent to the
editor the following vigorous reply:

“We understand the purpose of the laboring classes in their
organizations and publications is to promote the best interests of our
suffering fellow men. And this we do wherever we find a man who has
fallen among thieves on the Jericho road. The fact that he has on the
wooden shoes of Holland, or the queue of China, or the corduroy pants
of Ireland, does not prevent our performing our duty to him as a
fellow man. And any one who abuses any man because of the land of his
birth deserves severe censure from every right-minded man who labors
with hand or head.

“Your inconsistency, Mr. Editor, appears when in one place you say
of the Chinese, ‘This town is afflicted with but few of them, thank
God, and the sooner they disappear the better.’ And in another column
you say, ‘We are willing to do anything possible to aid in promoting
charity, but if creed or nationality is to be considered in bestowing
it, just count us out.’ What is your creed? The one in which you thank
God this town is afflicted with only a few of one nationality, or the
one in which you propose to be counted out unless charity shall be
bestowed regardless of creed or nationality? The man who tries to ride
two horses is apt to fall. Inconsistency always appears ridiculous.
We hope the prayer in your ‘Thank God’ does not put you under the
condemnation of Proverbs 28:9.

“In behalf of every nation in America, we protest against the abuse of
any people, whether they come from the banks of the Shannon, or of the
Rhine or the Po, the Danube or the Hoang Ho.

“It is urged against the Chinese in one of your columns that their
great sin is in the fact ‘that California has been drained of over
$200,000,000 during the last twenty-five years.’ This is an average
of $800,000 per year. But surely this is not a great offence, for Mr.
Michael Davitt, at Madison Square Garden, New York city, recently
urged ‘that millions of dollars had been sent from this country to
gladden the poor Irish peasants.’ Every true man will rejoice that the
peasantry of Ireland and China and Germany can be gladdened with money
honestly earned by their friends in America. The heart of one peasant
is as precious in the sight of the Lord as the heart of any other
peasant so far as we know.

“We have always held that it was mean for a great strong man to strike
a small one. When we see this done we feel like saying, ‘Take a man
of your size.’ On this principle we shall never admire the 17,000,000
laboring men attacking the 125,000 now in our country. We do not
believe any one has correctly sensed the heart of true workmen when
he tries to win their favor by abusing the few harmless industrious
celestials.

“What are the charges you have to make against these Chinese? Are
they disturbers of the peace, are they thieves, are they licentious,
are they riotous or drunkards or paupers? Are they the burden of our
courts? If there be anything I denounce it is national prejudice.
Will you denounce an Irishman because he came from Ireland, or a
Chinese because he came from China? I will not. My condemnation shall
fall on him who violates law and is an unworthy citizen. And then my
condemnation rests, not upon his nationality, but upon his guilt. So
long as any man is a quiet, law-abiding citizen, he can count me his
friend. When he sins, I shall preach to him repentance and reformation.

“I am aware that the problem of foreign immigration is gigantic.
But what kind of a sieve shall be used to strain the stream that is
flowing into America from the Old World? The men who weave the meshes
of the strainer have a Herculean task. Your readers will find it very
profitable to study the ‘evils incident to immigration’ in the _North
American Review_ for January, 1884.”

       *       *       *       *       *




BUREAU OF WOMAN’S WORK.

MISS D. E. EMERSON, SECRETARY.


HOW TO ORGANIZE AND CONDUCT A LADIES MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

The Home Land Circle, Park St. Church, Boston, was organized a little
more than two years ago. Three public meetings are held during the
year. Funds are divided among the Am. Miss. Asso’n, the A. H. M. S. and
the N. W. E. C., in such proportions as the ladies decide at one of
these meetings. The names of the ladies in the church and society are
taken, a band of collectors is appointed, and each lady is called upon,
and offered the privilege of contributing. By mentioning the wish to
the collector, any contributor can have the whole of her gift go to the
specified society. Membership is constituted by an annual contribution,
no amount specified. The meetings, we are informed, have been made very
interesting by means of letters from the workers of the societies aided.

Referring to the value of these letters in mission circles, one lady
writes: “While once we felt ourselves to be working blindly, with
little idea of the work that was being done or of the manner in which
we could best help, we seem now to have a personal and friendly
interest, as well as an increased sense of our own responsibility.”

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COLORED PEOPLE are crazily fond of organization. Women and men
alike are caught in the whirl. Offices with high-sounding names,
processions, regalia and show, have a wonderful charm before which go
down their better judgment. The evils of the Lodge, our missionaries
meet on every hand. In the home and in the church, this insidious foe
to piety and thrift is encountered. The love of organization may be
utilized and turned to good account. Our teachers endeavor to impress
upon their pupils the value of co-operation in doing good. The outcome
of such instruction appears in one of our schools where the girls
of their own accord, and without aid from their teachers, organized
themselves into the Helping Hand Society, in which the members pledge,
(1) Not to tell lies, (2) Not to steal, (3) Not to be selfish, (4) Not
to quarrel, (5) Not to talk about the boys when together, and (6) To
try and help every one they can.

On the other hand, the vice of “Secret Orders” may be seen in the
following, written by one of our teachers:

A colored man with the title of Elder, recently visited this place and
organized a secret society called the Universal Brotherhood. He had
left one church with stains upon his moral character, but, as is too
often the case, another fold had an open door for sheep, goat, or wolf,
and, as he could operate better inside a church than out, he went in.
The initiation fee to the society is one dollar, and the monthly dues
are twenty cents. Small as this amount is, it is much to those who have
families to provide for upon very small wages. If all the promises
made by the organizer could be believed, membership in the society of
Universal Brotherhood would be better than forty acres and a mule. All
who are sick are to receive aid. When a member dies, his family will
receive a thousand dollars. If any one of the family dies before the
member insured does, twenty-five dollars will be furnished for funeral
expenses. Heavy fines are imposed for absence from the meetings, which
are held weekly. The name might lead one to suppose that this lodge
is for men only, but it is composed of men and women. They have oaths
and pass-words and secrecy, but one who is too wise to join such an
organization says the great secret which they will never find out is
_where the money goes_.

The idea of some one to help in time of sickness, and of property left
to one’s children, is enough to draw the final dime from a colored
person’s pocket, and stimulates parents who are not able to patronize a
school to invest in a lodge. A colored woman who does well to send one
of her six children to school said to me last week, “I am just as much
opposed to the lodge as I can be. A good many women have to work hard
to support their families, for it takes all their husbands can make to
keep up the lodges. They pay four dollars a month for the rent of a
hall to meet in, and they can’t pay the rent for a shelter for their
families, so their wives have to attend to that.” The poor woman had
the eloquence of truth and earnestness. She had had enough experience
to know what she was talking about.

They have the lodges, chapters, commanderies, and consistories of the
Masonic order for colored men as well as for white. In Oddfellowship
there are lodges for the men, and the Household of Ruth lodges for
the women. There are the Knights of the Wise Men and the Sons and
Daughters of Relief. The following are some of the lodges for men and
women: Diamond Square, Beulah Temple, Blazing Star Temple, Daughters
of Shiloh, Sisters of Charity, Sons and Daughters of Ham, and Willing
Workers. There are Queen Esther’s Courts, and the United Sons and
Daughters of Abraham, the Good Samaritans, the United Daughters of
Zion, the Star Tabernacles, the Daughters of Union, the Tabernacle
of Love and Charity, the Sons and Daughters of Moses, the Sons and
Daughters of Honor, the Mothers and Daughters of Israel, the Eastern
Star, the United Brothers of Friendship, the Sons of the Mysterious
Ten, and the Immaculates.

In our little town there are but two surviving secret societies amongst
the colored people, but in my opinion there are too many by two. They
rob the home, the church and the school, and are obstacles in the way
of all who seek to promote the best interests of the people. Yours for
the right and the light.

                                                              J. B. N.

       *       *       *       *       *




FOR THE CHILDREN.


THE WAY TO DO IT.

REV. C. L. HALL, FORT BERTHOLD, DAKOTA.

We have a Badger in our house. He begins with a capital B, and he is
a capital little chap. He can throw his bean-bags into the hole every
time, and he does well in school, too. A year ago his relatives wanted
him to come to our school, but as he could not live in the ground and
grow his own coat as other badgers do, we had to wait till this fall.
I said he could not live in the ground. He did live on it though last
winter, for there was no floor in his house and the sides and roof were
made of logs and mud, and he had a tin cup, and sometimes a tin plate,
perhaps, and that was all there was to supplement his fingers. Some
forked sticks in the ground, on which a board or two were supported,
and a dirty quilt and an old blanket made his bed. The bed made itself,
without any neat housekeeper’s help.

Corn, pounded up in a wooden mortar and boiled in water, and dried
venison and berries, were the principal diet of our Badger.

Now, he is just like a boy––a white boy––and he is learning to talk
English fast, and he tries to sing Sunday-school hymns and gets the
tune quite well. Pretty good for a Badger just out of his native hole,
isn’t it?

Well, he has woolen shirts, knee-pants, stockings, mittens, and shoes
and cap, etc.; everything suitable for a boy seven years old. You would
not know him from a boy if he did not sometimes get down on all fours
and rub his stockings through at the knees; but we hope he will grow
out of this badgerly habit in time.

Now, there are some boys and girls called the “Torrington Valley
Gleaners,” who like pets so well that they are taking care of this
little Badger. They call him Edward.

They send him clothes and send money to buy his food. They held a fair,
and the boys brought in pumpkins, turnips, celery, pop-corn, etc., not
for the Badger to eat, but to sell, so that they might have money to
help him. The girls made fancy articles for the same purpose.

Now they have enjoyed doing this so much, and they think it will be
so nice when they and their Badger are grown up, to feel that they had
helped him to be a man, that they have asked me to recommend their plan
to other boys and girls and to their parents, in Connecticut and other
States also.

We can say that we have a variety of pets for them––ducks, bears,
weasels, cows and other animals, to whom we give Christian names and
Christian training, so far as Christian friends help us to do so.

Nine of these Indian boys have just gone off in the twilight with their
lady teacher, in a big sled, to get the mail, and a dozen little girls
are making rag dolls, etc., for they all like a little play after
school is out and their work is done. So they have both work and play
and are not dull.

May there be many to pray for them and help them that they may become
good servants of Jesus Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR FEBRUARY, 1887.


  MAINE, $266.43.

    Andover. “Friend,” _for Debt_                              $9.50
    Augusta. Joel Spalding to const. MRS. JOEL SPALDING,
      MRS. ARTHUR F. SKEELE, and MARY B. SPALDING, L.
      M.’s                                                    100.00
    Augusta. “Two Friends,” _for Debt_                         10.00
    Bangor. First Parish Sab. Sch., 19.29; Central Ch.
      12.60, _for Oahe Indian M._                              31.89
    Bingham. Cong. Ch.                                          2.60
    East Otisfield. Susan Lovell, 5; Rev. J. Loring, 3;
      Mrs. M. Knight, 2; Mrs. Morton, 1; Susan Knight,
      1; Augusta Lovewell, 1                                   13.00
    Farmington. Three Classes Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                                13.00
    Gorham. “Helping Hand Soc.,” _for Talladega C._             3.00
    Hampden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.10
    North Edgecomb. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.34
    Orland. “A Friend,”                                         1.00
    Portland. State St. Cong. Ch., 15; Second Parish Y.
      P. S. C. E., 5                                           20.00
    Portland. High St. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Oahe Indian
      M._                                                       7.00
    Skowhegan. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Selma, Ala._
    South Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         13.00
    South Paris. Pkg. work, _for Selma, Ala._
    West Falmouth. Sab. Sch. of Second Ch. 10; Second
      Ch. Bbl. C.; Mrs. M. E. Hall, Bbl. C. and for
      Freight, 1, _for Selma, Ala._                            11.00
                                                              ––––––
                                                              251.43

    LEGACY.

    Bethel. Estate of Sarah J. Chapman, by A. W.
      Valentine, Ex.                                           15.00
                                                              ––––––
                                                              266.43


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $368.77.

    Bedford. “Thurston Mission Band,” _for Talladega C._        2.10
    Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 19.50
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                20.00
    Chichester. Elvira L. Sanborn, 2; Maria Sanborn, 1.         3.00
    Colebrook. Ladies of Cong. Soc. 5.25 and Rev. G. A.
      Curtiss, 1, _for debt_                                    6.25
    Concord. “A Friend,”                                        1.00
    East Derry. First Ch. and Soc.                              9.46
    East Jaffrey. Eliza A. Parker                              10.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                        30.00
    Gilmanton. Rev. and Mrs. S. S. N. Greeley                   5.00
    Goffstown. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             12.00
    Hancock. “Cheerful Workers,” by Mrs. L. M. Tuttle,
      _for Freight_                                             1.00
    Lebanon. Ladies, _for Student Aid, Straight U._            35.00
    Lebanon. Lewis C. Pattee, _for Straight U._                10.00
    Littleton. “The Hillside Gleaners,” by Mrs. C. L.
      Clay, _for Oahe Indian M._                               35.00
    Manchester. Hanover St. Cong. Ch.                          71.76
    Manchester. Miss’y Soc., Bbl. C., _Val._ 50, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Newport. Cong. Ch.                                         23.25
    Pembroke. “Friends of Pembroke Academy,” _for
      Charleston, S. C._                                        5.60
    Portsmouth. “Cong. Sab. Sch.”, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             17.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                                        2.85
    South Merrimack. “A Friend,”                                5.00
    Walpole. First Cong. Ch.                                   24.00
    West Lebanon. Mission Band of Cong. Ch., _for Storrs
      School, Atlanta, Ga._                                    20.00


  VERMONT, $200.33.

    Alburg Springs. Box C., _for McIntosh, Ga._
    Bethel. Bbl. C. 2, _for Freight, for McIntosh, Ga._         2.00
    Burlington. Ladies of First Cong. Ch. _for McIntosh,
      Ga._, by Mrs. L. A. Dewey                                40.00
    Cornwall. For Freight, for _McIntosh, Ga._                  2.00
    Danville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  11.00
    Dorset. Result of Dime Collection, Ladies of Dorset,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks              6.00
    East Corinth. Mrs. Ruth Bayley to const. MRS. H. P.
      JAMES, L. M.                                             30.00
    East Corinth. Three Bbls. C., _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Essex Center. Ladies, _for McIntosh, Ga._ by Mrs.
      Ellen D. Wild                                             2.00
    Jericho Center. Sab. Sch. Class of Boys, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._, by Mrs. Henry Fairbanks                   1.38
    Johnson. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for McIntosh, Ga._, by
      Mrs. Ellen D. Wild                                       17.45
    Marshfield. Lyman Clark                                    15.00
    Montpelier. Bethany Sab. Sch., 10; Ladies of Bethany
      Ch., Box of Goods, val. 50. by Mrs. Ellen J. Howe,
      _for McIntosh, Ga._                                      10.00
    Montpelier. Bbl. C., _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Morgan. Miss Lucy Little                                      50
    Northfield. Mrs. D. J. Allen                                5.00
    Norwich. Mrs. B. B. Newton                                  5.00
    Peru. Dea. Edmund Batchelder. 3; Rev. A. B. Peffers,
      2                                                         5.00
    Sudbury. “A Friend,”                                        2.00
    Strafford. Cong. Ch.                                       25.00
    West Brattleboro. Ladies of Cong. Ch. by Miss A. L.
      Grout, _for McIntosh, Ga._                               18.00
    West Randolph. “An Old Lady,”                               1.00
    West Westminster, Bbl. C. and _for Freight_, 2; _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                            2.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,989.73.

    Amesbury. E. P. Elliott                                     2.00
    Amherst. Mrs. Elijah Ayres, Bdl. Basted Garments,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Andover. Ladies of South Cong. Ch. _for Freight_            2.00
    Andover. Ladies Soc. of Free Christian Ch., 2 Bbls.
      of C., value 72.27, _for Macon, Ga._
    Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. to const. REV.
      RUFUS B. TOBEY, and Miss GENEVIEVE R. GIFFORD, L.
      M’s                                                      74.00
    Attleboro. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        13.05
    Boston. South Boston, Phillips Ch., 114.57; “Friend,
      for the debt due from the North to Colored Race in
      the South,” 50; Mount Vernon Ch., adl., 5; ––
      Charlestown, Sewing Circle of Winthrop Ch., _for
      Woman’s Work_, 20; –– Jamaica Plain, Central Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., 50                                        239.57
    Boylston. Cong. Ch.                                         1.52
    Braintree. South Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    Brookfield. Bible Sch. of Evan. Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    50.00
    Brookline. “S. A. C.”                                      10.00
    Campello. Miss Drucilla W. Pettengill, 10; Miss Mary
      C. Pettengill, 5; _for Indian M._                        15.00
    Campello. Ira. A. Leach                                       50
    Clinton. Mrs. Neil Walker, 2; Mrs. A. C. Dakin, 2;
      _for Talladega C._                                        4.00
    Conway. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                            24.50
    Dunstable. Bbl. C., _for Thomasville, Ga._
    Eddyville. “A Friend.”                                      5.00
    Fall River. Central Cong. Ch.                              59.00
    Fitchburg. Cal. Cong. Ch., 20; Mrs. E. M. Dickinson
      of C. C. Ch., 8                                          28.00
    Greenfield. Miss Jeanette Thompson                          5.00
    Hadley. First Ch. Sab. Sch.                                11.68
    Hatfield. Box Christmas gifts, _for Selma, Ala._
    Haverhill. Center Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Talladega C._        25.00
    Holyoke. Ladies of Second Cong. Ch., adl., _for
      Debt_                                                     2.00
    Hopkinton. Cong. Ch.                                        3.72
    Lakeville. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Debt_                  2.00
    Lowell. Highland Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             21.60
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch., _for Freight_                   3.00
    Medway. E. F. Richardson, Box C., etc., 1.15, _for
      Freight, for Macon, Ga._                                  1.15
    Middleboro. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                           8.85
    New Salem. Rev. A. R. Plumer, to const. MRS. L. A.
      G. PLUMER, L. M.                                         30.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                          4.58
    Northampton. Mrs. C. L. Williston                         100.00
    Northampton. Edwards Ch. Sab. Sch., 44.88; Miss
      Hattie G. Day, 20, Miss Caroline A. Yale, 5;
      “Friend,” 1; G. E. Parsons, 25c., _for Indian M._        71.13
    Northampton. “A Friend,” _for Indian M._                   10.00
    Pittsfield. “Young Ladies Alosha Soc.,” Bbl. C.,
      _for Tougaloo U._
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                    55.00
    Reading. Cong. Ch.                                         17.50
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch., _for Santee Indian M._              50.00
    Shelburne Falls. L. A. Soc., _for Fisk U._                 12.00
    Sherborn. “A Friend.”                                     600.00
    Southbridge. “A Friend.”                                      50
    South Deerfield. Miss L. E. Williams, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                             5.00
    South Hadley Falls. “A Friend,” 2; –––– 1.50, _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                                 3.50
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  48.00
    Stockbridge. Alice Byington, Bdl. Patchwork, etc.,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Walpole. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                   31.76
    Ware. “A Friend” (10 of which _for Mountain White
      Work_)                                                   13.68
    Westboro. Bbl. C., etc., _for Straight U._
    West Brookfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Santee Indian
      M._                                                       5.00
    West Dennis. Miss S. S. Crowell (1.50 of which _for
      debt_)                                                    3.00
    Westford. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bdl. Bedding, etc.,
      _for Atlanta, Ga._
    Whitman. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 40.55; “A Friend.” 30
      to const. ERNEST L. BELL, L. M.                          70.55
    Worcester. Summer St. Cong. Ch., 44.27; Old South
      Ch., 26.12                                               70.39
    Worcester. “Friends,” _for Talladega C._                   23.00
    Worcester. “Lady Member Main St. Bapt. Ch.,” _for
      Hampton, N. and A. Inst._                                10.00
    Worcester. “Mite Band” of Plymouth Ch., by Lillian
      M. Crawford, _for Tougaloo U._                            9.62
    Worcester. “Friends,” for Rosebud Indian M.                   70
    By Charles Marsh, Treas. Hampden Benev. Ass’n:
          Agawam, _for Indian M._                      3.50
          East Long Meadow                             5.00
          Ludlow                                      19.14
          Springfield. Olivet, _for Hampton N. and
            A. Inst._                                 20.00
          West Springfield. Park St.                  15.00
                                                      –––––    62.64
    ––––, “A Friend”                                            1.00
                                                            ––––––––
                                                            1,945.69

    LEGACIES.

    Enfield. Estate of J. B. Woods, by R. M. Woods,
      Trustee                                                  40.00
    Lancaster. Estate of Miss Sophia Stearns, by W. W.
      Wyman, Ex.                                                4.04
    Salem. Estate of Elizabeth B. Mansfield, by N. B.
      Mansfield and John C. Osgood, Ex’rs
                                                            1,000.00
                                                            ––––––––
                                                            2,989.73

    CLOTHING, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON OFFICE.

    Andover. Ladies Charitable Soc., Bbl. _for Tougaloo
      U._
    East Cambridge. Miss Mary F. Aiken, Box, _for
      Marietta, Ga._
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. _for Marietta, Ga._
    Taunton. Ladies Sew. Soc. of Broadway Cong. Ch.,
      Bbl., Val. $38.66, _for Fisk U._
    Yarmouth. Ladies Sew. Circle of Cong. Ch., Bbl.,
      _for Oaks, N. C._


  RHODE ISLAND, $401.97.

    East Providence. Samuel Belden, to const. MISS
      NELLIE E. FRENCH, MISS HATTIE A. FRENCH, MRS.
      CHARLES MATTOON, MRS. MONICA RICHARDS MATTOON, L.
      M’s                                                     200.00
    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  102.00
    Little Compton. United Cong. Ch.                           20.00
    Newport. United Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._                 69.97
    Newport. “A Friend”                                        10.00


  CONNECTICUT, $1,905.94.

    Bridgeport. “The Four O’clocks” of First Cong. Ch.,
      for _Marie Adolf Sch’p Fund._                            10.00
    Clinton. Y. P. Soc. of C. E., Cong. Ch.                     2.63
    Cornwall Bridge. Geo H. Swift                              10.00
    Danbury. First Cong. Ch., 104.80; Second Cong. Ch.
      and Soc., 18.02                                         122.82
    Darien. Ladies, by Mrs. Ellen M. Nash, _for Conn.
      Ind’l Sch., Ga._                                         10.00
    East Morris. W. H. Farnham                                  1.00
    Farmington. Rev. E. A. Smith, _for Kindergarten,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            10.00
    Granby. South Cong. Ch. 7.65; First Cong. Ch. 5.50         13.15
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                             10.00
    Greenwich. Second Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               12.50
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._, and to
      const. DEA. E. W. LEETE, L. M.                           30.00
    Guilford. Ladies of Third Cong. Ch. _for Debt_              5.00
    Hartford. Fourth Cong. Ch., to const. REV. GRAHAM
      TAYLOR, L. M.                                            37.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Sab. Sch. 20; Mrs. W. J.
      Wood, 10 _for Talladega C._                              30.00
    Hartford. “The Parsonage Circle,” Bbl. Bedding, _for
      Thomasville, Ga._
    Lakeville. Mrs. S. S. Robbins                               5.00
    Lebanon. Goshen Soc.                                       16.96
    Middletown, (Westfield.) Third Cong. Ch.                   10.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch., Mrs. Ella Grannis                        5.00
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                 11.50
    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch.                                      100.00
    New Britain. First Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                                9.34
    New Haven, Prof. Edward E. Salisbury                       50.00
    New Haven. Dwight Place Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Student
      Aid Fisk U._                                             50.00
    New Haven. College St. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                               15.00
    New Haven. “A Friend in Center Ch.” 5 _for Debt_, 5
      _for Kindergarten, Atlanta, Ga._                         10.00
    New Preston. Mrs. Betsy Averill                            10.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                        100.54
    North. Branford Cong, Sab. Sch., _for Woman’s Work_        20.00
    North Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                 14.45
    Norwich. Second Cong. S. S. Miss’y Soc. (44.63 of
      which _for Dakota Indian M_)                             46.43
    Norwich. Buckingham Sab. Sch.                              25.00
    Norwich Town. C. B. Baldwin                                20.00
    Plantsville. Mrs. Sarah W. Stow, _for Indian M._            5.00
    Plantsville. Fannie Cummings, 10c.; Florence
      Cummings 10c., _for Rosebud Indian M._                      20
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                  12.00
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                                90.06
    Rockville. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Rosebud
      Indian M._                                                14.00
    Roxbury. Mrs. S. J. Beardsley, 1, and P’k’g. basted
      patch work, _for Macon, Ga._                              1.00
    Somersville. Cong. Ch.                                     10.58
    Southington. Y. P. Soc. of C. E, by Della M. Pardee.       10.00
    Terryville. “Friends,” _for Indian M._                     18.25
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                       24.15
    Union. Cong. Ch.                                            5.00
    Unionville. First Ch. of Christ.                           25.72
    Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Wapping. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    7.85
    Waterbury. First Cong. Ch.                                144.48
    Waterbury. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Talladega C._       20.00
    Watertown. E. L. DeForest, _for Talladega C._             500.00
    Westbrook. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.00
    West Hartford. “Grey Girls,” _for Santee Indian M._        40.00
    West Haven. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Rosebud Indian M._        12.20
    Westminster. Cong. Ch.                                      9.12
    Westminster. Mrs. S. B. Carter, _for Conn. Ind’l
      Sch., Ga._                                                5.00
    Weston. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    West Winsted. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                    4.51
    Wethersfield. Mrs. Jane C. Francis’ Sab. Sch. Class,
      _for Rosebud Indian M._, and to const ROBERT W.
      ROBBINS, L. M.                                           30.00
    Windsor. Cong. Sab. Sch, _for Rosebud Indian M._            8.50
    –––– “A Friend in Conn.”                                   20.00
    –––– “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Straight U._             5.00
    Woman’s Cong. H. M. Union of Conn. by Mrs. S. M.
      Hotchkiss, Sec., _for Conn. Ind’l Sch. Ga._
          Naugatuck, Ladies Soc.                       5.00
          Suffield. Y. L. H. M. Circle                 5.00
          West Winsted, Miss M. W. Gray’s S. S.
            Class. Second Cong. Ch.                   20.00
                                                      –––––    30.00


  NEW YORK, $1,058.33.

    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Santee
      Indian M._                                               37.50
    Brooklyn. Lee Av. Cong. Ch., Ladies Circle 20, and
      Sab. Sch. Class. 5: also 2 bbls. papers, for
      _Student Aid, Williamsburg, Ky._                         25.00
    Brooklyn. E. M. Mosher, M. D., 10; Park Cong. Ch.,
      9.47; Rev. S. W. Powell, 2                               21.47
    Brooklyn. Plymouth Ch. Sew. Soc., bbl. C., etc.,
      _for Talladega C._
    Canandaigua. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Conn. Ind’l Sch.,
      Ga._                                                    117.69
    Canandaigua. Cong. Ch. (10 of which, _for Chinese
      M._)                                                    101.65
    Churchville. Mission Circle, _for Rosebud Indian M._        5.05
    Clifton. Mrs. Robertson, _for Dakota Indian M._             5.00
    Copake Iron Works. Union Sab. Sch., by Miss M.
      Werden, _for Oahe Indian M._                             10.00
    Deansville. Cong. Ch.                                       9.02
    Flatbush. Mrs. P. S. Harris                                 1.00
    Flushing. First Cong. Soc.                                 43.58
    Gaines. Cong. Ch.                                          15.49
    Hamilton. Cong. Ch.                                        11.00
    Hobart. Mrs. J. W. Blish                                    3.50
    Lima. Miss Clara M. James                                   2.00
    Lisbon Centre. First Cong. Ch.                             11.15
    Lisle. Cong Ch.                                            10.00
    Morristown. Cong. Ch.                                       8.00
    Mount Sinai. Cong. Ch.                                      9.63
    New Lebanon. Cheerful Workers’ Band, by Rose
      McWilliams, _for Woman’s Work_                           20.00
    New York. “A. F.,” 250; “A. M. R.,” 50                    300.00
    New York––Tremont. GEORGE R. PERRY, to const.
      himself, L. M.                                           30.00
    North Pitcher. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              1.00
    North Walton. Cong Ch. Sab. Sch., 11.13; and Miss’y
      Soc. 16.55                                               27.68
    Norwich. “Vestibule Soc.,” _for Savannah, Ga._              3.00
    Oneida. Edward Loomis                                       5.00
    Oxford. Ladies H. M. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo
      U._
    Paris. Cong. Ch.                                           24.50
    Port Richmond. Stephen Squires                              5.00
    Poughkeepsie. “Friends,” _for Indian M._                    5.75
    Suspension Bridge. Cong. Ch.                               10.40
    Syracuse. Mrs. J. M. Rose. Pkg. Papers, etc., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Volney. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           3.00
    Walton. First Cong Ch.                                     85.12
    West Bloomfield. Cong. Ch. (26 of which _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._)                                           45.15
    Woman’s H. M. Union of N. Y., by Mrs. L. H. Cobb,
      Treas., _for Woman’s Work_.
          Walton. Ladies Aux.                         15.00
          Buffalo. First Ch. W. H. M. Soc,            30.00
                                                      –––––    45.00


  NEW JERSEY, $259.15.

    Bound Brook. Friends in Bound Brook and Ware. Mass.,
      by Rev. John Kershaw, _for Mt. White Work_               45.00
    Lakewood. “A Friend.”                                       5.00
    Lyons Farms. Fred W. C. Crane, 10; Mrs. Jane T.
      Crane, 2                                                 12.00
    Newark. “F. M.”                                             2.00
    Salem. W. Graham Tyler                                     30.00
    Upper Montclair. Christian Union Cong. Ch.                165.15


  PENNSYLVANIA, $111.00.

    Alden. Cong. Ch.                                            2.00
    Carlisle Barracks. C. M. Semple, _for Charleston, S.
      C._                                                       5.00
    East Springfield. Mrs. C. J. Cowles                         1.00
    Neath. Cong Ch.                                             3.00
    Pittsburg. H. Sampson, _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                     100.00


  OHIO, $539.84.

    Austinburg. Cong Ch.                                       13.00
    Birmingham. Jessie M. Leonard                               1.00
    Cleveland. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                              40.04
    Cleveland. Jennings Ave. Cong. Ch. (7.75 of which
      _for Indian M._)                                         30.00
    Elyria. E. W. Metcalf, to const. MRS. E. W. METCALF,
      MAYNARD MAYO METCALF, and MISS ANNA M. RICH, L.
      M’s                                                     100.00
    Findlay. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Gomer. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                     42.67
    Kinsman. Presb. and Cong. Ladies Soc., 2 Bbls., Box
      and Pkg. C., etc., _for Williamsburg, Ky._
    Madison. Mrs. Harriet B. Fraser, _for Talladega C._       100.00
    Medina. “Opportunity Club,” by Miss Eva A. Oatman           2.00
    North Bloomfield. By Wm. C. Savage & Co., _for
      Rosebud Indian M._                                        4.20
    North Ridgeville. Cong. Sab. Sch. 3 and Bbl. C.,
      _for Williamsburg, Ky._                                   3.00
    Oberlin. Royalty on Dr. Cowles’ Commentary                 52.33
    Painesville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Oahe Indian M._         50.00
    Radner. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00
    Ravenna. Cong. Ch., _for Oahe Indian M._                   30.00
    Saybrook. First Cong S. S. Mission Band                     7.60
    South Salem. Daniel S. Pricer                               5.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch. 25, and Sab. Sch. 5           30.00
    Strongsville. Cong. Soc., Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo U._
    Tallmadge. “A Friend.”                                      4.50
    Toledo. Central Cong. Ch.                                   3.15
    Youngstown. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                11.35


  INDIANA, $22.86.

    Macksville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 2.86
    New Corydon. Geo Stolz                                     20.00


  ILLINOIS, $369.84.

    Barry. Lyndon Freeman                                       1.50
    Bone Gap. Mrs. Lu Rice                                      9.00
    Chicago. New England Cong. Ch.                             56.23
    Chicago. Sedgwick St. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Santa Fé
      M._                                                      30.00
    Chicago. Rev. H. Willard, _for Student Aid,
      Williamsburg, Ky._                                       10.00
    Dover. Cong Ch.                                            17.00
    Earlville. “J. A. D.”                                      50.00
    Elgin. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. Bbl. C., etc., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Englewood. “The King’s Children.” box S. S. Papers,
      _for Talladega C._
    Galva. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Macon, Ga._             37.40
    Geneseo. First Cong. Ch.                                   44.59
    Illini, Four Classes in Cong. Sab. Sch.                    11.80
    Kewannee. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             11.11
    Lombard. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. _for Mobile, Ala._             7.00
    Lyonsville. Cong. Ch.                                      10.33
    Ottawa. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           34.53
    Plymouth, Mrs. R. C. Burton                                 3.00
    Rio. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                        7.00
    Rockton. Cong. Ch.                                         21.25
    Sparta. Bryce Crawford, 5; P. B. Gault, 1; James
      Hood. 50c                                                 6.50
    Sublette. “Mrs. A. D.”                                      1.00
    Woman’s H. M. U. of Ill. Mrs. B. F. Leavitt, Treas.
      _for Woman’s Work_: Ladies                                  60


  MICHIGAN, $209.14.

    Adrian. A. J. Hood                                         10.00
    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                 56.50
    Benzonia. W. J. Pettitt                                     5.00
    Calumet. “Womans Miss’y Soc.” by Lucie M. Dobbie,
      _for Woman’s Work_                                       20.00
    Calumet. “Helping Hand Soc.” by Gertrude Colton,
      _for Woman’s Work_                                       10.00
    Flint. Mrs. S. B. Holman, _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                         50
    Grand Rapids. Ladies Miss’y Soc. by Miss M. L.
      Elliot, _for Woman’s Work_                               20.00
    Manistee. Y. L. Mission Circle, by Miss A. E. Lewis,
      Treas. _for Oahe Indian M._                              25.00
    Olivet. Herbert Williams, _for Talladega C._                2.00
    Saint Clair. Cong. Ch.                                     35.00
    Three Oaks. Cong Ch.                                       25.14


  WISCONSIN, $123.87.

    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., 10; H. H. Swain, 10; _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                                20.00
    Lake Geneva. Mrs. Geo. Allen                                5.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          49.10
    Menomonee. Cong. Ch.                                       12.61
    New Richmond. Cong. Ch.                                    12.91
    Peshtigo. “Zigzag Miss’y Soc.” bdl. patch work, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Sturgeon Bay. “Friends.” _for Freight_                      3.25
    By W. H. M. U., of Wisconsin, _for Woman’s Work_:
          Emerald Grove. Mrs. Curtis                   4.00
          Emerald Grove. Mrs. R. Cheney                2.00
          Ripon. Mrs. C. T. Tracy                      3.00
          Ripon. Mrs. Towle                            1.00
          Rosendale. W. M. S.                          5.00
          Rosendale. Y. L. M. S.                       5.00
          Whitewater. W. M. S.                         1.00
                                                       ––––    21.00
    W. H. M. U., of Wisconsin, _for Woman’s Work_, in
      March number should read:
          Baraboo. W. M. S.                              25
          Elkhorn. W. M. S.                            7.00
          Madison. W. M. U.                           25.00
          Windsor. W. M. U.                            5.00
                                                      –––––
                                                      37.25


  IOWA, $266.34.

    Atlantic. Cong. Ch. 27.80, and Sab. Sch. 2.30              30.10
    Cherokee. F. E. Whitmore to const REV. WALTER A.
      EVANS, R. H. SCRIBNER, and W. H. ELFORD, L. M’s         100.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                  15.99
    Clay. Cong. Ch. 18.23, and Sab. Sch., 3.77                 22.00
    Decorah. Mission Circle, Bbl. C., _for Straight U._
    Dubuque. Cong. Sab. Sch. bbl. S. S. Papers, _for
      Talladega C._
    Farragut. Mrs. L. S. Chapln, _for Woman’s Work_             2.00
    Grinnell. Cong Ch.                                         39.19
    Jefferson. Rev. D. B. Eells                                 5.00
    Manchester. “Rainbow Mission Band,” by Mrs. J. G.
      Miller, _for Woman’s Work_                               10.00
    Maquoketa. Cong Ch.                                         5.19
    Marshalltown. Boy’s Miss’y Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                              7.37
    McGregor. Young Peoples’ Mission Band, by P. C.
      Daniels, _for Student Aid Straight U._                   10.00
    Tabor. Rainbow Mission Band, _for Talladega C._            15.00
    Tipton. Mrs. M. D. Clapp                                    4.50
    Woman’s Home Missionary Union of Iowa _for Woman’s
      Work_ (Incorrectly acknowledged in March number
      under Wisconsin).
          Alden. Ladies of Cong Ch.                    1.75
          Decorah. L. M. S.                           25.00
          Eldora. L. M. S.                             6.50
          Grinnell. W. H. M. U.                        3.14
          McGregor. W. M. S.                          10.87
          Marion. Y. P. M. S.                         20.00
          Osage. W. M. S.                              4.45
          Stacyville. W. M. S.                         5.00
          Polk City. Collected by Minnie Stubbs
            and Dollie Egleston                          74
                                                      –––––
                                                      77.45


  MINNESOTA, $174.75.
    [* Receipts for Jan. $423.40.]

    Hawley. Union Ch.                                           9.40
    Minneapolis. Plym. Cong. Ch., 18.50; Como. Av. Cong.
      Ch., 4.09                                                22.59
    Rochester. W. J. Eaton                                     30.00
    Worthington. Union Cong. Ch.                               12.33
    M. W. H. M. S., by Mrs. Clara Morton Cross, Treas.,
      _for Woman’s Work_:
          Minneapolis. Plym. W. H. M. S. to
            const. MRS. E. A. ELDRED, L. M.           30.00
          Minneapolis. Plym. Y. L. M. S.              13.00
          Northfield. W. H. M. S.                     40.00
          Saint Cloud. L. M. S.                        5.00
          Saint Paul. Atlantic Ch., L. M. S.           5.00
          Zumbrota. S. S.                              7.43
                                                      –––––   100.43


  KANSAS, $3.50.

    Capioma. Cong. Ch.                                          2.00
    Lawrence. Rev. A. M. Richardson, 75c.; Mrs. Susan W.
      Platt, 75c                                                1.50
    Topeka. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., Box C., _for Atlanta,
      Ga._


  DAKOTA, $75.94.

    Clark. Cong. Ch.                                            5.70
    Sioux Falls. W. H. M. S. of Cong. Ch. _for Indian
      M._, by Mrs. C. G. Black, Treas.                          5.00
    Sioux Falls. Cong. Ch.                                     36.63
    Springfield. Cong. Ch.                                      3.05
    Vermillion. W. M. S. of Cong. Ch.                           5.00
    Yankton. First Cong. Ch.                                   20.56


  NEBRASKA, $4.10.

    Cowles. Cong. Ch.                                           1.95
    Crete. Mrs. R. Sturtevant, _for Debt_                         50
    Greenwood. Mrs. C. A. Mathis, box papers, etc., _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Guide Rock. Cong. Ch.                                       1.65


  ARKANSAS, $5.00.

    Little Rock. Ladies of Cong. Ch. _for Indian M._            5.00


  CALIFORNIA, $25.00.

    San Jacinto. Mrs. L. N. Suydam, 20; Keith Suydam, 5;
      adl. to const NELLIE MACNITE SUYDAM, L. M.               25.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $5.35.

    Olympia. First Cong. Ch.                                    5.35


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $10.00.

    Washington. “Member of First Cong. Ch.”                    10.00


  WEST VIRGINIA, $1.50.

    Coalburg. Miss F. A. Marvin, 1; Mrs. E. R. Marvin.
      50c                                                       1.50


  KENTUCKY, $130.00.

    Williamsburg. Tuition                                     130.00


  TENNESSEE, $998.67.

    Grand View. Tuition                                        12.50
    Jellico. Tuition                                           33.75
    Jonesboro. Tuition, 28.05; Rent, 2.50                      30.55
    Memphis. Tuition                                          408.80
    Nashville. Tuition                                        513.07


  NORTH CAROLINA, $187.04.

    Kittrell. Miss P. M. Lee                                      84
    Troy. Cong. Ch.                                               50
    Wilmington. Tuition                                       175.60
    Wilmington. Miss Fitts, 3.75; Miss Farrington, 3;
      Miss Warner, 2; Miss Peck, 1.35, _for Student
      Aid_                                                     10.10


  GEORGIA, $780.02.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition                             261.85
    Macon. Tuition, 185.70; Rent, 3.75                        189.45
    Macon. Rev. W. C. Bass, D. D., _for Macon, Ga._             5.00
    McIntosh. Tuition                                          50.80
    Savannah. Tuition, 190.50; Rent, 50c                      191.00
    Thomasville. Tuition                                       50.40
    Woodville. REV. J. H. H. SENGSTACKE, 30 to const.
      himself, L. M.; Pilgrim. Cong. Ch., 1.52                 31.52


  FLORIDA, $7.00.

    Crescent City.                                              5.00
    Saint Augustine. E. Sabin                                   2.00


  ALABAMA, $344.88.

    Kymulga. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                        65
    Mobile. Tuition                                           230.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                        3.05
    Talladega. Tuition                                        110.43
    Talladega Cove. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                 75


  LOUISIANA, $287.00.

    New Orleans. Tuition                                      277.00
    New Orleans. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Straight
      U._                                                      10.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $205.50.

    Meridian. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._                     1.00
    Tougaloo. Tuition, 196.25; Rent, 8.25                     204.50


  TEXAS, $5.00.

    Laredo. A. B. Headen, _for Talladega C._                    5.00

  –––––––– $20.00
    ––––. “Endowment,” _for Oahe Indian M._                    20.00


  CANADA, $4.00.

    Montreal. Mrs. H. W. Spaulding                              4.00


  EAST AFRICA, $10.00.

    ––––. Rev. B. F. Ousley                                    10.00


  BULGARIA. $12.00.

    Samokov. Rev. James F. Clark                               12.00
                                                            ========
    Donations                                               8,461.05
    Legacies                                                1,059.04
    Tuition and Rents                                       2,869.70
                                                           –––––––––
        Total for February                                 12,389.79
        Total from Oct. 1 to Feb. 28.                      99,303.97
                                                           =========

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

    Subscriptions for February                                122.55
    Previously acknowledged                                   439.18
                                                              ––––––
        Total                                                 561.73


                                        H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer,
                                                   56 Reade St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

* The following sums from Minnesota were received in January and
included in the total amount of receipts for that month, but by an
accident of the printer were omitted from the published statement:

  MINNESOTA, $423.40.

    Alexandria. “A Friend.”                                     3.00
    East Minneapolis. First Cong. Ch.                          68.86
    Glyndon. Ch. at Glyndon.                                    6.05
    Mazeppa. Mrs. Bradshaw’s Class in Sab. Sch., _for
      Santee Indian M._                                         2.00
    Medford. By Rev. Wm. L. Sutherland.                         5.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 38; J. I. Bell, 25; Mrs.
      R. Laughlin, 50c.                                        63.50
    Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            41.12
    Plainview. Cong. Ch.                                        8.70
    Saint Paul. Primary Class Park Sab. Sch., _for
      Beach Inst._                                             10.00
    Saint Paul. Mrs. C. C. Andrews.                             1.00
    ––––, “Minnesota Friends”.                                100.00
    By Mrs. Clara Norton Cross. Treas. Minn. W. H. M.
      S., _for Woman’s Work_:
          Lakeland. W. H. M. S.                        2.00
          Minneapolis, Y. L. M. S. of Plymouth
            Ch.                                       68.49
          Minneapolis, W. H. M. S. of Plymouth
            Ch. (13.40 of which for Debt.)            33.56
          Minneapolis. W. M. Soc. of Second Cong.
            Ch.                                        9.12
          Minneapolis. Clara Amelia Cross, _for
            Marie Adolf Sch’p Fund_.                   1.00
                                                      –––––   114.17

       *       *       *       *       *


                         CHURCH AND CHAPEL HYMNALS,

     Which would be prized by every Church or Choir Singer, Each is
             adapted to the Congregational Service of Song.


                                  I.

                        The Evangelical Hymnal.

                            Hymns and Tunes.

    The Rev. CHAS. CUTHBERT HALL, } Editors.
    SIGISMOND LASAR,              }

628 pages, 613 Hymns, 657 Tunes. 8vo, cloth. Price for examination,
$1.75.

“The most complete and precious hymnal ever published in this
country.”––THE MUSICAL PEOPLE, Cincinnati.

“A rich collection of tunes which have caught the spirit of divine
worship, and afford a vehicle for the best emotions of a
congregation”––THE CHRISTIAN UNION.


                                  II.

                            Worship in Song.

                            Hymns and Tunes.

    The Rev. J. GLENTWORTH BUTLER, D. D., } Editors.
    JOSEPH P. HOLBROOK, Mus. Doc.,        }

450 pages, 712 Hymns, 30 selections, 396 Tunes. 8vo, cloth.

Price for examination $1.50.

“I am delighted with the book. We are indebted to Dr. Holbrook for
some of our sweetest melodies. The hymns offer every variety that
worship demands, and the adaptation of the tunes appears to me to be
judicious”––Rev. HOWARD CROSBY, D. D.


                                 III.

                           Carmina Sanctorum.

                            Hymns and Tunes.

    The Rev. ROSWELL D. HITCHCOCK, D. D., LL. D., }
    The Rev. ZACHARY EDDY, D. D.,                 } Editors.
    The Rev. LEWIS W. MUDGE,                      }

450 pages, 746 Hymns, 440 Tunes, 21 Doxologies, 43 Chants, and 7
separate Indexes. Price for examination, $1.25.

“This book is, on the whole, the best one out”––CHRISTIAN INTELLIGENCER.

“I am impressed by the Judgement and taste displayed; the delicate work
of adaptation has been done with unusual skill and care”––Rev. THOMAS
S. HASTINGS, D. D.

“The tunes are selected carefully from the best composers. They are on
the highest plane of choral psalmody, and preserve as a whole the flavor
of the American favorites”––N. Y. INDEPENDENT.


                                  IV.

                   Hymns and Songs for Social Worship.

                            Hymns and Tunes.

    The Rev. ROSWELL D. HITCHCOCK, D. D., }
    The Rev. ZACHARY EDDY, D. D.,         } Editors.
    The Rev. LEWIS W. MUDGE,              }

360 pages, 660 Hymns, 296 Tunes, 21 Doxologies, Apostles’ Creed, 34
Chants, full Indices. Price for examination, 75 cents.

The Rev. GEO. F. MAGOUN, D. D., President of Iowa College, says “The
‘Hymns and Songs for Social Worship’ is much the best for use in
devotional Church meetings that I know. It was introduced at Grinnell
by my suggestion, and proves every way admirable and acceptable. While
it is richer and fuller than other hymn and tune books designed for the
same purpose, the choices of old favorites is very fine and generously
large, and that of new and lighter ones (both words and melodies) is
not too lavish or beyond the limits of good taste. _It hits the golden
mean._”


⁂ Churches would do well to furnish themselves with a supply of each of
these books. They contain many tunes peculiar to themselves with hymns
that are familiar. They would admirably supplement the hymn books in
use.

Returnable copies forwarded on application. Address
      A. S. BARNES & CO., Publishers,
            111 & 113 William St., N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


                       JOSEPH GILLOTT’S
                          STEEL PENS

              GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXPOSITION––1878.
                   THE MOST PERFECT OF PENS


       *       *       *       *       *


      ‘OUR CONSTANT AIM IS TO MAKE THEM THE FINEST IN THE WORLD’

               Ask your Grocer for “OUR TRADE-MARK” HAMS

    [Illustration: Ham]                       [Illustration: Bacon]

                           AND BONELESS BACON.


NONE GENUINE UNLESS SHOWING OUR PATENTED TRADE-MARKS, A LIGHT METALLIC
SEAL ATTACHED TO THE STRING, AND TO THE STRIPED CANVAS, AS IN THE CUTS.

          A little higher in price, but of unrivalled quality


       *       *       *       *       *


                               INDELIBLE

  Mark your Clothing! Clear record of half a Century.

                                 “Most Reliable and Simplest for plain
                                  or decorative marking.” Use a common
                                                                  pen.

[Illustration: Two children with large packages of ink]

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers, News and Fancy Goods dealers.

                                PAYSON’S
                              Indelible Ink!


       *       *       *       *       *


                             MASON & HAMLIN
                                IMPROVED
                             UPRIGHT PIANOS

                 With their Improved Method of Stringing.

                         PATENTED JULY 24, 1883.


                             CHARACTERIZED BY
              BRIGHTEST, PUREST TONES, GREATEST DURABILITY,
                        IMPROVED METHOD OF STRINGING.

The Strings being directly secured to the iron frame by metal
fastenings will not require tuning one-quarter as often as Pianos on
the old system.

This new mode of piano construction, invented by Mason & Hamlin in
1882, has been fully proved, many excellent experts pronouncing it the
“greatest improvement made in pianos of the century.”

WARRANT.––_Each piano will be accompanied by the fullest warrant.
Determined to achieve the very highest reputation for their
pianofortes, should defect develop itself in any one, the Company will
be more eager to correct it than the purchaser can be to have them._

Pianos can be rented, if preferred, at moderate cost, with privilege of
purchase.


                             MASON & HAMLIN
                                 ORGANS

[Illustration: World map:
  THE OLD WORLD SAYS
    “MATCHLESS”
    “UNRIVALLED”
    FRANZ LISZT
    AND HUNDREDS OF OTHERS
  THE NEW WORLD SAYS
    “MUCH THE BEST
    MUSICIANS GENERALLY SO REGARD THEM”
    THEO. THOMAS
    AND THOUSANDS OF OTHERS]

                          THE WHOLE WORLD SAYS:

At every Great World’s Exhibition since 1867, these organs have been
awarded the Highest Honors.

Supplied to Her Majesty Queen Victoria.

Used in Westminster Abbey.

Used in St. James’s Hall.

Always used by Ira D. Sankey.

After having used a Mason & Hamlin Organ eight years at Corisco Island,
off the western coast of Equatorial Africa, the Rev. C. De Heer,
Missionary, writes:

“This is the only organ, American or European, that has not gone to
pieces within six months after its arrival.”

100 Styles, $22 to $900. Catalogues free.


                     MASON & HAMLIN ORGAN & PIANO CO.,

BOSTON, 154 Tremont St.; NEW YORK, 46 East 14th St.; CHICAGO, 148
Wabash Ave.


       *       *       *       *       *


  1850                 Thirty-Seventh Year.                 1887


                         Manhattan Life
                          INSURANCE CO.
                           OF NEW YORK,
                      156 AND 158 BROADWAY.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

We desire to engage the services of competent, reliable men as Agents,
in localities where this company is not now represented. Liberal
arrangements will be made with men who would like to undertake the
business. The requirements are, a good reputation for honesty and
integrity, popularity, intelligence, industry and perseverance. With
these qualities any man can succeed; if he can add enthusiasm he can
command great success. Send references as to ability, integrity, etc.


  Accumulation                    =_11,155,000_=
  Surplus, by New York standard,   =_2,254,000_=

_Cash surrender values. Policy incontestable after five years. Very
liberal to insurers, embracing the non-forfeiture law of New York._


                   JAMES M. McLEAN, President.

  J. L. HALSEY, 1st Vice-Pres’t.
               H. B. STOKES, 2d Vice-Pres’t.
                            H. Y. WEMPLE, Secretary.
                                         S. N. STEBBINS, Actuary.


       *       *       *       *       *


                         Clinton H. Meneely
                            BELL COMPANY

                            Troy, N. Y.,

                        MANUFACTURE SUPERIOR
                         Church, Chime and
                             Peal Bells.


       *       *       *       *       *


    “THE BEST HYMN AND TUNE BOOK FOR CHOIR AND CONGREGATIONAL USE”
                               ––IS––
                     SONGS OF CHRISTIAN PRAISE.

 Published with or without SCRIPTURE SELECTIONS for RESPONSIVE READING.

              Edited by REV. CHARLES H. RICHARDS, D.D.

The =“Congregationalist”= says: “It has been compiled with a
discriminating wisdom and taste, and edited with a thoroughness, which
are uncommon.”

The =“New York Observer”= says: “It contains everything essential to a
Handbook for general worship and special services.”

The =“Advance”= says: “One of the choicest, richest, and most usable
hymn-books published.”

The =“Golden Rule,”= Boston, Mass., says: “In its musical part, this
service-book is probably not surpassed by any other in the language.”

=Rev. L. H. Cobb, D.D.=, of New York, says: “I have examined it
carefully and thoroughly, and shall be happy to recommend it to our
churches.”

From =Rev. Geo. M. Boynton=, Pastor Congregational Church, Jamaica
Plain, Boston, Mass.: “We have been using ‘Songs of Christian Praise’
for six months, with great pleasure and profit. Both the hymns and
tunes have impressed our people very favorably. There is an excellent
variety in the book, so that it is possible to find a classical,
a popular, or a familiar melody for the expression of almost any
sentiment appropriate to Christian worship.”

=Rev. Geo. L. Spining, D.D.=, Pastor Woodlawn Ave. Pres. Church,
Cleveland, Ohio, says: “It is the best I have ever seen.”

=Rev. J. E. Rankin, D.D.=, says: “The book is a grand one. Certainly
the best of its kind I have ever examined.”

=Rev. Jas. Powell, D.D.=, of New York, N. Y., says: “Of all hymn-books
now before the public of which I have knowledge, THE BEST.”

=Rev. A. Hastings Ross, D.D.=, Pastor First Congregational Church, Port
Huron, Mich., says: “It meets our highest expectations.”

=Rev. Robert West= said: “I know of no superior hymn-book for general
worship.”

=Rev. J. G. Vose, D.D.=, Providence, R. I., says: “Our people are
unanimous in its favor, and enjoy it more and more.”

=Rev. T. M. Monroe=, of Akron, Ohio, says: “The book grows upon us, and
we heartily commend it.”

=Rev. W. H. Thomas=, Leavenworth, Kan., says: “It is just what we
wanted, and has given perfect satisfaction.”

=Rev. M. M. Dana, D.D.=, St. Paul, Minn., says: “For freshness, taste
and adaptedness to congregational purposes, I think this book is
without any superior.”

Returnable copies sent free to pastors and church committees desiring
books for examination. A twenty-four page pamphlet, containing specimen
pages, testimonials, price-lists, etc., mailed free to any address on
application to the publishers.


               _FOR THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL AND PRAYER-MEETING_,

                       SONGS OF PRAISE AND PRAYER,

                 Edited by Rev. CHARLES H. RICHARDS, D.D.

From =Rev. James R. Danforth=, Pastor Central Congregational Church,
Philadelphia, Pa.: “I look upon it as the BEST BOOK before the public
for service in both prayer-meeting and Sunday-school.”

From the =“Congregationalist,”= Boston: “Dr. Richards’s name is enough
to warrant its quality, and examination confirms one’s anticipations of
its merits.”

From the =“Illustrated Christian Weekly,”= New York: “The best book for
its purpose that we have yet seen.”

From =Rev. Judson Titsworth=, Milwaukee, Wis.: “We like it better and
better, and are not in the least happy in the thought that we have only
begun to know it. We like it equally well in the prayer-meeting.”

From =“The Independent,”= New York: “The Rev. Dr. Richards’s ‘Songs
of Praise and Prayer’ may safely be pronounced not only THE BEST YET
PUBLISHED, but a very close approach to the ideal manual, particularly
for the Sunday-school.”

Returnable copies sent free to pastors or church committees desiring
books for examination.


              Scripture Selections for Responsive Reading.

         Selected and arranged by REV. CHARLES H. RICHARDS, D.D.

              50 cents per copy, or 100 copies for $40.00.


                         THE BOOK OF PSALMS.
            Arranged according to original Parallelisms, for
     RESPONSIVE READING IN CHURCH, SABBATH-SCHOOL OR FAMILY WORSHIP.

32mo Edition––Limp cloth, 30 cents; leather covers, 50 cents per copy.
16mo Edition––Cloth binding, 50 cents per copy, or 100 copies for
$40.00.

⁂ Single copies of any of the above books mailed, postage paid, on
receipt of price.

   TAINTOR BROTHERS & CO., Publishers, 18 & 20 Astor Place, New York.


    *       *       *       *       *

            PRESS OF HOLT BROTHERS, 119-121 NASSAU ST., N. Y.

    *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Notes:


Spelling and punctuation were changed only where the error appears to
be a printing error. Capitalization and punctuation in the Receipts
section is inconsistent, and was retained as printed. The remaining
corrected punctuation changes are too numerous to list; the others are
as follows:

  Changed inquries to inquiries in “in answer to these inquiries” on
    page 108.

  West Westminister changed to West Westminster in receipts for Vermont
    on page 124.

  Talledaga changed to Talladega in receipts for Massachusetts on page
    124 and for Connecticut on page 125.

  Marie Adlof changed to Marie Adolf in receipts for Connecticut on
    page 124.

  Westminister changed to Westminster in receipts for Connecticut on
    page 125.

  Nangatuck changed to Naugatuck in receipts for Connecticut on page
    125.

  Mount Sinia changed to Mount Sinai in receipts for New York on page
    125.

  Sante Fee changed to Santa Fé in receipts for Illinois on page 126.

  Manisteo changed to Manistee in receipts for Michigan on page 126.

  Talladego changed to Talladega in receipts for Texas on page 127.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 41, NO. 4, APRIL, 1887 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.