Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

  VOL. XXXVI.      JULY, 1882.      NO. 7.

  THE

  American Missionary

  “THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


  NEW YORK:

  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

  ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
  matter.]




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                                                         PAGE.

  EDITORIALS.

    THIS NUMBER                                            193
    DEATH OF WM. E. WHITING                                194
    PARAGRAPHS                                             194
    THE NEW LAW AND OUR WORK                               195
    GENERAL NOTES--Chinese, Indians, Africa                196
    SEEKING A WIFE IN TARTARY (Cut)                        197
    BENEFACTIONS--SELECTIONS                               199


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ANNIVERSARY REPORTS                                    201
    HAMPTON INSTITUTE                                      201
    FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE                             202
    TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.                             204
    HOWARD UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON                          205
    AVERY INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON                            205
    BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH                              206
    PEEPING THROUGH (Cut)                                  207
    EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE                              207
    NORTH CAROLINA CONFERENCE                              208
    WOMEN’S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION AT MARION, ALA.         210


  AFRICA.

    MR. LADD’S JOURNAL                                     211
    ABYSSINIANS (Cut)                                      213


  THE INDIANS.

    NEW CHURCH AT DUNGINESS                                215


  RECEIPTS                                                 215

         *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, or,
when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C. L.
Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or
Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street, Chicago,
Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life
Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may be
addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

             VOL. XXXVI.      JULY, 1882.      NO. 7.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


Our readers will find in this number of the MISSIONARY reports of
the anniversaries of seven of our institutions. Other reports will
appear in our next issue.

It will be seen that the number of pupils in the higher grades of
study has been unusually large and that the boarding departments
have been crowded as never before.

We opened during the year new dormitory buildings at New
Orleans, Tougaloo and Talladega. These have given much needed
accommodations. By autumn, Livingstone Missionary Hall at Nashville
will be ready for occupancy, affording rooms for 140 boarders
besides chapel, library and recitation rooms. Stone Hall at Atlanta
will also be completed, which, though not a dormitory building,
will nevertheless relieve the other buildings so that greater
accommodations for students can be secured; but still the pressing
need at Atlanta will be more room for the girls’ department.

The growth of interest among the colored people in our schools is
outstripping the growth of conveniences for them, and new dormitory
buildings at several points are becoming an imperative necessity.
There are many reasons for this condition of affairs. One is the
righteous purpose exhibited in the work of the A. M. A. South. Both
whites and blacks realize that our institutions are based upon
the great fundamental principles of the Gospel. They witness the
self-sacrifice of the teachers, their prayerful devotion to the
welfare of their pupils, the frequent revivals resulting from their
efforts, the large number of students sent forth to teach, and
the churches planted and supplied with a responsible and educated
ministry. The work done inspires confidence.

Some time since, the principal of a colored institution received
an honorary degree from a Southern college, whose trustees had
observed his work for a series of years. When conferring the
degree, they said: “We recognize your fidelity to the principles
of those who sent you forth.” It is fidelity to the principles
that have actuated the A. M. A. for nearly forty years that is
winning the hearts of the people, and every year confirms the
conviction that we have only to press forward with renewed energy
and perseverance in order to achieve the best results for the whole
southern portion of our country.

       *       *       *       *       *


The fathers are passing away. The death of Wm. E. Whiting, which
occurred June 3, removes one of the most familiar names in the
annals of the American Missionary Association. He was chosen
member of the Executive Committee at the first election, and no
complete list of the officers of the Association has been published
since, that does not contain his name. Of that first list but one
man survives him (a Vice-President), and of the administrative
officers, he was the last. His position has been various; on the
Executive Committee from 1846 to 1871; Assistant Treasurer from
1865 to 1875; Vice-President from 1876 till his death. In all Mr.
Whiting’s relations to his associates in the office and to the
workers in the field he was ever gentlemanly and courteous; in the
discharge of his duties he was faithful and conscientious. He was
among the first to enlist in the great anti-slavery struggle, and
in the martyr age of that contest he bore his share of contumely,
reproach and danger. In his private life and as a member of the
Church of Christ, he had rendered himself so useful and so beloved
that the heartfelt eulogy pronounced upon him at his funeral by his
pastor might have seemed overdrawn but for the attesting evidence
of the manly and womanly tears that throughout accompanied the
eloquent words.

       *       *       *       *       *


We were pleased to have a call on the 20th of May from Rev. D. K.
Flickinger, the Missionary Secretary of the United Brethren in
Christ, who had just returned from a tour of inspection at the
Shengay Mission in the Sherbro country of West Africa, bringing
with him the Rev. Mr. Gomer, a colored man who is the local
Superintendent of the mission. We gained from them much valuable
information concerning our own mission among that people. It is
wonderful how much exposure that Secretary and his Superintendent
have been able to endure in that climate. We bless God for the
great work which their church through them is doing for West Africa.

       *       *       *       *       *

The faculty and students of the Wesleyan Female College at
Macon, Ga., on the 12th of May celebrated the birthday of their
benefactor, Mr. George I. Seney. They sent him a telegraphic
greeting, which he acknowledged. They had music and poetry and also
an oration by Colonel Hardeman, one of the first orators of the
State.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Christian Recorder_, the official organ of the African M. E.
Church, thus pronounces its benediction upon Mr. John F. Slater,
changing the Spanish Bishop’s cursings upon liberal journalists
into blessings:

  “May Almighty God bless John F. Slater with the perpetual
  blessings pronounced upon His saints and His angels! May he
  live with the martyrs and the confessors! May the Lord judge
  him as he judged Moses and David and Hezekiah! May the earth
  preserve him alive! Let him be blessed day and night, sleeping
  and waking, in eating, in drinking, and in playing, when he
  speaks and when he keeps silence! May not his eyes be blinded,
  his ears be deaf, and his tongue be dumb! Blessed be every
  member of his body! Let him be blessed from to-day and forever!
  May his sepulchre be that of the saints! May no famished wolves
  prey upon his corpse and may his eternal company be that of
  Michael and his angels!”

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NEW LAW AND OUR WORK.

We are mortified that our Government has reversed the traditions
and the precedents which have made our country a home for people
from all parts of the world. The political parties bidding for the
prize of the Pacific Coast have humiliated our nation in the eyes
of all the others. It were a ludicrous spectacle, if it were not so
sad, the great nation of the West receiving at this Atlantic port
in a single month 90,000 immigrants of half a dozen nationalities
and yet shuddering in its Congressional Halls over the 105,000
almond-eyed people who in the last score of years have landed at
our Pacific harbor. It is a grotesque object lesson which we are
now exhibiting at the Golden Gate--our ministers of Government
standing there and watching for any stray vessel ready to send
back the few Chinamen, who, following the star in the east of
Christian civilization, have ventured over the waters to compare
with it their pagan religion. Fifty millions of Christian people
seem afraid to bring their system into competition with the effete
superstitions of a hundred thousand heathen sojourners. We have
been praying that the walls of opposition might be broken down and
the doors opened to the Gospel among the nations; and now when
China is the answer to that prayer, saying “Come to us” with your
glad tidings, and let some of us go over to eat of the tree of life
in your land, we close the port, we slam the door in their faces.

And how does this new law bear upon our work on the Pacific coast?
Will this cutting off of the supply preclude all enlargement of the
school and mission process? May it even call for a curtailment of
our present operations? By no means. We have as a stock on hand,
these hundred thousand people, and we should push our evangelizing
appliances to their utmost capacity, so as to do the most possible
for the soul-welfare of those who are left under our influence, not
only for their own good but preeminently that they may be prepared
to receive and to help to Christianize those who shall yet follow
them, and then, also, to carry with them on their ever-intended
return to the land of their fathers the blessings of the gospel
of Christ. It may be that this enforced quiet and isolation shall
become a mighty factor in this scheme for Christianizing the
Mongolians who are already upon our shores. And so with this sea of
prohibition before us, we hear the voice saying, “Go forward.”

Then the politicians’ law is for only ten years. Meantime it may
appear to the interest of one party or the other to repeal the
restricting edict. The conscience, the principle of the nation,
will be at work. Demands for labor in subduing and developing that
majestic Farther West will yet be heard. Before we are aware of
it, the floodgates may be raised and a great tide of immigration
may set in from the neighboring country over the Western sea. So,
in any event, we must be on the alert, doing in this line the full
measure of work that God brings to our hand.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


THE CHINESE.

--The Chinese Sunday-school of the Mount Vernon Church, Boston,
numbers 110, and is increasing so rapidly that it is difficult to
find teachers.

--Thirty-one societies employ in China 618 laborers and expend
$764,039. The American Board, last year, led in the amount
expended. The China Inland Mission has the largest number of
laborers, and the American Presbyterian Church the largest number
of ordained missionaries.

--The medical ladies of the Methodist Episcopal Mission at
Kin-kiang have more to do than they are able to accomplish. The
Home is crowded with poor, sick women, who cannot be turned away,
showing how great is the need of a hospital building.

--The Medical Missionary Hospitals at Han-kow and Tien-tsin are now
entirely supported by the natives, who thus not only tolerate, but
encourage the propagation of the Christian tenets which are known
to be disseminated at such institutions. Thus old prejudices melt
away.

--The island of Hainan, on the coast of China, has a population of
about 1,500,000. A Mr. Jeremiassen, formerly engaged in the service
of the Chinese customs at Canton, being an earnest Christian, left
this service to engage in mission work at his own expense. He is
now on the island of Hainan for the purpose of introducing the
Gospel there.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

--According to the last statistical report of the Missionary
Society of the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, it had among the
Indians 13 ordained and licensed preachers, 7 candidates, 40
ruling elders, 29 deacons, 24 organized congregations and 527
communicants.

[Illustration: SEEKING TO WIN A WIFE IN TARTARY.]

--At Capt. R. H. Pratt’s Indian Training School there has been an
increasing religious interest the past winter. One evening those
who are already members of Christian churches were asked to rise.
Thirty-four stood up. Then all who were wanting to be Christians,
and trying to be Christians, were asked to rise; whereupon 72
arose. This included the first class. The prayers of the young men,
which are now altogether in English, were short, but in many cases
showing, by the tone and manner, an earnest desire for a Christ
life.

--The latest established of the Training Schools for Indians
is that at Forest Grove, Oregon, under the auspices of the
Presbyterians. It started with an appropriation of only $5,000
two years ago, out of which to erect buildings, clothe and feed
the Indians and pay all the necessary expenses of transportation.
The Indian boys have erected the building in which they live,
doing all the work from the foundations up. They have made all
the furniture, beds, chairs, tables, all the desks and essentials
of the schoolroom. The girls have made bedding, all the clothing
requisite for the schoolroom, and under the guidance of the matron
have done the necessary cooking.

       *       *       *       *       *


AFRICA.

--The United Presbyterian Church of Jamaica has sent Mr. H. G.
Clerk, who has been educated in the college at Kingston, as a
missionary to Old Calabar, Western Africa.

--Mr. James Stewart and party reached Livingstonia early in
September to begin work on the road to be made between Lakes Nyassa
and Tanganyika. Dr. and Mrs. Hennington and party were at Quilimane
Oct. 25.

--Dr. Laws reports the removal of the mission from Cape Maclear,
the previous chief settlement of the Livingstonia Mission, to
Bandawa, on the road now being made to Lake Tanganyika.

--Rev. and Mrs. David Scott and party report themselves at Blantyre
Dec. 10. All were suffering somewhat from fever.

--The C. M. S. Uganda Mission finds Mtesa again on his good
behavior, and the missionaries are having all desired liberty and
much encouragement in their work.

--Three members of the Livingstone (Congo) Inland Mission, Messrs.
Clarke, Richards and Ingham, had succeeded in reaching Stanley Pool
in safety about Christmas.

--The West Central African Mission of the American Board has
experienced a severe loss in the death of Rev. Walter Weldon
Bagster, the leader of the enterprise. Mr. Bagster had occasion to
visit the coast frequently for the furtherance of the work, and on
this account was more exposed to the African fever than those who
remained at Bailunda, the principal station of the mission, the
altitude of which is 5,000 feet above sea level.

--Lake Ngami, to which a native mission has lately been sent, is
2,500 feet above the level of the sea. It lies between 20th and
21st parallels of south latitude, and was discovered on Aug. 1,
1849, by Dr. Livingstone and his fellow-travelers, Messrs. Oswell
and Murray.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Mr. Geo. I. Seney has furnished the means to build a chapel for the
Lucy Cobb Institute at Athens, Ga.

The late Ex-Gov. O. C. Washburn, of Wisconsin, has left by will
$50,000 for a public library at La Crosse.

Hon. John R. Bodwell gives $1,000 and three other persons $700
towards the erection of a new building for the Hallowell Industrial
School.

The Methodist Seminary at Montpelier, Vt., has received $30,000 for
endowment purposes.

Mr. Roland Mather, of Hartford, Ct., has given $12,500 towards the
Professorship Fund of Chicago Seminary.

Mr. Chas. Pratt, a graduate of Amherst College, has given $25,000
towards a gymnasium for that institution.

The Senior Class of Iowa College have secured nearly $6,000 for the
rebuilding of East College.

The late Mrs. Percy, of Oakland, Cal., bequeathed $4,000 to Mills
Seminary; $3,000 for scholarships and $1,000 for general use.

_The Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association at
its last Annual Meeting appealed for $500,000 for the endowment of
its chartered institutions at the South. The anniversaries of the
different colleges of the land are calling the attention of the
benevolent public to their growth and wants. We especially urge the
claims of the colored people South to a full share of the gifts
made for endowment purposes._

       *       *       *       *       *


SELECTIONS.

A RICH MAN’S BENEFACTIONS.

In these days of numerous contested wills it is something of a
novelty to see a rich man forestall the lawyers by making his
bequests before his death. George I. Seney is one of this class.
His large gifts have been entirely unsolicited; they have been
made simply because he himself thought that they ought to be made.
These bequests make in the aggregate $1,485,000, not bestowed
through sentiment or caprice, but in accordance with the trained
judgment of a shrewd, far-sighted business man. When asked why
he made these various bequests during his life, he answered:
“First of all, because I feel that I am a trustee, responsible
for the right use of the money given me. With the experience
that I have, I believe that I am the person best qualified to
carry out the provisions and duties of that trusteeship. What
certainty have I that these provisions and duties would ever be
duly carried out after my death? Absolutely none. Whereas now,
by making these gifts in my lifetime, I am sure that the precise
object I desire is accomplished in just the way I want. And then,
too, I am more and more convinced of the truth of the words: ‘It
is more blessed to give than to receive.’ The great danger of
increasing riches is that it fosters a disposition to hoard money
only for the sake of hoarding it. Slightly to alter a common
word, it becomes _money_-mania with them; they gloat over their
millions, just because they are millions and not because of the
happiness producible from them. Now I maintain that such a spirit
is unworthy not only of a true Christian but of a true man, and I
have determined never to let it appear in my character.”--_New York
Tribune._


GIVING IS GETTING.

One of the plain paradoxes in the realm of mind, matter, nature and
grace, is that true gain comes only through loss; that hoarding
is impoverishing; that there is no way of keeping one’s hold on a
desired good, like parting with it; that acquisition is a result
of expenditure; that dividing is multiplying; that scattering is
increasing; that spending is saving; that giving is getting. Bodily
strength comes from its expenditure, not from its hoarding. Every
wise use of a muscle adds to the power of that muscle.

It is the use, not the possession, of any material treasure that
gives it its highest value. Money gathered and kept for its own
sake increases the discontent and cravings of its holder: while
money sought and handled for its beneficent uses gives pleasure
and satisfaction to him who employs it. As a rule, men and women
of ample means shrink more from the outlay of money for their
personal convenience and enjoyment, or for the giving of pleasure
to others, and really have less of the delights which money-using
might secure, than persons of more limited income who have no
desire for money as money; no wish to be rich, in comparison with
the thought of living and doing richly. Straitened circumstances
are quite likely to increase with growing accumulations of wealth;
and unsatisfied cravings for riches are exaggerated by every effort
at their satisfying. “There is”--indeed there is--“that withholdeth
more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.” And the pinch of
poverty itself can never nip so sharply as the pinch of withholding
avarice.

Our mental faculties gain through their using. Giving out thought
in speech or writing increases one’s treasures of thought, as well
as one’s ease and power of expression. In our moral nature the same
principle prevails. Pres. Hopkins said: “It is of the very nature
of the affections that they give; and of the desires that they
receive.”

The exercise of desire is belittling, that of affection, ennobling.
Desire brings unrest. Affection brings content. When a child
receives gifts, or selfishly employs what has been given him,
his _desires_ are exercised, and by their very exercise they are
strengthened and intensified. But when the child gives to others,
it is his _affections_ which are exercised, and which are enlarged
by their exercise. As with the child, so with those of us of any
age. Only as we give do we get anything that is worth getting. Only
in our giving do we find the real pleasure of living. If we find
that our affection, our ministry, our presence, is a source of
comfort or pleasure, we recognize a blessing just there.

  “For the heart grows rich in giving; all its wealth is living
    grain.
  Seeds, which mildew in the garner, scattered, fill with gold the
    plain.”

                                                  --_S. S. Times._




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.


HAMPTON INSTITUTE.

BY REV. H. B. FRISSELL.

Anniversary day at Hampton was cool and comfortable. The steamers
from New York and Boston for several days previous had been
bringing the friends of the institution from the North, and the
morning of Thursday, May 25, found a good number assembled to
witness the anniversary exercises.

At 8.30 A.M. the battalion was drawn up in front of Academic Hall
and the regular morning inspection was held by the U.S.A. officer
who has charge of the military drill of the school.

The students and visitors then passed to the large assembly room of
the New Academic, where morning prayers were held and the news of
the day was read. The rest of the morning was spent in visiting the
classes and looking at the various industries. The Indian classes
claimed their full share of attention, and showed an improvement
in the advancement and general character of the pupils over last
year. The kitchen garden, the cooking class for girls and the
class in the new “tonic sol fa” system were filled with visitors.
The training class, where the seniors had a chance to show their
skill in teaching a row of ten urchins brought up from the primary
school, was one of the features of the day.

The new stone building erected for the industries of the school
with the money given by Mrs. Stone showed this department to the
best advantage. The shoe shops, the printing establishment, the
tailoring and knitting department have gained a new impulse, now
that they have gotten into their large new rooms. The saw mill, the
harness-making shop, the tin, carpenter and wheelwright shops were
all in full blast.

After a pleasant lunch in the “Stone building,” the procession,
headed by the trustees and re-inforced by a large party from
Norfolk, made its way toward Virginia Hall, where the graduating
exercises were to be held. In a few moments the large hall was
crowded. A few words from Gen. Armstrong explained the change
in the graduating exercises inaugurated the previous year, by
which the speakers of the day were for the most part members of
classes that had graduated in previous years, and had come back
to tell of work done and experience gained. Only two speakers,
the valedictorian and salutatorian, were from the class of ’82.
This change of plan has been found to work well, and has made the
exercises of the last two years especially interesting.

The speeches of the afternoon were, for the most part, full of
practical common sense, plain, straightforward accounts of work
done and the difficulties and discouragements met and overcome. The
salutatory, delivered by one of the girls of the graduating class,
told of the missionary work which the students had done among the
poor people of Hampton, of the Bible reading in the miserable
cabins, and the help which they had been able to bring to those in
distress.

“My Home” was the title of a very interesting piece by one of the
girls, in which she described the condition of affairs among the
colored people in one of the western towns of Virginia. “To the
Girls” gave the graduating class and the audience the wisdom which
had come from a year’s experience in the world. Thos. Wildcatt
Alford, a young Indian chief, made a strong plea for the education
of his people. He said that one educated Indian could do more for
the benefit of his people in one year than a regiment of soldiers
in ten years. He spoke hopefully and bravely of the future of his
race, and of what he meant to do for it. He is one of the three
Indians who graduated with the present class, the first who have
finished the regular English course of the school.

“Our Race,” by one of the early graduates of the school, told of
the discouraged feeling which he had when he arrived at Hampton and
found that most of the students had to work hard with their hands
every day. He showed of what advantage that same training had been
to him, of how he had been able to build his own school-house. He
spoke of lack of industry as being one great obstacle in the way of
the success of the colored people.

Between the speeches, the great chorus, massed in the front part
of the hall, swelled out in the national hymns of the different
countries and the pathetic slave songs so full of power and
feeling. After the valedictory, Rev. Dr. Strieby, the President of
the Board of Trustees, presented the diplomas to the graduating
class with appropriate remarks. Sixty students came forward to
receive their diplomas. The present class is much the largest that
has gone forth from the institution.

After the parting hymn had been sung by the class, Rev. Dr. Bartend
paid a glowing tribute to the school and to Gen. Armstrong’s work.
He said: “For many years after the beginning of this institution,
we were accustomed in this part of the country to speak of the
Hampton school as an experiment; to-day, by the help of Almighty
God, we can say that Hampton school is a magnificent success.” He
spoke of the work that was being done for the colored race, of the
manly characters that were being developed by the school training.
He referred to the Indians, and especially to the speech which one
of them had made. He spoke of the intention of the early settlers
of the country in regard to them. “Two hundred and fifty years ago
there came floating into this beautiful harbor vessels from the old
country. What was their object? What was their hope? The prayer
that arose from their decks was this: God give us strength that we
may educate and Christianize the Indian. William and Mary College,
now almost ready to perish, is the monument of their endeavor. They
did not see the answer to their prayer. God works in His own way,
in His own time, with His own men. Could they see what we to-day
behold, they would say as do we, speed on! God speed this glorious
school. God bless its patrons that we may raise up good citizens
here and glorify God forever and forever.”

The closing remarks were made by Rev. Dr. Burrows, of Norfolk,
in the course of which he said that he had often heard of the
institution, but the half had never been told him. When the crowd
poured forth from the hall, the sun was far down in the west and
the steamer was waiting to take away some that had brought much of
brightness and cheer to our anniversary day.

       *       *       *       *       *


FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE.

BY MRS. L. A. SHAW.

Commencement week, crowded with exercises representing the treasure
accumulated by a year’s labor and overhung with the joys and
sorrows usually attending such occasions, has just closed. Nearly
two weeks ago “the last things” commenced, and the sadness of
parting from friends began to settle down, tempering the joy of
having completed a year’s work.

Friday, May 19, the first public exercises were held. A class of
thirteen, having completed the Common School Normal Course, gave an
exhibition and received certificates of fitness to teach the common
English branches.

Sunday morning Prof. Bennett preached an appropriate sermon from
Matt. 25:34. His delineation of the blessedness and glory of the
saint’s inheritance in Heaven was especially attractive to tired
teachers and pupils. The Baccalaureate sermon in the afternoon by
President Cravath was from John 3:19. The darkness of the souls
of those who engage in evil practices was so vividly depicted that
deep and lasting impressions must have been made on many minds.

Dr. Haygood, President of Emory College, Georgia, delivered the
annual sermon before the Missionary Society of the University.
The speaker by his book, “Our Brother in Black,” has proven his
interest in the colored people, and by his recent refusal of the
office of Bishop in the M. E. church has demonstrated his loyalty
to the choice made when he entered upon educational work. His
sermon was listened to with close attention as he presented anew
the setting apart and sending out of Paul and Barnabas on their
first missionary tour.

On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M., oral
examinations of the various classes were conducted by their
respective teachers. These were visited by quite a number of
friends and strangers from different parts of the country, some of
whom took part in the work by asking questions as opportunity was
given.

Monday evening the two literary societies of the University held
their anniversary exercises. In a debate between representatives
of the two societies on the question “Should the State assume the
payment of bonds issued in aid of railroads,” their ability to
grapple and handle a living subject in a masterful and convincing
manner was fully demonstrated.

Tuesday evening the Senior Preparatory exhibition, and Wednesday
evening the graduating exercises of the higher normal department
and the Alumni Address by John H. Burrus, were attended by large
and enthusiastic audiences. Mr. Burrus is a member of the class of
’75. He described the “man for the times” in a way to inspire those
preparing for usefulness. Four higher normal graduates received
their diplomas, and ten from the Senior Preparatory class enter
college.

Thursday, the “day of days,” to the two college graduates,
dawned clear and beautiful. The audience assembled promptly at
ten o’clock. The exercises opened with a number of distinguished
guests on the platform. The music by the Mozart Society elicited
much praise, as did the music given on other occasions by the
same society. The two young men who were that day to take their
degrees delivered their orations in a self-possessed and dignified
manner that was a prophecy of future success. The subjects,
“True greatness of republics” and “Atheism destructive of man’s
nobility,” sufficiently indicate the line of thought.

The commencement address by Dr. Scott, President of the State
University Columbus, Ohio, was worthy of the occasion, and crowned
the whole with its beauty and grace of diction and the scholarly
treatment of the hackneyed subject, Time. Music, sculpture and
painting were beautifully shown not only to pay tribute to time,
but to have their very existence in it. Words fail to describe
the effect of the whole with the exquisite closing in the words
of the poem, “I sat alone with my conscience.” It was remarked by
one of the hearers, “That is the poetry of science.” After a few
remarks by Gov. Hawkins and the Hallelujah Chorus by the Mozart
Society, came the alumni dinner. At the table with the President
and his wife were seated Gov. Hawkins, Judge Lawrence and wife of
Nashville, Dr. Scott, orator of the day, Dr. and Mrs. Phillips of
the Nashville Institute and the two new A. Bs. The other guests
were seated at tables near the President. The after-dinner speeches
by the Governor, Dr. Scott and Mr. Stewart, who is finishing the
new custom-house, were evidences that “the world moves.” The
Governor spoke of the solicitude he felt at the close of the war
in regard to the future of the colored people and his questions
as to what would really be the outcome of the struggle. He said,
“The question has been answered. It is answered in the exercises
of this occasion, in the intelligent faces before me. The tasteful
decorations of these halls, these very walls themselves, have
answered the question of doubters as to the elevation of the
colored people.” His presence and remarks were well calculated to
help on the good work of breaking down the walls of caste prejudice
in which many minds are still inclosed.

Dr. Scott referred to the condition of things during and at
the close of the war, in which he had a part. He expressed his
delight in being permitted to see the growth and progress of the
last seventeen years. His words of appreciation and sympathy
were especially grateful to the workers. He reminded them that
any institution which outlives the trying period of training and
sending out its first graduates and of nourishing and giving
strength to its first alumni was destined to live and grow. Alma
Mater is a name dear to every good student, and Fisk University has
a history and a future. The delightful exercises were brought to a
fitting close by all rising and singing the doxology, “Praise God
from Whom all blessings flow.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TOUGALOO UNIVERSITY, MISS.

BY MISS J. KELLOGG.

The final examinations occupied three days, the 25th, 26th and
29th of May. The attendance of parents and friends increased from
day to day. On Sunday a Sunday-school Institute was held and the
attentive throng seemed about as great as the chapel would hold,
but the absolute limit of its capacity was not reached until the
exhibition, Tuesday evening, when the people were fairly wedged
in. A beneficent down-pour of rain Wednesday morning prevented the
crowd from being any greater on that day, and rendered the air so
cool and pleasant that people did not suffer from being closely
packed.

The Committee on Decorations had made the chapel very inviting
with a fountain, motto and other devices. A class of six earnest,
faithful Christian students, three young men and three young women,
having completed the normal course, were to receive certificates.
President Pope addressed his sermon to them Sabbath evening--his
theme being Serving One’s Generation.

At 10 o’clock on Wednesday, the 31st, the commencement exercises
began. As these young people have been, in accordance with the
avowed aim of this institution, educated for usefulness in
practical life, it was fitting that their essays and orations
should be as they were, on subjects of every-day interest and
treated in an intensely direct and practical manner.

The music was inspiring, especially the class song, composed
for them by the Rev. B. A. Imes, of Memphis, a fine scholar and
talented gentleman of their own race.

In presenting their certificates, the President gave them five
“Remembers” from the Holy Scriptures, as his final charge to them.

In the afternoon the annual address was delivered by the Rev.
Dr. Truman M. Post, of St. Louis. As I cannot reproduce it for
you, I will only say that it seemed an address which must prove
a strong lever to aid in the “Uplift of Character, Intelligence
and Social Life,” which was his theme. Taking a sweeping glance
at the providential dealings of God with races and nations, he
came speedily to the problems which confront us in this our
commonwealth; and, after pointing out that races or individuals can
only be uplifted by their own exertions, cannot be raised but only
assisted to rise by external aid, and that it is not merely duty,
but godlike privilege for the stronger and more fortunate to render
this aid to the weaker and less fortunate, he dwelt upon specific
means of advancement and elevation, and pointed to a hopeful future.

There were but few white visitors present. Despite the rain,
a carriage load of gentlemen came out from Jackson, and added
materially to the interest of the exercises--Mr. Lemly, a trustee
of this institution; Col. Power and Gen. Clifton, members of the
State Board of Visitors.

The first-named gentleman is accounted a firm friend of the school,
but can never be prevailed upon to evidence it by speech-making.
The others spoke very kindly and entertainingly. In the close of
his witty and eloquent speech, Col. Power, Editor of the _Clarion_,
spoke of the progress he had witnessed in this school since its
establishment, and expressed the hope that a few years hence
the enrollment will have increased from a couple of hundred to
a thousand, and that a spacious chapel will have been erected,
capable of holding them all and their friends.

Gen. Clifton stated that in asking the Legislature for an increased
appropriation for this school he had said that he believed it was
doing more good than any other school in the State, and he could
repeat that as still his conviction, because it is doing a work so
vitally needed.

       *       *       *       *       *


THEOLOGICAL DEP’T, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.

BY REV. W. W. PATTON, D.D.

Our theological anniversary exercises passed off very pleasantly
May 5th. They were held in the Assembly Presbyterian Church,
which is of convenient size and centrally situated. Though
the weather was unpleasant, the attendance was good, both of
the white and colored races, and included various persons of
distinction. The number of theological students this year has been
thirty, not including eight others, who study principally in the
classical department. The graduates were five, connected with the
Congregational, Presbyterian and Methodist denominations. Three
go to the Southern field, and two look towards Africa. Their
addresses were most creditable in matter and manner, and were
warmly received by the audience. On behalf of the Washington Bible
Society, Rev. Dr. Butler presented each of them with a neatly bound
copy of the Holy Scriptures. Rev. Dr. Bullock, the chaplain of
the United States Senate, made an excellent, practical address to
them, on their coming life-work, and Rev. Dr. Craighead, Dean of
the department, added some felicitous closing remarks. Owing to
the endowment by Mrs. Stone, supplemented by the large aid of the
American Missionary Association, and in a less degree by that of
the Washington Presbytery, the Theological Department of Howard
University is in vigorous operation; and we are prepared to receive
and train young men, white or colored, for the Gospel Ministry of
all Evangelical denominations.

       *       *       *       *       *


AVERY INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.

BY REV. E. T. HOOKER.

The public exercises incident to the closing of the school year at
Avery Institute began Monday evening, May 29, with an exhibition
by a portion of the intermediate department, under the charge of
Miss Emma T. Miller. Though this was not a usual or most prominent
feature of anniversary, it was enthusiastically received by one
of the best audiences of the week, which have all been large and
indefatigable. They were well repaid by the bright recitations,
well-drilled singing and tasteful appearance of the pupils.

Tuesday morning, at 10 o’clock, began what is called “Children’s
Day,” being a similar exhibition of accomplishments by the primary
department, under Mrs. Brown and Miss McKinley, both natives of
Charleston and of kindred blood with their pupils. The performances
in dialogue, recital and music of these little ones did not differ
from those in Northern schools of the same grade, which is enough
to say both for the culture received and the faculty displayed.
There were as many faces, too, of ideal childhood beauty, and
obviously as much parental pride somewhere back of this their
juvenile début, as if their race was not just making its début upon
the stage of Saxon civilization.

Tuesday night saw a rendering of a lengthy and varied programme
by the scholars of the upper grades not graduating. The _News and
Courier_, in a report printed the next morning, says: “Of the
essays it may truthfully be said that they were written with neat
rhetoric and obvious originality; of the recitations, that they
were given without a faltering of memory, and some with admirable
distinctness of enunciation and winning hold upon the listeners.”

The regular Commencement exercises were held on Thursday, and
attracted a large crowd of persons of both colors and was of more
than passing interest. The stage was handsomely decorated, and
above was the class motto, “Perseverance overcomes all obstacles.”
After the essays, songs and choruses, the diplomas of the Institute
were awarded to the three graduates by the Principal of the
Institute, who took occasion to commend the graduates for their
perseverance and to congratulate them upon their success. The Rev.
E. J. Meynardie then delivered an eloquent address on “National
Responsibility,” arguing that no civilization is perfect which is
not founded upon the fundamental principles of revealed religion.
He also claimed with justifiable pride to have been the first man
in this city in _antebellum_ days to advocate publishing the repeal
of the prohibition upon schooling for the slaves. He spoke within
A. M. A. walls evidently _con amore_. He is pastor of the Bethel M.
E. Church South.

       *       *       *       *       *


BEACH INSTITUTE, SAVANNAH, GA.

BY H. H. WRIGHT, PRINCIPAL.

The work at Beach Institute is taking on more definite shape.
This year a class has graduated, and the course of study for the
remaining grades has been brought into something like symmetry.
The Savannah public schools graduate the colored pupils from
the grammar grade, above which no provision is made for their
education. For the white pupils, however, a High School is
maintained. Hence the ambitious colored youth, many of whom are as
fair as their white neighbors, turn hopefully to the “Beach” as a
school which will give them what the city fathers have denied them.

The first of the public exercises which have just closed the
academic year was a public examination, held Friday, May 26. The
programme was the regular daily programme, so far as the order of
classes was concerned, but the questions put were given at random
and without previous preparation from the work of the entire year.
By this plan, of course, a few failures occurred, but the visitors
felt that they had seen the classes fairly tested, and their hearty
commendation was duly appreciated.

The second public exercise was a sermon preached in the
Congregational Church to the graduating class on Sunday evening,
May 28, by the pastor, Rev. Dana Sherrill. His earnest words of
advice to rise above county and State lines and become at least
national in their views of life were fitly spoken and well received.

The third public exercise occurred Wednesday, May 31, beginning at
11 o’clock A.M. An extensive programme of declamations, dialogues
and songs was rendered in a most satisfactory manner and listened
to by a crowded house. The tables, the organ and the lamps were
most tastefully trimmed with a profusion of flowers, the gifts
of the pupils. Jessamines mingled their fragrance with that of
the late-blooming rosebuds. Pond lilies and Spanish moss were
enlivened by the æsthetic sunflower. Upon the platform, during a
part of the exercises, were the Hon. J. O. Ferrill and Mr. Murray.
The former is a member of the City Board of Education and a firm
friend of the colored people. He has frequently advocated in the
Board, but with only partial success, more extended facilities
for their education in the public schools, and better salaries
for the colored teachers. Mr. Murray is a representative of the
Savannah _Daily Recorder_. In the audience were numerous colored
men of influence, who happened to be in the city attending the
Baptist Missionary Convention. The music was furnished entirely
by the pupils, and included songs, quartets, duets, solos and two
instrumental pieces. The exercises were closed by the graduation of
a class of two girls. The diplomas were presented by the principal.
Then the pupils rose at the touch of the organ, and striking up a
march, “The Christian Soldier,” sang their way to their various
school-rooms, and the year’s work was ended.

[Illustration: PEEPING THROUGH.]

       *       *       *       *       *


EMERSON INSTITUTE, MOBILE, ALA.

BY REV. O. D. CRAWFORD.

Emerson Institute has rounded out a year of peculiar
disappointments and has crowned the last days with a brighter bow
of promise than ever. The seven teachers have sought a well-earned
rest in their cooler homes of the North. Their heroism at the
burning of our church and school building last January, and their
cheerful endurance for Christ’s sake of the hardships that have
followed, have been beautiful object lessons to their pupils and
any spectators. As the scattering of the early disciples from
Jerusalem advanced the Kingdom, so our dispersion to two different
sections of the city, it is believed, has accomplished the hope of
our night.

No colored man has co-operated with us more efficiently than Rev.
A. F. Owens, pastor of the Third Baptist Church. He and his people,
after our fire, offered us the use of their house for school
purposes. No mention of pay was permitted beyond that involved in
some repairs necessary to adapt it to our purposes.

The marks at the written examinations fell below those of last
year, as might have been expected in the midst of such privations.
But at the oral examinations, on the 25th, the various classes
gratified their teachers and visitors. Among the latter were our
staunch friend, Rev. Dr. Burgett, and three colored pastors.

The brightest color in the bow appeared in the anniversary
exercises. The preparation had not interfered with regular lessons,
but their thoroughness was manifest in the hearty testimony of the
leading white M. E. pastor in the city, Rev. J. O. Andrews, who
had offered the opening prayer. The exercises were witnessed by
over 800 people, some of them outside, at the window. Those within
entered by tickets, an experiment which fully succeeded in the
presence of those who have some real interest in the work, and in
securing better attention. The new Music Department was justified
by its fruits, especially in a short cantata in which the Queen of
the Fairies crowned the virtues.

Like the latest wonder, the exhibition is universally declared
the finest ever witnessed here. The deliverances warned against
alcohol, tobacco, ignorance and laziness, and recommended labor and
piety.

The advanced point made was the presence and remarks of the
Recorder (Mayor) of the Port, R. B. Owen. He was accompanied by
his wife. As his honor came upon the platform, before the closing
song, the Superintendent grasped his hand, exclaiming, “The North
and the South, one and inseparable!” to which he responded, “That
is my sentiment.” In a few well-chosen words he expressed his
pleasure in the efforts of the colored people to gain an education;
declared that the time had come for intelligence and morality
to be the recognized mark of a man, and said he was “infinitely
gratified” with the performances of the young people at this time,
and grateful for the opportunity of witnessing the results here
obtained, and of giving a word of cheer to all engaged in the work
of education.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NORTH CAROLINA CONFERENCE.

BY SUPERINTENDENT ROY.

The dedication of Christ’s Church of Wilmington, and the building
of the Teachers’ Home and the rebuilding of the school-house were
duly noted in the AMERICAN MISSIONARY, as the _plant_ of that
_seedsman_ Mr. J. J. H. Gregory, of Marblehead, Mass. The picture
of the same three buildings has also adorned our magazine. Now
comes the Conference of the State to inspect the working of this
machinery, to test the quality of its products and its capacity.

Arriving one day ahead of the opening, we take a leisurely visit
through the several departments of the school, and find it
reconstructed after the most approved style of the Grammar School.
We find it presided over by six accomplished lady teachers, Misses
Chandler, Warner, Fitts, Jewett and Bishop, and Mrs. Steere, who
has charge of the musical department. We find it numbering 220
pupils; we find custom work done; we find the temperance text-books
proposed by the A. M. A. introduced, as in all its schools of
the South, and working wonders in laying the foundations for a
temperance-loving generation. We test the capacity of the Home
and find it elastic enough to take in sixteen guests beyond the
fifteen of the regular family; we find it a marvel of convenience
and taste and economy. We find the church edifice a gem of beauty,
with its noble bell, which does double duty in serving the church
and the school; and we find the saving of several thousand dollars
of expense and the superior quality of workmanship due to the
personal supervision of Rev. D. D. Dodge, the pastor, who selected
the material and had the jobs done by the day. We hear of a Sister
of Charity, who says that the only thing in Wilmington she covets
is this group of buildings. We hear of citizens pronouncing it
an ornament to the city. We hear of leading pastors in the city
saying that it is doing the best work in Wilmington for the colored
people. We find that the entire work on the three buildings was
done by colored mechanics, except one master mason on the brick
work and a dozen days of bricklaying.

And so the Conference finds itself _in situ_. The opening sermon
is preached by Rev. A. Connet. The moderator of the last year is
re-elected for this year, Rev. G. S. Smith, of Raleigh, a graduate
of Atlanta, a member of the Executive Committee of the State
Temperance organization. Rev. A. Connet is made registrar in the
place of Rev. D. Peebles, who has left us to go and look after the
other “twin relic” in Utah. When we were organizing this body at
Raleigh, with five churches, I asked Dr. Tupper, the President of
the Shaw (Baptist) University there, how many churches they had in
the State. He answered, five _hundred_, “but never mind,” said he,
“I can see that in twenty-five years you will have a great church
work as the result of your school process.” So to the five we this
year add two, those at Troy and Pekin, with two more coming on.
While we are here, a Council, called in the regular way, ordains
as the pastor of those two churches Mr. W. H. Ellis, a graduate
of Williams. The sermon was preached by Supt. Roy; the prayer of
ordination offered by Rev. J. P. Les Strade; the charge delivered
by Rev. G. S. Smith and the right hand presented by Rev. Islay
Walden. The two educated colored young ladies who teach school in
those two churches are present to report their work, thus showing
how by our plan the school and church work go hand in hand. Every
church is represented, and so is every one of the seven schools of
the State. As the churches must have their narrative of the state
of religion, so the schools must have their report of operations,
with discussion as to measures and principles.

An evening is given to the subject of temperance, especially to
the business of reconstructing, reorganizing and resupplying
the temperance army after its recent defeat in the State, and
preparatory to the next intended assault upon the devil’s
stronghold. The process of recruiting was beautifully illustrated
when Miss Jewitt, with her class and a blackboard before the
great assembly, brought up the enthusiasm as they represented the
deadly poison of alcohol, how it is made, what its effects upon
the physical system, upon the mental and moral nature. The topics
of infant baptism, family training, Sunday-school management,
were duly handled. In the local Sunday-school of two hundred
scholars, the Conference appeared to pay its _addresses_, and
offered the same courtesy to the day-school. Some of the city
pulpits were supplied. The whole was an occasion of stimulus and
of encouragement. Slowly but steadily our work is advancing in
the old North State. Our two lady missionaries for the State,
Miss Farrington, supported by the ladies of Maine, to labor in
connection with this mission in Wilmington, and Miss E. P. Hayes,
sustained by the W. H. M. A., of Boston, laboring at Raleigh, where
she had taught many years, were present to report their work and
to add to the inspiration of the occasion. It is said that there
are not many models of patents in the Patent Office in Washington
furnished by women; but these women show a wonderful ingenuity in
devising ways and means for doing the people good, and reveal a
vast amount of good accomplished.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOMAN’S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

_At Marion, Ala._

BY MISS MARY K. LUNT, SELMA.

Mrs. H. S. De Forest, of Talladega, President, called the meeting
to order, and after the opening exercises, welcomed representatives
of sister societies and visitors who had come in to listen to the
reports of the harvesters. Letters expressing interest and good
cheer were read from the President and Corresponding Secretary
of the Woman’s Missionary Association of Boston. Mrs. Fay sang
“If I were a Voice.” Miss Partridge, of Talladega, read a letter
from Miss Sawyer, of Boxford, Mass., a former laborer in the
field, showing that her interest had not abated. Miss P. added
a few remarks entreating the girls to make the most of their
opportunities, showing that each one had a special duty to perform
in imparting to others what she herself had received.

Mrs. Andrews, of Talladega, then made an address on Woman’s Home
Missionary Work, giving an account of the organization of the
State society, the motives which prompted and warranted it, with
a summary of the organization of the parent society in Boston and
the number of missionaries first commissioned to the South and
Southwest, reviewing the home work in our own State.

After singing “Rescue the Perishing,” the reports from the local
societies at Marion, Mobile, Montgomery, Selma and Talladega were
given. The Marion society, with its thirty names enrolled, meets
once a week. The Mothers’ meeting has been conducted by Mrs. A. W.
Curtis, whose illness prevented her presence at this time. Miss
Mickle told how greatly they esteemed Mrs. C., and by request led
in prayer for her recovery.

The girls composing the Emersonian Mission Band of Mobile, are
doing their part in the work of helpfulness and uplifting, by
making articles for a fair, the proceeds of which are to be given
to a missionary in South Africa. The mothers’ meeting, under
the influence of Miss Clark, visiting missionary, gives promise
of increasing interest. The Woman’s Missionary Association has
received fifty names since its organization, thirty-two reporting
themselves this year. Missionary subjects are presented once a
month, and a collection is taken.

Montgomery reports forty members. Since late in the winter
they have been engaged in making garments for the destitute. A
special case of destitution, discovered by one of the members,
was the means of rousing to greater activity. The meetings of the
society aim to elevate in literary culture, as well as in other
directions. Mrs. Fay offered suggestions in regard to the manner of
increasing the interest of these meetings. Miss Fairbanks and Miss
Curtis followed with remarks, sensible and practical, in regard
to the training of the girls in our churches and schools. The
contributions amounted to $39, $5 of which was donated to the Mendi
Mission, the remainder to home work.

Selma has an enrollment of 32. Many of the members had been unable
to attend regularly on account of business and family cares.
Missionary tea parties were introduced, proving quite successful.
Select reading, singing, conversation and simple refreshments
occupied the hours of meeting. In response to a call from Tougaloo,
two quilts were made and sent to help replace those lost by fire.
In connection with the mission workers, they have contributed
the sum of $50, $26.75 of which was sent to the A. M. A. as a
special gift, the balance being expended for the church. A ladies’
prayer-meeting, three sewing classes and children’s meeting had
been sustained during the week. A Young People’s Literary Society
was held on alternate Monday nights.

Talladega showed a very prosperous year in the monthly gatherings
of the Mission Band, mothers’ meetings and two sewing classes. With
funds collected they had purchased a carpet for the platform of the
chapel, secured a share in the John Brown steamer, defrayed the
funeral expenses of a poor woman and aided many needy and destitute
around them. The young people of both sexes are being educated in
the direction of missionary labors through the different committees
which have been formed for that purpose.

A paper prepared by Miss Wilcox, of Burrell School, “Helps or
Hindrances, Which?” was read by the Secretary, being a practical
and earnest appeal to all Christian workers in the field to be more
self-denying and untiring in their efforts for the women and girls
for whom they are laboring. Another by Mrs. Headen was read on “The
Gain of Giving,” reviewing three points “How, When and What Shall
We Give,” aptly quoting Scripture to sustain her arguments and
making a practical application.

We cannot fail to be encouraged and strengthened by this mutual
interchange of thoughts, and to have our hearts drawn out in closer
sympathy, while listening to the prayers of those for whom we are
laboring that they may become sons and daughters of the Great King.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. LADD’S JOURNAL.

_Sunday, Dec. 25._--Christmas morning in the tropics! My ankle
is much better, though I cannot use my foot yet. We started at 8
A.M.; stopped for lunch under some trees at _Gaigy_. We are getting
rather tired of our hard fare, and long for one good, square meal.
We have kept further from the river than we supposed we should, and
are practically on the desert. We have seen the river only once.
Then we proposed to camp at it, but our guides disagreed and we
went on, and finally, it being Sunday night, we camped, earlier
than usual, about a mile from the river at _El Hefera_.

_Monday, Dec. 26._--The men are getting worn out and begin to
lag. It was 8:15 A.M. before we could get them started. Proximity
to water has a bad effect on camel drivers. It is very hot. We
turn out of our road a few steps to see the ruins of an ancient
church at a place called Merre. We discover a big crocodile,
about 15 feet long, lying on a mud bank. We lunch in the town of
_Aboo-Hashein_, in a plantation on the bank of the river under the
shelter of a “sakia,” or water-wheel platform. We meet the postman
in the afternoon and send home some postals. We come upon some
fine cataracts in the river and see half a dozen huge crocodiles.
We camp for the night at _El Shereigh_, near the bank, in a truly
tropical bit of scenery. Ankle much better.

_Tuesday, Dec. 27._--Started at 6.30. Mousa’s camel ran away with
him to-day. It was a most comical sight, and then to end up with,
when he at last reached the ground, she kicked him twice. We lunch
on the bank of the river at a point called _Tondaeb_, where we
leave the river for 8 hours to cut a bend. Then we have a little
rivalry with another caravan that has tried to keep ahead of us,
and we get ahead. We are on the desert again. In fact, it is
nothing but desert all the way to Berber. We climb a high plateau
called _Natayielinnus_, and camp for the night in the middle of it,
at a spot covered with the most beautiful, clean, white sand, just
the thing for the children to play in if they only had it somewhere
in the back yard. There is a town on the river to our right called
_El Karaba_.

_Wednesday, Dec. 28._--Started at 7 A.M., and gradually descended
from the high plateau. We have seen great numbers of partridges and
two gazelles. We cross the dry bed of a river lined with palms,
and strike the Nile again at the “5th” cataract. The rapids here
extend for several miles. The slate formation along the bank has in
some places been fused and looks much like coal. We stop for lunch
at a point where we can get a good view of the cataract in both
directions, called _Wady El Hamar_. Then we leave the river for
about two hours, ascend another high desert plateau, and gradually
descend again to an open plain, where nestles a village called
Genenila. We camp for the night opposite the large, fruitful island
of _Artoli_, where one of our guides lives. In the evening we
receive two presents of milk.

_Thursday, Dec. 29._--The second guide swam over this morning from
Artoli. We started at 7.15, and traversed a magnificent plain,
needing only water upon it to make it a most fruitful region. As
we approach Berber the houses are better built, and the villages
are larger and more numerous. We passed the following in rapid
succession: El Bowga; El Hodbab, a very large one; El Abidieh,
close to the last; El Farekha; Dangail, where there is a ruin; El
Hassa, El Ezarab, Es Sraphine and El Hor. Just before we reached
this last place our guide told us that here Sheik Hassan Halifa’s
father lived; that he had heard we were coming, and had sent orders
to him not to let us pass without coming to dine with him. This is
about five miles from Berber. Here the Sheik had come to meet us
himself at the house of his father. And what a princely reception
it was! The grand old Arab, who is the son of the former king of
this country, came out to meet us, and brought us in. The house
was ours, and we were free to stay as long as we pleased. The
most delicate sherbets were placed before us. A sheep was killed,
and a grand banquet served in the most royal style. We were quite
surprised and overwhelmed at all this unexpected kindness. But the
grand old Arab, under whose father 5,000 men bit the dust in their
attempt to defend the country against the Turks, seemed to take
a delight in this generous hospitality. At 3.15 P.M. we took our
leave, and, following the telegraph lines, entered Berber through a
fine broad avenue. Sheik Hassan Halifa accompanied us. On the way
two of his men showed us their skill in dromedary racing, and it
certainly was quite exciting, especially when the animals became
unmanageable and came tearing down upon us, threatening to upset
the whole crowd. We reached Berber at 5 o’clock. We went first to
the lower landing-place, and then to the upper to select a place
for our camp, and finally settled on the former. We pitched our
three tents near the water, on the high bluff-like bank. The whole
space of both landing places is covered with bales and boxes, etc.,
etc., showing that considerable business is done here. The people
appear very friendly, and we are well pleased with the look of
the place. We have come 405 miles on camel-back, over one of the
hardest of deserts, and to-morrow morning we don’t propose to get
up very early.

_Friday, Dec. 30._--There is a high wind that rolls up the
whitecaps on the river like a sea. The Berberinos are a fine,
muscular, well-built set of people, and, apparently, a happy race.
We have heard the first hearty laughter here since we came to the
country. Their voices, too, are very sweet and musical. After we
have made an attempt at washing off the dust and dirt of travel, we
go to see the Governor, Ibrahim Bey. He talks Turkish and we get
on well together. The government dahabeah is the only one here.
There are a few merchant boats, but they are all full or engaged.
So we have the boldness, as ours is pressing business, to ask
the Governor for his dahabeah. No! we can’t have it. He is going
out to collect taxes and needs it himself. We can go by camel or
by merchant boat, as we please. Then we haul out our orders from
Cairo and give him another opportunity to let us have the dahabeah.
Finally he says that if we can get an order from Raouf Pasha, the
Governor General of the Soudan, he will let us have it. We take
a walk through the city, and then returning to our tents send a
telegram to Khartoum to His Excellency, the Governor, asking for an
order for the dahabeah.

[Illustration: ABYSSINIANS.]

_Saturday, Dec. 31._--The order from Raouf Pasha has arrived; the
dahabeah is ours! and besides the order came a separate telegram of
welcome to the Soudan. Surely we could not ask to have things in
better shape. In a few moments the dahabeah is moored in front of
our tents, and the Reis reports to us for orders. We have had some
business with the Sheik to-day. Our boxes were badly broken up on
the desert through carelessness, and after repeated warnings, and
before we pay the remainder of the camel money we propose to have
the drivers mend those boxes in a proper manner. They refuse; and
there are high words and loud talking. The Sheik comes. We explain
to him the position of affairs, and tell him that as we expect
to travel through this country more than once, we want it fully
understood _how_ we intend to travel. He says it shall be done as
we say, and orders the carpenter to be called. He comes, and the
drivers dismiss him and clamor for their money. Not a _para_ until
those boxes are mended! After a time another carpenter is brought
who patches up the boxes, but we refuse to accept the work, and
insist on having it done over, and done properly. At last, after
considerable growling, it is done, and we offer them the remainder
of the amount agreed upon at Korosko. They refuse to take it,
demanding nearly twice as much. We go to Sheik Hassan Halifa with
it, state the case, and offer the money. He obliges the men to
take it, and we come off with the respect of the whole crowd! It
is the only way to do in a country like this! We have visited the
bazaar, which is quite extensive. We have paid our respects to the
Governor, who, now that we have carried our point, is more polite
than ever. We have also had a number of calls. We have posted off
a big batch of letters, got our washing and our marketing done, so
to-morrow, being the Sabbath, we work till late and go on board the
dahabeah by moonlight. Mousa goes to the town, gets drunk, and is
returned by the police. We give him to understand most plainly that
if we observe anything out of the way with him again he will be put
ashore and left there, as we cannot and will not have anyone with
us who will in any way be a reproach to our party. We are eager now
to reach Khartoum. We have been wonderfully prospered thus far,
and things look bright ahead. God grant that the New Year, so soon
to dawn, may be as rich with His favor and blessing as the old,
which is now passing away! The promises are many, and we can go
cheerfully forward.

_Sunday, Jan. 1, 1882._--Happy New Year! We are on board the
government dahabeah, ready to start for Khartoum. Our boat is
moored to the upper landing to receive her provisions. At last
everything was ready. The noise and confusion at the landing was
so great that toward night, for the sake of a little quiet, and
to hasten forward on this, the Lord’s business, we allowed the
men to spread the sail, and soon left Berber and the noisy rabble
on the bank in the distance, the solitary minaret being the last
object seen. There is a village nearly opposite, but a little above
Berber, called Sheik Abdel Medjid, whence the caravans start for
Dongola. We met three men in Berber worthy of mention. They were
the governor, Ibrahim Bey; the chief of police, Mohamed Effendi,
and Sheik Hassan Halifa. We took a great fancy to this last man,
more for what he is in himself than for his family history, which
is full of interest. We have sailed only a short distance, as we
have been obliged to tie up for the night on account of rapids in
the stream and lightness of the wind. We number on board 16 people
all told. One is a comely black girl, who does the cooking for
the sailors. Her natural graces of person are untrammeled by the
conventionalities of civilized life. She wears only a scant rag
about her waist. All the boats on the river here have one or more
of these women, who grind the durra on flat stones and cook for
the men. We have decided not to put up our flag, but to sail under
the Egyptian colors, as this is a government boat, and ours for
the time only through the kindness of Raouf Pasha. New Year’s Day
on the Nile! How many thoughts of home and loved ones have crowded
upon us as we have been lounging on deck in the bright moonlight.
God bless us all, and give us a truly Happy New Year!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW CHURCH AT DUNGINESS.

BY REV. MYRON EELLS, S’KOKOMISH, WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

Our little church at S’kokomish has swarmed, granting letters to
seven of its members who live at Jamestown, Dunginess, most of whom
were Clallam Indians. Four others united with them on profession
of faith, and the Congregational Church of Jamestown was organized
by your missionary April 30. One infant baptism took place at the
same time. A number of their white neighbors gathered in to the
encouragement of the Indians, six of them communing with us. The
services were held in Chinook, Clallam, English, Chinook translated
into Clallam, and English translated into Clallam.

At the same time we made a few hymns in the native Clallam
language--the first ever made in the language. A good share of the
Indians understand English and sing some in it. All but a few of
the very oldest understand the Chinook jargon, which I talk and
in which we have a number of hymns. But they were anxious to have
something in their own language and were much pleased with them.
They consist mainly of the same sentiment as is contained in our
songs of “Come to Jesus,” “Where are the Hebrew Children?” “I’m
Going Home,” though a few are entirely different in meaning from
any of our English songs.

The work here at S’kokomish has been more encouraging than last
year. Five have united with us this year on profession of faith.
The older Indians are taking more interest than heretofore, asking
for extra meetings, and some of the younger ones who have been in
school are helping very greatly in them, and in my absence taking
charge of some of the meetings with entire acceptance to their
older friends.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR MAY, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $264.33.

    Bangor. First Cong. Soc., $22.55; Hammond St.
      Sab. Sch., $10.                                        $32.55
    Bath. Central Ch. and Soc.                                24.83
    Bethel. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           6.02
    Biddeford. Second Cong. Ch.                               30.32
    Bridgton. Mrs. Rebecca S. Hale.                            5.00
    Castine. Mrs. Lucy S. Adams to const. REV.
      PLINY B. FISK L. M.                                     30.00
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    Gorham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Hallowell. Cash.                                           1.00
    Newport. M. S. N., _for John Brown Steamer_                1.00
    Saint Albans. Rev. Wm. S. Sewall, $6; Mrs.
      Hattie Philbrick, $3; “Two Friends of
      Missions,” $1.25.                                       10.25
    South Berwick. Mrs. Lewis’ Class in Cong. S.
      S., _for Student Aid_, Wilmington, N.C.                  5.00
    South Paris. Cong. Ch.                                     6.46
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    Wells. Second. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.00
    Winthrop. Mrs. N. S. Bourne.                               5.00
    Yarmouth. First Cong. Ch. and Parish.                     36.90


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $444.99.

    Bath. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   6.32
    Bristol. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                2.44
    Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                40.00
    Canterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            10.00
    Centre Harbor. Mrs. W. A. P.                               0.50
    Colebrook. “E. C. W. & W.”                                 2.00
    Derry. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                              17.46
    Dudley. Cong. Ch.                                          7.02
    Exeter. Second Cong. Ch.                                 100.00
    Fitzwilliam. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           26.50
    Fisherville. Collected by Jeremiah C. Martin
      (ad’l), to const. LORENZO M. CURRIER, L. M.              9.00
    Francestown. Joseph Kingsbury, $10; W. B., 50c.           10.50
    Hampstead. Cong. Sab. Sch., $23; Ann M.
      Howard, $5                                              28.00
    Haverhill. C. P. P.                                        1.00
    Meriden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.52
    Milford. Christiana Moore                                  5.00
    Nashua. Matthew Barr, _for Wilmington, N.C._              10.00
    New Ipswich. “A Member of Cong. Ch.,” to
      const. REV. S. G. WOOD and WILLIAM H.
      LINCOLN L. Ms                                           60.00
    Orford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 8.00
    Pembroke. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 15.26
    Pembroke. Mrs. M. W. Thompson, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Piermont. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         17.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 4.80
    Rochester. Phebe J. Moody                                  5.00
    Short Falls. J. W. Chandler                                2.00
    Swanzey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                8.00
    Tamworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              10.00
    Troy. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  20.22
    Westmoreland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.45


  VERMONT, $1,849.06.

    Bradford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              26.00
    Brandon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.32
    Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      13.18
    Burlington. Third Cong. Ch.                               87.50
    Burlington. S. H. F. S., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Clarendon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.00
    Danby. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                              2.51
    Dorset. Cong. Ch., $14.85; Sab. Sch., $10                 24.85
    Georgia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                9.00
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     3.00
    Montpelier. “A Lady Member of Bethany Cong.
      Ch.”                                                   510.00
    New Haven. “Three Church Members.”                         6.00
    Norwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $20; Albert
      Buell, $10                                              30.00
    North Cambridge. John Kinsley                              5.00
    Post Mills. Lyman Hinckley                                 5.00
    St. Johnsbury. “Friends, North Church”                   750.00
    Springfield. A. Woolson, _for Atlanta U._                 25.00
    Thetford. D. T.                                            1.00
    Wallingford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           52.95
    Williston. C. A. Seymour                                   5.00
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.75
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,599.06

    LEGACY.

    Saint Johnsbury. Executors Erastus Fairbanks’
      Estate                                                 250.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,849.06


  MASSACHUSETTS, $10,775.77.

    Andover. Free Ch. and Soc., $133.50 (adl.) to
      const. CATH. A. MIDDLETON, MARY H. HUSSEY,
      MARION DOVE, SARAH H. BERRY, MARTHA P. GOFF,
      WALTER S. DONALD, GEO. W. FOSTER and JAMES
      P. BUTTERFIELD L. Ms.; Chapel Ch., Theo.
      Sem., 128.25                                           261.75
    Andover. Free Ch. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Andover. Two Bbls. of C. and $2, _for
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Amherst. William M. Graves                                20.00
    Amherst. Fannie P. Cutler, 1 Doz. Towels, _for
      Tougaloo U._
    Boston. Shawmut Ch. and Soc.                             864.19
    Boston. Shawmut Branch Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_ and to const. JAMES P. RICE
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Boston. Samuel B. Capen, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                               100.00
    Boston. Mrs. E. P. Eayrs, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 6.00
    Boston. Woman’s Home Missionary Association,
      _for Lady Missionaries_                                123.76
    Boston. American Tract Soc., Bundle Tracts,
      _for Raleigh, N.C._
    Boxford. Box of C. and $2 _for Talladega C._;
      Miss F. C. $1, _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                      3.00
    Brimfield. Mrs. P. C. Browning, $10; Mrs. J.
      S. Upham, $3                                            13.00
    Brockton. Mrs. T. C. P.                                    1.00
    Cambridge. Shepard Ch. and Soc.                          100.87
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc., $215.22;
      Mrs. M. C. B. and Mrs. L. G. C., $1                    216.22
    Charlestown. Ivory Littlefield                            50.00
    Clinton. Woman’s Home Mission Ass’n, to const.
      MRS. J. D. HAYES L. M.                                  30.00
    Chelsea. Central Ch. and Soc.                             21.76
    Chelsea. Ladies’ Union Home M. Band, 3 Bbls.
      of C., val. $36, _for Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Dalton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         166.00
    Dorchester. “Two Mites,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.00
    Dorchester. Mrs. M. J. B.                                  0.50
    East Bridgewater. “A Friend,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    East Medway. Bundle of C.
    Fall River. Central Mission Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              70.00
    Fitchburgh. F. Fosdick’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Fisk U._                                                26.01
    Fitchburgh. A. S. D.                                       1.00
    Franklin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              26.57
    Globe Village. Byron Harwood                               5.00
    Granby. Cong. Soc., $47.87, and Sab. Sch.,
      $17.74, to const. REV. F. W. BALDWIN and W.
      A. TAYLOR L. Ms.; “C. E. H.,” $30, to const.
      Miss HATTIE M. HUNT L. M.                               95.61
    Great Barrington. “A. C. T.,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Groton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                75.55
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              91.00
    Holbrook. Winthrop Ch. and Soc.                           59.95
    Holliston. “Bible Christians of Dist. No. 4”              25.00
    Holliston. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            3.55
    Hubbardston. Mission Circle, Ev. Ch. and Soc.,
      $22.20; Mrs. A. W. M. and Mrs. N. S., $1                23.20
    Hyde Park. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       34.39
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          2.27
    Lenox. Lenox Sab. Sch., $40, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._; $10, _for John Brown Steamer_            50.00
    Lowell. Eliot Ch. ($30 of which to const. Miss
      MARY E. FLETCHER L. M.)                                 60.00
    Lynn. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong Ch. _for Fisk
      U._                                                     50.00
    Lynn. J. P. Woodbury, $1; J. L. O., 50c.                   1.50
    Medford. “A Friend.”                                       0.25
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Natick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                55.00
    New Bedford. Acushnet First Ch.                           38.00
    New Bedford. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Stone Ch.,
      Bbl. of C. and $3, _for Talladega C._                    3.00
    Newburyport. Belleville Ch. and Soc. $56.15;
      Miss Ann P. Bassett, $5.; Miss S. E. Teel, $5           66.15
    New Marlborough. Dea. W. H. R.                             1.00
    Newton. Freedmen’s Soc. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Straight U._                               25.00
    Newton Center. Ladies of First Ch., by Mrs. D.
      L. Furber, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                 4.50
    Northampton. First Cong. Ch.                             194.71
    North Somerville. “A Friend.”                              1.00
    Peabody. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              4.64
    Pittsfield. Ladies’ Sew Soc., Bbl. of C., _for
      Atlanta U._
    Plymouth. Amasa Holmes                                     4.00
    Roxbury. Eliot Ch. and Soc., $103.35.; Mrs. P.
      N. L., $1                                              104.35
    Somerville. Mrs. H. M. W., 60c.; A. M. R., 50c             1.10
    South Egremont. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    South Framingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     115.25
    South Framingham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                20.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., to
      const. FRANCIS H. FEARING L. M.                         45.00
    Springfield. North Ch. and Soc. ($25 of which
      from Sab. Sch.)                                        150.00
    Springfield. Chas. and Nathan Bill, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                60.00
    Springfield. “H. M.,” _for Atlanta U._                    50.00
    Sturbridge. H. Haynes                                      2.00
    Tewksbury. J. Clark’s family, Bale of C. and
      $1, _for Talladega C._                                   1.00
    Upton. Cong. Ch. & Soc.                                   17.50
    Wakefield. Cong. Sab. Sch., $10.80; Mission
      Workers, $9.20; _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._           20.00
    Waltham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Little Rock,
      Ark._                                                   10.00
    Walpole. B. L.                                             0.50
    Ware. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            33.60
    Ware. East Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Warren. Cong. Ch. (ad’l), to const. F. W.
      KEYES, E. E. RICE, E. W. BUTTERWORTH, MRS.
      MARY L. CARPENTER, MRS. LUCY BLISS and MRS.
      S. H. BLISS L. Ms.                                      90.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        25.00
    Wellesley. “A Friend”                                     15.00
    Westborough. Freedman’s Soc., $1.50 and Bbl.
      of C., _for Talladega C._                                1.50
    Westfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      45.64
    West Medway. “Friends,” $14.50; Second Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $8.72                                     23.22
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            35.00
    Winchendon. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     100.00
    Winchendon. Mr. and Mrs. Wood, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         5.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $96.52; Cong.
      Sab. Sch., _for Freight_, $1.50; Miss A. F. C., $1      98.02
    Winchester. Cong. Sab. Sch., Bbl. of Books,
      _for Chattanooga, Tenn._
    Winchester. Stephen Cutter, Box of Books, val.
      $6, _for Talladega C._
    Worcester. Salem St. Ch., $62; Plymouth Cong.
      Ch. and Soc., $57.54                                   119.54
    Worcester. Mrs. H. A. Wakefield, $50, and Bbl.
      of C., _for Fisk U._                                    50.00
    Worcester. Mission Circle, by Miss M. H.
      Hubbard, Sec., Box and Bbl. of C., _for Fisk
      U._
    Worcester. Mrs. M. L. Rice, _for Atlanta U._               5.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $4,485.12

    LEGACIES.

    Andover. Estate of Herman Abbott                         600.00
    Charlemont. Estate of Mrs. Wealthy B. Hunt, by
      H. H. Mayhew, Ex.                                      500.00
    Foxborough. Estate of Daniels Carpenter, by W.
      H. Alden and C. W. Hodges, Exs.                      4,640.65
    Franklin. Estate of Miss Emily Pond, by L. B.
      Cleveland, Ex.                                         550.00
                                                         ----------
                                                         $10,775.77


  RHODE ISLAND, $50.00.

    Pawtucket. “E.”                                           20.00
    Providence. J. C. Greenough, _for Furnishing
      Primary Sch. Room, Tougaloo U._                         20.00
    Providence. State Farm, Rev. Marcus Ames                  10.00


  CONNECTICUT, $3,296.51.

    Bethlehem. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                 6.27
    Bridgeport. Park Street Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          40.39
    Bridgeport. Boys and Girls of North Ch., part
      proceeds of fair and festival, _for Chinese,
      Oakland, Cal._                                          24.00
    Bristol. ----                                              5.00
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch.                                      15.33
    Collinsville. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              41.00
    Cornwall. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                       18.13
    Danbury. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C. and
      $3 _for Freight, for Talladega C._                       3.00
    Danielsonville. Mrs. Sarah A. Backus                       6.00
    Darien. Cong. Ch.                                         32.50
    East Hampton. H. H. Abbe, $25; A. Conklin, $5;
      Mrs. Barton, $5, _for Theo. Dept., Talladega
      C._                                                     35.00
    East Hampton. Mrs. Dea. Skinner, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.00
    East Windsor. Mrs. S. L. Wells                             5.00
    Haddam Neck. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Hadlyme. R. E. Hungerford                                 50.00
    Hartford. J. E. Cushman                                  400.00
    Hartford. Mrs. S. E. Perkins, $500; Roland
      Mather, $100; _for John Brown Steamer_                 600.00
    Hartford. “A Friend,” _for Atlanta U._                   100.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      and $3 _for Freight, for Talladega C._                   3.00
    Higganum. Cong. Ch.                                       13.50
    Kensington. Mrs. Rhoda Hotchkiss                           5.00
    Kent. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                              35.50
    Lisbon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 2.16
    Middlefield. Cong. Ch. ($60 of which from John
      O. Couch, _for Fisk U._) to const. MISS
      ISADEL C. COUCH, MISS EMILY T. COUCH, MISS
      MARY E. LYMAN and DAVID LYMAN L. Ms.                   120.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch., $9, _for Student
      Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._, and $2.50
      _for Emerson Inst._                                     11.50
    Millbrook. Mrs. E. P.                                      1.00
    New Britain. Mrs. Minerva Lee Hart                        30.00
    New Haven. North Ch., $96.28; “A Friend,” $5             101.28
    New Haven. John J. Mathias, _for Student Aid,
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                 5.00
    New Haven. Rev. O. H. White, D.D., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    New Haven. F. H. Hart, _for Talladega C._                 10.00
    Norfolk. Robbins Battelle, _for Talladega C._             25.00
    North Madison. Cong. Ch.                                   7.00
    Norwich. Henry B. Norton, $50; Mrs. E. P.
      Huntington, $50; _for Atlanta U._                      100.00
    Putnam. Miss M. H.                                         1.00
    Redding. Cong. Ch.                                        23.70
    Rockville. First Cong. $100; to const.
      FREDERICK GILNACK and REV. J. W. BACKUS L. Ms.;
      Second Cong. Ch., $53.97                               153.97
    Rockville. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          30.00
    South Britain. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                   67.00
    South Manchester. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch., _for Reading-Room, Talladega C._                   25.00
    South Windsor. Second Cong. Ch.                           40.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      59.82
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         7.11
    Vernon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              9.00
    Warren. “A Friend”                                        10.00
    Washington. “Z.,” _for Indian M._                          1.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    West Hartland. F. A. B.                                    0.51
    Westville. Cong. Ch.                                      50.00
    Westville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                31.00
    ----. “A Friend”                                          50.00
    ----. ----                                                61.75
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,496.51
    LEGACIES.

    Greenwich. Estate of Miss Sarah Mead, by S. D.
      Mead, Ex.                                              200.00
    Fair Haven. Estate of Wm. H. Shipman, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                               600.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $3,296.51


  NEW YORK, $3,190.02.

    Amsterdam. D. Cady                                         5.00
    Arcade. Lyman Parker                                       5.00
    Binghamton. Mrs. C. Bean                                   5.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Soc., $221.80; South
      Cong. Ch., $197.02 ($90 of which to const.
      REV. ELDREDGE MIX, CHARLES H. PARSONS and
      JEREMIAH CROWELL L. Ms.); Julius Davenport,
      $100                                                   518.82
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Missionaries at Ladies Island, S.C., and
      Fernandina, Fla._                                      175.00
    Brooklyn. James S. T. Stranahan, _for
      Talladega C._                                          100.00
    Brooklyn. “A Friend,” _for Charleston, S.C._,
      and to const. CHESTER A. ARTHUR, President
      of the United States, L. M.                             30.00
    Brooklyn. John B. Hutchinson, _for Talladega
      C._                                                     25.00
    Buffalo. “R. W. B., First Cong. Ch.,” to
      const. MRS. EMMA HAINES, MRS. JOSEPH H. TRUE
      and S. L. GRAVES L. Ms.                                100.00
    Clifton Springs. A. Peirce, _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                           25.00
    Danby. Cong. Ch.                                          22.44
    East Bloomfield. Cong. Sab. Sch.                          23.70
    Ellington. Mrs. Anson Crosby                               2.00
    Gloversville. Mrs. U. M. Place, $10; Isaac V.
      Place, $10; Dewitt Smith, $5; Mrs. B. B.
      Edwards, $5; H. A. P., $1, _for Talladega C._           31.00
    Groton. Mrs. Bostwick                                      5.00
    Homer. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Needmore Chapel,
      Talladega, Ala._                                        15.23
    Irvington. Mrs. R. W. Lambdin                              5.00
    Keeseville. Cong. Sab. Sch., $15; Master W. A.
      B. and Miss Helen T. B., $1 each; Rev. L. H. E.,
      $1, _for John Brown Steamer_                            18.00
    Lisbon Center. First Cong. Ch.                            11.00
    Madison. Cong. Ch., $10; Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_, $10                                20.00
    Malone. Mrs. Mary K. Wead, _for Atlanta U._              100.00
    Malone. Miss M. F.                                         0.51
    New York. Broadway Tab. Ch. (ad’l) $10; Dr. A.
      S. Ball, $5; Rev. S. W. Powell, $5                      20.00
    New York. Mr. and Mrs. Wm. E. Dodge, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                               300.00
    New York. Mrs. Mary A. Parker, $100; “A
      Friend,” $50; George C. White, Jr., $20;
      Chas. A. Hull, $10, _for Talladega C._                 180.00
    New York. Richard T. Auchmutz, _for Fisk U._             150.00
    Nichols. J. Weller                                         3.00
    Northville. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                           18.50
    Nyack. John W. Towt                                       50.00
    Oriskany Falls. Cong. Ch., $5; Cong. Sab.
      Sch., _for John Brown Steamer_, $5                      10.00
    Perry Center. Cong. Ch.                                   73.50
    Phœnix. Mr. and Mrs. C. E Candee, _for Chapel
      in Kansas_                                               3.00
    Randolph. First Cong. Ch.                                  6.02
    Rome. John B. Jervis                                      25.00
    Sandy Hill. Mrs. Collin, $2; Mrs. Taylor, $2;
      Mrs. P., $1, _for Tougaloo U._                           5.00
    Sherburne. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           33.30
    Spencerport. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                       15.00
    Syracuse. M. W. Hanchett                                  10.00
    Tarrytown. “A Friend”                                     40.00
    Ticonderoga. First Cong. Ch.                               5.00
    ----. “A Friend”                                       1,000.00


  NEW JERSEY, $399.00.

    Montclair. Sab. Sch. of First. Cong. Ch., $53
      _for Fisk U._, $35 _for Hampton N. & A.
      Inst._                                                  88.00
    Morristown. Miss Ella M. Graves, _for Atlanta
      U._                                                    200.00
    Newark. “A Friend”                                        10.00
    Orange Valley. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega C._             100.00
    Roselle. A. A.                                             1.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $107.00.

    Allegheny. Mrs. N. B. Hyde, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    East Springfield. Mrs. C. J. Cowles                        2.00
    Hyde Park. Thomas Eynon                                   25.00
    Jeanesville. Welsh Cong. Ch.                              11.00
    North East. Mrs. M. K. Spooner                             5.00
    Pittsburgh. R. Edwards                                    50.00
    West Alexander. Ladies, _for Freight, for
      Storr’s Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                              9.00


  OHIO, $1,658.22.

    Austinburgh. L. B. Austin                                100.00
    Austinburgh. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              15.00
    Bellefontaine. Mr. and Mrs. John Lindsay, _for
      Storrs Sch., Atlanta, Ga._                               5.00
    Claridon. C. M. Wells, $3; C. G., 50c.;
      Others, $6.50                                           10.00
    Cleveland. Young Peoples’ Missionary Soc. of
      First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._, and to const. MISS ALICE L. TREAT and
      MISS ORRA G. INGRAHAM, L. Ms.                           60.00
    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch.                                 5.00
    Columbus. Cong. Ch. (adl.) ($30 of which to
      const. REV. IRVING W. METCALF L. M.)                   120.56
    Columbus. Cong. Ch., _for Reading Room,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Crestline. Mrs. J. N. Stewart                              5.00
    Delphos. M. D. J.                                          1.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Ch. ($90 of which to
      const. D. B. ANDREWS, E. D. GRISWOLD and
      WILLIAM I. NEVINS, L. Ms.)                             123.33
    Geneva. W. R. J.                                           1.00
    Hagamon. “A Friend.”                                      15.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           10.00
    Lenox. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from J. R. King)            11.00
    Mansfield. First Cong. Ch., $61.94; Ladies
      Benev. Soc., $18.67, and Young Peoples Miss.
      Circle of First Cong. Ch., $19.39, to const.
      MRS. JULIA M. TOLMAN, MRS. W. P. HARPER and
      FRANCIS PALMER, L. M’s                                 100.00
    Marietta. First Cong. Ch.                                 61.16
    Newark. “A Friend,” $100; Mrs. J. C. Wheaton,
      $25                                                    125.00
    Oberlin. Ladies, by Miss Rice, _for Tougaloo
      U._                                                     25.00
    Oberlin. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Painesville. Miss’y Soc. Lake Erie Sem., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              25.00
    Peru. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     15.00
    Radnor. Welsh Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch., to const.
      REV. W. E. FAY L. M.                                    30.00
    Warren. Two S. S. Classes, _for Student Aid,
      Emerson Inst._                                          10.00
    West Farmington. Cong. Sab. Sch.                           6.00
    Youngstown. “A Friend”                                     1.00
                                                          ---------
                                                            $930.05

    LEGACY.

    Lodi. Estate of Timothy Burr                             728.17
                                                          ---------
                                                          $1,658.22


  ILLINOIS, $818.58.

    Altamont. School by Miss Etta Pierce, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               3.00
    Avon. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Rebuilding
      Emerson Inst._                                           5.60
    Bondville. “A Friend”                                      5.00
    Camp Point. Mrs. A. R.                                     1.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., $144.90; A. R., 50c.           145.40
    Chicago. Mrs. Wm. H. Ferry, _for Fisk U._                 50.00
    Chicago. Leavitt St. Cong. Ch., _for Howard
      Chapel, Nashville, Tenn._                               13.37
    Chicago. Ladies of South Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               10.00
    Danvers. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Dundee. Cong. Ch.                                         16.69
    Evanston. H. W. C.                                         1.00
    Galesburg. Mrs. E. T. Parker, $30; “A Friend,”
      $20                                                     50.00
    Highland. Miss Pittman, Box Papers and $1.55,
      _for Talladega C._                                       1.55
    Joliet. Rev. S. Penfield                                   2.00
    Jacksonville. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    La Harpe. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Lewiston. Mrs. M. Phelps                                  50.00
    Millington. Mrs. D. W. Jackson                             5.00
    Morris. Cong. Ch.                                         21.00
    Oak Park. First Cong. Ch., $79.70; O. Peck,
      $1.50; “Lyons,” $1                                      82.20
    Oneida. Cong. Ch., $19.93; and Sab. Sch., $2.12           22.05
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         30.00
    Port Byron. A. F. Hollister                                5.00
    Rockford. Second Cong. Ch., $199.47; Thomas P.
      Carleton, $3; H. S., $1                                203.47
    Rockford. Ladies’ Aid Soc., _for Fisk U._                 25.00
    Roseville. Cong. Ch. ($20 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                         34.00
    Saint Charles. Ladies Missionary Soc.                      5.00
    Thomasborough. ----                                        5.00
    Udina. Cong. Ch.                                           6.25


  INDIANA, $32.55.

    Crooked Creek. Rev. C. W. C.                               1.00
    Elkhart. Cong. Ch.                                         9.00
    Gilead. Cong. Ch.                                          0.55
    Kokomo. Mrs. J. F. V.                                      1.00
    Liber. Cong. Ch.                                           1.00
    Terra Haute. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      refurnishing Ch. and Sch., Emerson Inst._               20.00


  MICHIGAN, $419.08.

    Alamo. Cong. Ch.                                           1.33
    Calumet. “Friends,” by Rev. M. Higgins, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              79.29
    Detroit. ARTHUR H. BIGG, M.D., to const.
      himself L. M.                                           30.00
    Galesburgh. P. H. Whitford                               100.00
    Grand Rapids. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev.
      J. H. H. Sengstacke_                                    30.00
    Laingsburgh. Ladies Missionary Soc.                        2.00
    North Adams. “What We Can Soc.” (Little
      Girls), $5; “Mission Band” (Little Boys), $3             8.00
    Olivet. W. B. Palmer, _for Talladega C._                 100.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                          4.46
    Port Huron. H. A. B.                                       1.00
    Romeo. Miss E. B. Dickinson                               50.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch.                                        13.00


  WISCONSIN, $153.46.

    Clinton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Fort Atkinson. Mrs. C. B. Snell                           10.00
    Fort Atkinson. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.75
    Genesee. Cong. Ch.                                         8.10
    Madison. Two Bbls. of C. and $3.50, _for
      Talladega C._                                            3.50
    Muscoda. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.75
    New Lisbon. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.50
    Platteville. Cong. Ch.                                    39.44
    Rosendale. Cong. Ch.                                      38.00
    Springvale. Cong. Ch.                                      3.60
    Whitewater. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            11.57
    Windsor. Union Cong. Ch.                                  21.25


  IOWA, 271.16.

    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 27.00
    Dubuque. Mrs. W. C. Wheeler, _for Fisk U._                 5.00
    Fairfield. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 4.00
    Fort Madison. Francis Sawyer                              20.00
    Garwin. Talmon Dewey                                       2.50
    Grinnell. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           40.25
    Grinnell. Two Bbls. of C., _for Talladega C._
    Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                         9.75
    Hillsborough. John W. Hammond                             25.00
    Keokuk. Mellrose Sab. Sch.                                 7.35
    Lansing. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Leon. A. E. Chase, _for Tougaloo U._                       5.00
    McGregor. Women’s Missionary Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 9.74
    McGregor. Ladies, _for Freight_                            0.50
    Mitchellville. W. B. Turner                                8.00
    Newton. Mrs. L. S.                                         0.50
    Orient. Mrs. A. L. C.                                      0.50
    Wayne. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     5.00
      Ames. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $5; Atlanta, Sab.
      Sch. and Ladies, $6; Cherokee, Cong. Ch., 5;
      Second Cong. Ch., $2; Corning, Cong. Ch.,
      $9.05; Fairfax, Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., $5;
      Green Mountain, Ladies, $16.10; Meriden,
      Cong. Ch., $4.52; Red Oak, Ladies, $7; by
      Mrs. Henry L. Chase, _for Lady Missionary,
      New Orleans, La._                                       59.67
      Charles City. Ladies of Cong. Ch., $10;
      Gilman, Ladies, $15.40; Orchard, Ladies, $1;
      Oskaloosa, Sab. Sch., $10; _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._, by Mrs. M. G.
      Phillips                                                36.40


  KANSAS, $15.34.

    Russell. First Cong. Ch.                                  13.34
    Topeka. Miss Sue Stevenson                                 2.00


  MINNESOTA, $95.28.

    Clear Water. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Duluth. “* M. *,” _for Student Aid, Talladega
      C._                                                     15.00
    Faribault. “Helping Hands,” _for Tougaloo U._             20.00
    Lolland. Rev. J. K.                                        1.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., $25.12; Second
      Cong. Ch., $5                                           31.12
    Owatonna. Cong. Ch.                                        6.34
    Wabasha. Cong. Ch.                                        11.51
    Worthington. Union Cong. Ch.                               6.31


  NEBRASKA, $7.95.

    Waverly. Cong Ch.                                          5.45
    Grafton. “The Useful Band,” by Edna Murdock,
      Treas., _for John Brown Steamer_                         2.50


  DAKOTA, $7.00.

    Bethel. Mrs. Minnie B. Rich, $5; Rev. L.
      Bridgman, $2                                             7.00


  COLORADO, $45.00.

    Colorado Springs. Young People’s Mission
      Circle, _for John Brown Steamer_                        20.00
    Denver. Jno. R. Hanna                                     25.00


  UTAH, $5.00.

    Whitelock. Mrs. E. C. Ayer, _for Storrs Sch.,
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            5.00


  OREGON, $9.10.

    Albany. Cong. Ch.                                          9.10


  CALIFORNIA, $5.00.

    Suisun City. Chas. A. Birchard                             5.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $183.00.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                              178.00
    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Chapel                        5.00


  VIRGINIA, $5.00.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $177.60.

    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition, $172.60;
      Cong. Ch., $5                                          177.60


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $255.00.

    Charleston. Avery Institute, Tuition                     255.00


  TENNESSEE, $428.30.

    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch.                                   201.85
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      226.45


  GEORGIA, $755.54.

    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition, $204.04; Rent,
      $35.80                                                 239.84
    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $192.10; Rent,
      $3                                                     195.10
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, 88.53; Cong.
      Ch. and Sab. Sch., to const. REV. S. E.
      LATHROP L. M., $35                                     123.53
    McIntosh. Tuition                                         21.07
    Savannah. Beach Institute, Tuition, $126;
      Rent, $10; Cong. Ch., $10                              146.00


  ALABAMA, $606.39.

    Anniston. Tuition                                         10.00
    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             76.90
    Athens. “Friends,” _for Bell_, by M. F. Wells             50.00
    Marion. Tuition, $10.25; Cong. Ch., $6.20                 16.45
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $174.65; First
      Cong. Ch., $6                                          180.65
    Mobile. Women’s Miss’y Ass’n, _for Mendi M._               1.50
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Montgomery. Miss M. Blanche Curtiss, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                 5.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          15.55
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition, $65.34;
      Cong. Ch., $10.00                                       75.34


  LOUISIANA, $195.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition, $143.;
      Central Ch., $50                                       193.00
    New Orleans. Morris Brown Sab. Sch., _for
      Athens, Ala._                                            2.50


  MISSISSIPPI, $3,085.00.

    Tougaloo. State Appropriation                          3,000.00
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $84; Rent, $1             85.00


  TEXAS, $164.70.

    Austin. Tillotson Inst., Tuition                         161.75
    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                    1.95
    Washington. Mrs. I. H.                                     1.00


  NEW BRUNSWICK.

    Milltown. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Talladega C._


  ENGLAND, $48.80.

    London. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc., £10, (£5
      of which _for Student Aid, Fisk U._)                    48.80


  JAPAN, $25.00.

    Osaka. Rev. W. W. Curtis                                  25.00


  INCOME FUND, $25.69.

    Income Fund, _for President’s Chair, Talladega C._        25.69
                                                          ---------
        Total                                            $29,874.92
        Total from Oct. 1st, to May 31st.               $191,417.08
                                                        ===========


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Rockville. Conn. First Cong. Ch.                          45.50
    London, Eng. Freedmen’s Missions Aid Soc., £190          927.20
                                                          ---------
        Total                                               $972.70
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1st to April
      30th                                                $2,484.43
                                                          ---------
        Total                                             $3,457.13




  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Morristown, N.J. Estate of R. R. Graves, by E.
      A. Graves, Ex., _for Scholarship Fund, Theo.
      Dept., Talladega C._                                $5,000.00
                                                          ---------

                                    H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                           56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




=7= PER CENT. TO =8= PER CENT. INTEREST NET TO INVESTORS in First
Mortgage Bonds on improved farms in Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,
secured by

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

  References and Circulars forwarded on application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.


It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

     Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the Ox-Brain
                          and Wheat-Germ.

           Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.

              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.

        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE

                       PRESBYTERIAN BOARD’S

                               CHEAP

                16mo SABBATH-SCHOOL LIBRARY, No. 1.

                          JUST PUBLISHED.

               Forty First-class Books in a Case for

                              $25.00.

This Library has been prepared to meet the call for lower-priced
books for Sabbath-school use. The volumes are well-bound, printed
on good paper, have the same illustrations as the higher-priced
books, and will be found very desirable for the price. Please
address orders to

                                 JOHN A. BLACK, Business Supt.,
                1334 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)


                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL

                EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS, DIMINISHED

                         VITALITY, URINARY

                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             HARTFORD

                       Woven Wire Mattress,

[Illustration]

Especially adapted to all climates--particularly warm
countries--the Hartford Mattress is cleanly, healthful, durable,
economical, impervious to vermin. Requires nothing but a blanket
for over-covering, making it the cheapest bed in the market. This
mattress will last a lifetime, and one-third of life is spent
in sleep. Make that portion comfortable by using the Hartford
Mattress. The Hartford Mattress is now used in all parts of the
world; it is the popular bed of the globe, as well as the most
delightful sleeping arrangement in use. Try it, buy it, and you
will have no other. It is just the mattress for the

                   MISSIONARY IN FOREIGN LANDS;

its health-giving properties will aid the weak; its freedom from
noise quiet the restless; and its luxurious comfort bring rest
and refreshment to the most wearied being. Address for catalogues
prices, or any desired information,

               HARTFORD WOVEN WIRE MATTRESS COMPANY,

                         _P. O. BOX 148_,

                          HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              Circulation Now 80,000, and Increasing.

         Advocating Evangelical Religion and Temperance.

           Liberty, Education and Equal Rights for all.

                         NEW YORK WITNESS

                       PUBLICATIONS for 1882

=New York Weekly Witness.=--Now in its 11th year; circulation,
80,000; ONE DOLLAR a year. Gratis copy for club of 10, with $10. On
trial three months, 25c.

=Sabbath Reading.=--A very handsome, small eight-page weekly,
containing in each number an excellent sermon and a choice
selection of interesting matter for reading on the Lord’s Day.
FIFTY CENTS a year club of ten, $4. On trial three months 15c.

=Gems of Poetry.=--A beautiful, sixteen-page monthly, on fine
paper, and with an excellent portrait of some eminent poet in
each number. The contents are two serials, the Æneid of Virgil
and Aurora Leigh by Mrs. Browning; a fine assortment of selected
poetry, and a great variety of original poetry--the latter
competing for two prizes each quarter. FORTY CENTS a year; club of
three, $1. On trial for three months, 10c.

=Specimens= of the above publications sent free on application. All
stop when subscription expires.

WITNESS, SABBATH READING and GEMS OF POETRY, three months on trial
for fifty cents.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.

                          WITNESS OFFICE:

                  21 VANDEWATER STREET, NEW YORK.

                     We demand the Prohibition
                      of the Liquor Traffic.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

=Case’s School Furniture.=--Parties about to purchase School
Furniture are invited to correspond with us. Our work is all of
the most approved patterns, and is unequaled for strength and
durability.

=Camp’s Outline Maps.=--Set of 9 maps, with key. No. 1,
Hemispheres; No. 2, North America; No. 3, United States; No. 4,
South America; No. 5, Europe; No. 6, Asia; No. 7, Africa; No. 8,
Oceanica; No. 9, Physical World.

=Case’s Bible Atlas.=--Embracing 16 full-page maps, quarto size,
beautifully printed in colors, covering the whole ground of
Biblical Geography; also 16 pages of Explanatory Notes on the maps.
Sent by mail on receipt of price; bound in boards, $1.; cloth,
$1.50. _Agents wanted._

Circulars sent on application.

                  =O. D. CASE & CO.=, Publishers,

                                AND

                  School Furniture Manufacturers,

                          HARTFORD, - CONN.


       *       *       *       *       *


                          KELLY & JONES,

                 202 Greene Street, - - New York.

                       LOW AND HIGH PRESSURE

                               STEAM

                             AND OTHER

                        HEATING APPARATUS.


                      We make a Specialty of

             Steam Heating and Ventilating Apparatus,
                      for Churches, Schools,
                   Public Buildings and Private
                            Residences.

Plans and Specifications of the latest and most approved methods
furnished on application.


Our apparatus is in operation in the following buildings:

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.; Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Georgia; Third Judicial District Court House, New York City; Museum
of Art, New York City; Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.,
New York City; State College, near Bellefonte, Pa.; New York State
Reformatory, Elmira, N.Y.; Point St. School, Providence R.I.;
Board of Education (Schools), Pittsburgh, Pa.; Van Wert Co. Court
House, Wan Wert, Ohio; Mahoning Co. Court House, Youngstown, Ohio;
Washington Co. Court House, Washington, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         ESTABLISHED 1780.

[Illustration]

Set Complete in Terry, $58. Set Complete in Plush, $64. Parlor,
Lodge and Church Furniture. No charge for packing. Send for
Illustrated Catalogue.

                        SHAW, APPLIN & CO.,
                                        27 Sudbury St., Boston.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            IF YOU WANT

“The most popular and satisfactory Corset as regards Health,
Comfort and Elegance of Form,” be _sure_ and get

                       MADAME FOY’S IMPROVED
                              CORSET
                         SKIRT SUPPORTER.

[Illustration]

It is particularly adapted to the present style of dress. For sale
by all leading dealers. Price by mail $1.30.

Manufactured only by

                        FOY, HARMON & CO.,
                          New Haven Conn.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

  For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
  For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
  And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
  And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

  Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
  The half risen sun every package should bear;
  For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
  And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      A PICTORIAL COMMENTARY

                                ON

                         ST. MARK’S GOSPEL

                              BY THE

                        REV. EDWIN W. RICE.

“The Pictorial Commentary on Mark, issued by the American
Sunday-school Union, and prepared for it by the Rev. E. W. Rice, is
the most compendious work of the kind with which we are familiar,
presenting, as it does, not only the results of the latest and best
scholarly investigation, but also the comments and reflections of
many spiritually-minded writers at home and abroad.”

                   Price, only $1. Postage Free.

             The most useful present to your Pastor,
                   Superintendent or Teacher is

                   THE DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE,

                           EDITED BY THE

                 Rev. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL. D.

                         (SECOND EDITION.)

All who have examined it have given this work THE HIGHEST
COMMENDATION. It is “THE PEOPLE’S DICTIONARY,” because it is HANDY,
POPULAR, CHEAP.

Crown octavo, cloth, handsomely bound, 400 engravings, 12 colored
Maps, 958 pages. Price, only =$2.50=. _Postage Free._

                                THE

                       AMERICAN S. S. UNION,

                1122 CHESTNUT ST., PHILADELPHIA; 10

                      BIBLE HOUSE, NEW YORK.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

                               SMITH
                             AMERICAN
                              ORGANS
                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                           THE TRAVELERS

                Life and Accident Insurance Company

                        OF HARTFORD, CONN.,

       FURNISHES EVERY DESIRABLE KIND OF PERSONAL INSURANCE.


                    LIFE AND ENDOWMENT POLICIES

of all safe and well-approved forms, on the Low Rate, All Cash,
Stock Plan. Ample security definite contract and policies
non-forfeiting. No dividends or profits, no assessments, and no
disappointed expectations, but cash insurance payable promptly at
maturity.


                     GENERAL ACCIDENT POLICIES

by the year or month, written by Agents at short notice. Principal
sum payable in case of death by accident, or weekly indemnity for
wholly disabling injury. They cover accidents happening in all
lawful occupations, traveling or not, at home or abroad.


                REGISTERED GENERAL ACCIDENT TICKETS

insuring $3,000 against death by accident, or $15 per week for
total disability, at twenty-five cents a day, or $4.50 for thirty
days. They are much used by travelers, and may be obtained at the
Company’s local agencies or railway stations.


                LIFE AND ACCIDENT POLICY COMBINED,

being a regular Life policy with weekly indemnity feature attached,
giving the insured complete protection for life and limb under one
contract. The cost is about the same as ordinary mutual premiums
for life policies alone.


                           THE TRAVELERS

is relatively one of the strongest companies in the world. Its
resources are estimated at a minimum market value; its investments
are made in the most conservative manner; its surplus to policy
holders is twenty-five per cent. of the gross assets; its
management is proverbially energetic and honest, and its record
is clean. Upon such a basis it confidently offers THE BEST in all
forms of personal insurance.


  Paid-up Cash Capital                           $600,000.00
  Gross Assets, over                            6,000,000.00
  Surplus to Policy Holders, over               1,500,000.00
  Amount of Claims Paid, Life and Accident      7,000,000.00


                  JAMES G. BATTERSON, President.

  RODNEY DENNIS, Secretary.       JOHN E. MORRIS, Ass’t Sec’y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Estey Organ

  J. Estey & Co
  Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       STUDENTS AND TEACHERS

                         (MALE OR FEMALE),

                          CAN EASILY MAKE

                           $100 A MONTH

                              SELLING

                        HEADLEY’S NEW BOOK.

                      “PUBLIC MEN OF TO-DAY,”

A NATIONAL Volume of =800= large octavo pages. The more than
=300= life-like PORTRAITS will sell the book in every community.
Every State represented. All want the book. No competition. Terms
liberal; =500= more salesmen wanted; choice of territory given.

Apply at once to

                                      S. S. SCRANTON & CO.,
                                               HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE
                          GREAT AMERICAN
                                TEA
                              COMPANY

                         31 & 33 Vesey St.

                     P. O. Box 4235, NEW YORK.

Stores, Hotels, Boarding Houses, Restaurants, Club Agents, and
large consumers will find it to their interest to send Postal Card
to the above address, and get the latest terms.

N. B.--Beware of imitators.

☞ NO HUMBUG.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of Fencing.
Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_--In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia,
1; North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky,
7; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana,
18; Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.--_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.--8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.--11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.--Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.--In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa--a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions were corrected.
The arithmetic errors in receipts were not corrected.

Moved a few lines of text from the top of page 214 to the bottom of
page 212 to allow the drawing to be placed between paragraphs on
page 213.

Added missing “s” in “was” on page 202. (that arose from their
decks was this)

Added missing “n” in “anniversary” on page 205. (Our theological
anniversary exercises)

Corrected “Taladega” to “Talladega” in the New Lisbon entry on page
219.

Changed “it” to “is” and “blankes” to “blanket” in the Hartford
Woven Wire Mattress advertisement on page 221. (the Hartford
Mattress is cleanly....Requires nothing but a blanket)

Changed “Superintentent” to “Superintendent” in the American S. S.
Union advertisement on page 223. (your Pastor, Superintendent or
Teacher)

Added missing “i” in “insuring” in The Travelers advertisement on
page 224. (insuring $3,000 against death)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 7, JULY, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.