Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

  VOL. XXXVI.      AUGUST, 1882.      NO. 8.

  THE

  American Missionary

  “THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


  NEW YORK:

  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

  ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York. N.Y., as second-class
  matter.]




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                                                         PAGE.

  EDITORIALS.

    ANNUAL MEETING—Mr. Ladd’s Return from Africa           225
    THE JOHN BROWN STEAMER                                 226
    OUR OPPORTUNITY—Atlanta Church                         227
    CHANGE OF ENVIRONMENT Rev. W. W. Patton, D.D.          228
    TEMPERANCE TEXT-BOOKS                                  230
    BENEFACTIONS                                           231


  THE FREEDMEN.

    ANNIVERSARY REPORTS                                    231
    ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, GA.                                231
    TALLADEGA COLLEGE, ALA.                                233
    STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS                       234
    TILLOTSON INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS                     235
    VIEW ON BAYOU AT HOUSTON (Cut)                         236
    NORMAL SCHOOL, WILMINGTON, N.C.                        237
    LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN.                     238
    LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL, MACON, GA.                          238
    “PINE GROVE COLLEGE,” KENTUCKY                         240
    FAMILIAR SCENE IN LOUISVILLE, KY. (Cut)                241


  AFRICA.

    MR. LADD’S JOURNAL                                     242
    EGYPTIANS OF UPPER EGYPT (Cut)                         245


  THE CHINESE.

    LETTER FROM REV. W. C. POND                            246


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    A TENNESSEE BAND OF HOPE                               248


  RECEIPTS                                                 249

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
be addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ——— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ——— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.


The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVI.     AUGUST, 1882.        No. 8.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING.

The next Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association
will be held in Cleveland, Ohio, commencing Tuesday, Oct. 24, at 3
P.M. Rev. C. L. Goodell, D.D., of St. Louis, Mo., will preach the
sermon. Other addresses and papers will be announced hereafter.

       *       *       *       *       *


REV. MR. LADD’S RETURN FROM AFRICA.

Our readers, who have followed Mr. Ladd’s journey in Africa, as
given in his interesting journal, will be glad to know of his safe
return and of his excellent and uninterrupted health throughout the
entire trip, which extended about 2,500 miles up the Nile to the
mouth of the Sobat, which is within the territory designated by Mr.
Arthington for the proposed mission.

Persons who have kept themselves informed through the public
press of the condition of things in the Upper Nile region will
be prepared for Mr. Ladd’s somewhat discouraging report of the
state of the country. The Arab leader and prophet, Achmet, of
whose successful rebellion the papers have from time to time given
brief intimations, Mr. Ladd found to be dominating completely a
portion of the very region in which the mission is to be located,
and it was by Divine interposition that Mr. Ladd was enabled to
explore so much of the territory and return safely. Intelligence
of a startling character received at this date (July 8), shows
that Achmet has achieved another victory over the Egyptian troops,
more decisive than any heretofore won, involving the slaughter of
3,000 of the Egyptian forces, which must for the present, at least,
annihilate the authority of the government in that whole region,
while the condition of Egypt itself, likely to become the theatre
of a terrible war, gives little promise that its authority can be
speedily re-established in the remote provinces of the Soudan. A
delay, therefore, is inevitable in our movements in Eastern Africa.

In the meantime, as was originally planned, Mr. Ladd is endeavoring
to marshal a new recruit of colored missionaries for the Mendi
mission, and expects to accompany them thither at the close of the
present wet season.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE JOHN BROWN STEAMER.

Some months ago we sent out our circulars to the Sunday-schools
in our churches, asking for $10,000, to enable us to build this
memorial steamer for mission work along the west coast, and up and
down the rivers, in that portion of the “Dark Continent” where
there are no roads, and no beasts of burden, no horses, no camels,
no oxen, not even mules. The need is great. The steamer will save
time, toil, and human life.

Inquiries come to us respecting the success of our appeal. We are
glad to answer: At this date, July 5, we have received $5,524 for
the steamer, and some pledges are yet unpaid. We are also receiving
additional remittances almost every day, and believe that the
amount needed will ultimately be realized. But we are anxious
to hasten the matter. Rev. Mr. Ladd has just returned from his
exploring tour in Eastern tropical Africa, and proposes to visit
our Mendi Mission in Western Africa (for which this steamer is
intended) as soon as the rainy season is over. We ought to have the
full amount for the steamer by September 1.

A good friend, in sending some money, says:—“Why moves the cause
so slowly? In looking over the list of donations, I am pleased and
grieved; pleased that so many are interested to give—grieved that
so few special donations for this very important object are made.

“Friends of Africa, if you could realize as I do the urgent need
of this steamer to save life and to advance the mission cause, you
would speedily pour in the money for it. It ought to be in service,
doing its greatly needed work this coming autumn. If you will go
to Africa and make one trip (as I have made many) to the Mendi
Mission, in a ‘dug out’—a canoe dug out of a log—the distance of
more than 100 miles, most of the way on the ocean—you will then see
and feel the need of this proposed steamer. O, why does not every
Sunday-school send in $50, $20, $10 or $5? Why do not individuals,
who have in hand a great abundance, send $50, $100 or $1,000,
and so have this noble work accomplished at once? Come, friends
of Africa, supply the means and send forth this new messenger
of mercy, to cause a great shout of joy to go up from the weary
missionaries and from a long-suffering people!” Who will heed this
plea from one who has known the field and suffered much for it?

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR OPPORTUNITY.

We find it in Kentucky. Our Executive Committee recently sent
their Field Superintendent to that State for a bit of inspection.
As a sample of opportunity we refer to the deeply interesting
article in this number from President E. H. Fairchild. The A. M.
A. has taken up that school and has assumed the support for six
months of Miss M. R. Barton, a student of Berea, from Illinois.
That school-house, which is the only one in Jackson County that
has windows in it, will give out a good deal of light among those
mountain people. At Cabin Creek, our old ante-bellum battleground,
in the foot-hill country, the people are building an “Academy,”
with the money subscribed on the condition that there shall be
no respect of color. The A. M. A. has been asked to lend there a
helping hand. At Williamsburg, the county seat of Whitley County, a
town sixty years old, where a church has never yet been finished,
_though three have rotted down during the process of building_,
Rev. A. A. Myers has returned to his old A. M. A. work, and has
inspired the people to build a church edifice 40×60. He works with
his own hands by the side of the citizens. He gets the base-ball
club to give an hour a day to the digging and rolling of stone for
the foundation. The First Congregational Church has been organized,
and now the same people are bent upon getting up a high school,
having turned to this Association for help, which will be gladly
rendered, negotiation being already on foot to secure the teachers,
who the citizens say must come from north of Mason and Dixon’s
line. This town, with fine water power and rafting facilities on
the Cumberland, has already attracted several mills and wood-work
factories, one of which is to make _oars_ for the market in Europe.
The railway that is to cross the mountains to Knoxville will soon
reach this place. Out of the mountain country still further back
of this, it is said, went Dick Yates to be the War Governor of
Illinois, and also its present Executive, Governor Cullom, and
other notabilities. At another county seat, which can scarcely be
reached on wheels—horseback being the almost exclusive mode or
travel; Mr. Myers and his wife having come seventy miles in this
way to the recent Berea Commencement—at this place, Beattyville,
the A. M. A. is to aid a recent colored graduate of Berea, O. W.
Titus, to run his, the only colored school in the county, through
the school year. In these mountains is our opportunity.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the First Congregational Church of Atlanta, Ga., Pastor Kent
having led his people into a system of giving, found that the first
response for the American Board, with envelopes, brought in $68,
from _two hundred and two_ contributors. This was preceded by five
missionary sermons, illustrated from a large missionary map, and by
a rousing Sunday-school missionary concert. “Do you wonder we are
jubilant?” exclaims the pastor. “It is interesting, but not at all
surprising, to observe how giving promotes spirituality. Our prayer
meetings are full of interest lately, and this increase seems to
date from our recent determination to put our hands to the work of
the Redeemer beyond our own confines. It is delightful. The idea of
‘the world for Christ,’ is getting hold of them, and I am confident
it will prove the most direct route to self-support. Several have
expressed to me the conviction that they must not only give for the
world, but that they must do more for the home church.”

       *       *       *       *       *


CHANGE OF ENVIRONMENT

BY PRESIDENT WM. W. PATTON, D.D.

This is a phrase with which the physical philosophers have made the
public ear familiar. The advocates of Darwin’s views have assured
us that all the variations of animal form may be explained by the
relations of life to environment. “Natural selection,” as the key
to the development of different species, denotes simply the effect
which accompanying circumstances have upon life, health and the
exercise of particular organs. “The survival of the fittest,” a
companion phrase, means merely the fact that those forms of life
endure which have the most favorable surroundings. And no one can
doubt that in the chain of causation, which links things together
in this world, there is a continual and most important interaction
between all life and that which environs it.

But may we not ascend, in our reasoning, from animal life to human
thought and character, and find the same law operative? As human
health, form and vigor are found to vary with phenomena of climate,
such as heat and cold, moisture and dryness, and with geographical
location among mountains and valleys, or on broad plains, by the
sea-coast or in the interior, so do we not notice that mental and
moral development depend upon the outward circumstances amid which
one lives? Our natures are plastic, and easily take the impress of
objects with which we come continually in contact. Education is
not merely that from books, but that also which is received from
all manner of surrounding influences, as they exist in the home,
in social intercourse and in the community at large. We see whole
nations continue, century after century, on the same low level of
barbarism, because no change occurs in their outward circumstances
to bring new forces to act upon them. Our Indian tribes are an
illustration. They live, out on the western plains, precisely as
their fathers did for ages before them; and thus they will live
so long as the modifying influence of civilization does not reach
them, and bring a change of environment.

Let such a change occur, however, and a revolution takes place,
whatever race may be involved. Even the most favored nations
improve rapidly, when any external fact comes in, to change
circumstances, and thus to alter the current of thought and
the channel of action. Think how much of modern civilization
is owing to three things, themselves external and mechanical,
yet powerfully affecting mind by their incidental effects—the
invention of gunpowder, of the mariner’s compass and of printing.
But if, in addition to new inventions and industries, there be
brought in schools and churches, to operate directly on mind and
heart, the effect is like placing people in a new climate. It is,
indeed, scarcely a figure of speech, when we sometimes speak of an
intellectual and moral atmosphere—meaning thereby the totality of
constant influences in a community, which affect opinion, modify
character and control conduct. As we breathe the air, every moment
of every day, thinking little of the fact, yet continually drawing
in health or sickness, life or death, so are we unconsciously but
most really influenced for good or evil by all that is going on
around us; by public opinion, social customs, example of friends
and neighbors, existing institutions, industries, amusements,
studies, reading, conversation and religious exercises.

It is a slow process to raise an entire population or a numerous
class of people; but much may be done rapidly, if we select some
of the young of both sexes and change their environment, and so
prepare them to introduce the leaven of improvement into the
mass. Thus, allow colored children to grow up in communities of
prevailing ignorance, superstition and immorality, where they
live in miserable hovels, see only examples of coarseness and
rudeness and hear only a negro dialect, and they will naturally be
like their parents and the neighbors. Nor will it be sufficient
merely to put spelling-books and readers into their hands. Their
surroundings are still depressing and degrading. But send some
of these youth away to such institutions of education as the
Atlanta, Fisk and Howard Universities—in other words, make a total
change of environment—and the effect is marvelous. In addition to
having access to books, they go where the entire conception and
standard of living is different and elevated; where religion is
intelligent; where morals are pure; where manners are refined;
where language is grammatical; where clothing is whole and neat;
where public sentiment is on the right side of disputed questions.
It is, indeed, breathing a new atmosphere, where every breath
is health and life. I have watched, with great interest and
satisfaction, the effect of these incidental influences, during
my five years’ connection with Howard University. The revolution
which will occur in a rough specimen of humanity from the interior
plantation districts—dull of countenance, and rude in manners and
in dress—would scarcely be credited. He finds himself in a new
world on reaching Washington, and mingling with older students
and the city population. New ideas of dress, speech and behavior
come to him daily. Chapel exercises, prayer-meetings and the
preaching on the Sabbath raise his religious conceptions. The
novel sights along the streets stimulate as well as interest. The
competition of fellow-students arouses ambition. He hears numerous
celebrated public speakers, and, on Saturdays, goes to the Capitol,
and listens to Congressional debates, sees eminent men, visits
the Patent-Office, the Smithsonian, the National Museum and the
Navy-Yard, gets an idea of our government and of politics, and thus
is hourly absorbing valuable knowledge at every pore. Three or four
years of such an environment make a very different man of him; and
all his new ideas he carries back to his home, and thus becomes a
power for good in the community.

Why will not Christian people appreciate these facts and amply
sustain the American Missionary Association in its noble work of
planting and strengthening the educational institutions which
operate to change for the better the environment of the colored
race in this country? All improvement must be by an influence from
without, which shall quicken and inspire, which shall teach and
guide; and there is no such influence comparable with that which
comes from the combination of schools and churches.

       *       *       *       *       *


TEMPERANCE TEXT-BOOKS IN OUR SCHOOLS.

Our institutions have always been temperance societies. Mr. John
M. Stearns, Sec. of the Nat. Temp. Soc., at its recent annual
meeting, reporting his tour through the South, said that, as he was
talking to the students at Fisk University, Prof. Spence reported
that every student was required to sign the total abstinence pledge
or to leave the institution. At Atlanta University, he found that
all of the 310 students had signed the same pledge; and this is
also true of all our other schools. Then our students, as they go
everywhere in their vacations, become temperance propagandists,
organizing societies, circulating the literature of the reform and
securing signatures to the pledge. But, during the past year, our
Executive Committee have thought to take a step forward, and so
have voted to require the use of some temperance text-book in all
our schools. Mr. Stearns found them introduced into many, and by
another year they will be found in all. The Atlanta University has
already had Dr. Richardson’s Temperance Lesson Book in use for two
or three years, to the highest satisfaction of all concerned. The
examination of the class in this book in the presence of the State
Board of Examiners was pronounced by a visitor the best temperance
lecture he had ever heard. Let such text-books go into all the
schools of the South, and they will hasten on a revolution.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Roanoke Collegian_, of Salem, Va., referring to the John F.
Slater Fund, says: “The most needed _right_ of the negro now is
his ability to _write_.”

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

John B. Eldridge, of Hartford, Conn., leaves by will $20,000 to Mt.
Holyoke Seminary, and $15,000 to Carleton College, Minn.

Ex-Gov. Chas. H. Hardin, the founder of Hardin College, has given
$19,000 to build a new wing to the edifice.

Mrs. J. S. Herrick, of Madison, Wis., has given $10,000 towards the
Professorship Fund of Chicago Seminary.

Senator Joseph E. Brown, of Atlanta, Ga., has given $50,000 to the
Baptist Theological Seminary, at Louisville, Ky.

Mrs. Ella J. Wheeler, of Boston, has given $30,000 for the
endowment of the Friends’ School in Providence.

Edwin C. Litchfield, who founded the observatory at Hamilton
College, has just given it $2,000 for additions, and has assumed
the payment of the salary of an assistant for Prof. Peters.

With a start of $30,000, given by Mr. E. N. Blake, of Chicago,
the sum of $70,000 has been raised in the West for the Baptist
Theological Seminary in that city; and now it is proposed to secure
$110,000 in the East, $45,000 of which is already pledged.

_The Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association at
its last Annual Meeting appealed for_ $500,000 _for the endowment
of its chartered institutions at the South. The anniversaries of
the different colleges of the land are calling the attention of the
benevolent public to their growth and wants. We especially urge the
claims of the colored people South to a full share of the gifts
made for endowment purposes._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNIVERSARY REPORTS.


ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, GEORGIA.

BY REV. C. W. FRANCIS.

Unless you could look through our eyes you would not know, from
a formal record of the closing exercises of our school, how much
interest and hope and pathos are crowded into these busy days.

On Sabbath morning, June 11th, President Ware preached to a crowded
audience, the sermon to the graduating class from the text 1 Tim.,
4th chap., 8th verse, giving a forcible presentation of the thought
that right doing is profitable in all respects, for this life. The
examinations were continued for three days, and were attended by
a committee of the Board of Visitors, appointed by the Governor
of the State, who, at the close, made to him a highly favorable
report, which has been published with his approval. Two evenings
were occupied by the exercises of the two literary societies of the
school, which were favorably received by good audiences.

On Thursday, the commencement exercises were held at Friendship
Baptist Church, one of the largest in the city, kindly placed at
our disposal for this purpose, which was filled with a closely
packed audience of about 2,000 people, well dressed, orderly,
attentive, and evidently having a personal pride in the results
exhibited. The appearance and conduct of this commencement audience
in successive years affords a good indication of the steadily
improving condition of the mass of the people, viewed with great
satisfaction by friends who have opportunities for comparison.

A class of twelve was graduated, ten young women from the Normal
course and two young men from the College course, all of whom
presented pieces which received much commendation for their
simplicity, directness and good sense.

The annual address was delivered by Rev. E. W. Bacon, of
New London, Conn., and was a forcible and eloquent plea for
self-education, which was singularly appropriate to the
circumstances of the young people just leaving school, to whom it
was primarily addressed.

Two members of the class which was graduated, had, during the year,
been called away from earth, as well as five from other classes,
being an unusual number of deaths in one year. A precious work of
grace was enjoyed during the year, and more than thirty professed
conversion, of whom fifteen united with the school church. All the
members of the graduating class were professing Christians, which
may also be said of nearly every class which has been graduated
hitherto.

As an evidence of the increasing favor with which this school and
its work is regarded in the community, there may be appropriately
quoted some of the remarks of Rev. C. A. Evans, of the M. E.
Church South, pastor of a large church in the city, formerly
General in the Southern army, who spoke at the close of the class
examinations: “I did not expect to say a word, but I comply with
an American habit of making a speech whenever called upon. I am a
Georgia man, and my children are all Georgia born, and I wish them
all to stay here. It is a kindred wish that every one of you may
remain a citizen of Georgia. I also wish that the friends who have
come from afar to be your instructors shall not take to themselves
wings and fly away, but shall settle in this grand old State, and
their children after them. There is no enmity between the white
and colored people in this State. There is a growing desire of
the white people, as you will find, for your welfare. They are
anxious that you should have the best in social life, the best in
intellectual life, and in moral life, to which you can attain. The
State is benefited by good citizens, and God is glorified by true
manhood. I have looked upon these exercises with great interest
as a fellow citizen, expecting to live with you and to come into
contact with you in a thousand ways. I am glad for all I see and
know.”

Remarks in a similar strain were made by several other prominent
gentlemen in attendance.


EXTRACTS FROM REPORT OF THE STATE BOARD OF EXAMINERS.

We do not believe that we have ever seen better teaching than
we find done at the Atlanta University. Evidences of the same
thoroughness appeared in all grades of the grammar school and
throughout all the classes of the higher departments.

We were particularly struck with one feature in the method
of instruction adopted in this institution, and that was the
accuracy of the language in which every question was required to
be answered. The answer is not only to be given correctly as to
substance, but it must be expressed in words both grammatical and
appropriate; if not, the pupil reciting is asked to correct it, and
if unable to do so, it is passed to others of the class.

Your committee noticed another feature in the management of the
university to which they desire to call your attention as worthy
of high commendation, and that is the manual labor training that
is here afforded in connection with the literary course. Every
student, male and female, is required to work an hour each day
at some useful labor, either on the farm connected with the
institution, or in the household and kitchen department. The
tendency of this regulation is not only to greatly reduce the
expenses of board, etc., but to induce habits of industry, and
impart valuable practical information for everyday use in after
life. The farm, including the beautiful grounds immediately
surrounding the college buildings, contains about sixty acres, and
is under the direction of a thoroughly practical and energetic
gentleman who keeps everything in admirable order and brings out
the best possible results. Specimens of field and garden crops,
embracing a great variety of grasses and forage plants, cereals
and vegetables, were exhibited to your committee, evincing great
efficiency in this department. Samples of the culinary art were
also shown us, and if our eyes and our palates did not deceive us,
they reflected great credit on those who prepared them for our
inspection and entertainment.

Special contributions have been obtained for the establishment of
an industrial department for instruction in the more useful trades.

“Stone Hall,” the gift of Mrs. Valeria G. Stone, of Malden, Mass.,
is in process of erection. Other new buildings are projected for
the coming year.

At a recent meeting of the trustees of the university, a resolution
was passed to institute forthwith a post-graduate course of two
years for graduates of the normal department. Its privileges are to
be open to those who have maintained a high standard in the regular
course, and who give promise of efficiency in work for which this
special training is designed to fit them, and the preference is to
be given to graduates of one or more years standing. This course,
while not neglecting intellectual culture, by providing for courses
of reading and for attendance upon recitations and lectures, and
for practice in teaching, is to provide special training in nursing
the sick, sewing, cutting and making of garments, care of household
affairs, the inauguration and management of mission work, and in
general whatever training seems likely to prepare young women of
culture for the responsible duties of actual life. At the same
meeting the trustees directed the executive committee to select as
soon as practicable a suitable person as principal of this course
of study, who shall also be matron of the family of young women who
may be gathered for this purpose; and they are further directed to
prepare plans for the suitable accommodation of such a family.

The trustees also voted that an industrial department for boys be
at once organized, which shall provide for training in carpentry
and other mechanical work; and the executive committee were
authorized to make the necessary arrangements.

       *       *       *       *       *


TALLADEGA COLLEGE, TALLADEGA, ALA.

BY PROF. GEO. N. ELLIS.

The prelude of our twelfth anniversary exercises came Friday
night, June 9, in the form of a school exhibition by the lower
departments, consisting of declamations, recitations, concert
exercises, etc. This was something new and drew a large and
appreciative audience. The participants came attended by a throng
of relatives and admiring friends, and the programme passed off in
a manner creditable to all.

In lieu of the usual baccalaureate sermon Sunday morning, Rev.
Edward W. Bacon, of New London, Conn., delivered a missionary
discourse. To his mind, a missionary was not a religious drummer
nor a mere itinerant preacher. He was a settler, locating in a
community, growing up with it, molding its moral, social and
religious life. To the young colored men of America, educated
and consecrated, no field offers grander opportunities for
distinguishment, in these respects, than does long-neglected
Africa. Mr. Bacon said his object was to induce some one to become
a missionary. His able and practical sermon will not be barren of
results; and when the call for workers shall come, Talladega will
respond with her quota.

At night President De Forest gave one of his practical talks to the
students about to go out for the summer. It was crowded with good
advice, plainly put, and will not be forgotten.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday forenoons public examinations were
held in the various departments. They seem to have passed off
satisfactorily to examiners, examined and visitors. One of the
latter who spent his whole time in seeing and hearing as much as
possible said: “I have not been into an examination which does not
reflect credit on teacher and scholar alike. Everything shows that
most excellent work has been done.” Theology is still the high
water mark of scholarship, but the “small Latin and less Greek”
of the institution are gradually rising and are not to stop short
of the line of a full college course. There is a good deal of
“back-water” waiting to be turned into these channels as soon as
they are properly enlarged.

Wednesday afternoon occurred the prize declamations and essays.

The evening entertainments for the week were, on Monday night,
a scholarly and uplifting address by Rev. Mr. Bacon upon
self-education; on Tuesday night exercises by the young people’s
literary societies, which showed commendable efforts in the
way of self-improvement; on Wednesday night, the usual church
prayer-meeting, one of the most enjoyable of all our Commencement
gatherings; and on Thursday night, a concert by the Musical Union
who rendered the Cantata of Esther, the Beautiful Queen, to the
satisfaction of a densely packed house and with an income to the
Union of nearly fifty dollars which they pledged for a new piano.

Talladega sends out no graduates this year. Though according to
previous standards, students were ready to receive their diplomas
both in theology and normal studies, they voluntarily chose to
spend another year in further preparation for life’s work. The
exercises of Thursday morning consisted of eight orations by
representatives (four each) from the college preparatory and
theological departments. In discussing standard and current
themes, they showed a grasp of thought, a clearness and vigor
in presentation certainly far from discreditable to any public
rostrum. _We were proud of them._ A little further mental
discipline in mathematics and the classics and they will be well
prepared leaders of their people.

At these various exercises more than the usual number of visitors
were present. During some of the examinations in the chapel the
room was fairly filled with listeners. Upon the platform were
leading white citizens of the town, and some from abroad. Among the
latter were Rev. O. W. Fay and Judge Buckley, of Montgomery, who
spoke most warmly of what they saw and heard.

Talladega College looks back upon the year just closed as the most
prosperous one in her history. It has seen new buildings reared,
others repaired, greatly needed improvements made, and a fair
beginning in the way of endowments; to the many friends throughout
the North whose gifts have caused these things to be, we are
unspeakably grateful. It has seen most thorough work done in all
departments of study, more than a score of its pupils confess a
newly-found Saviour, and much activity in mission and Sunday-school
work on the part of the more advanced. Already many applications
for another year are coming in.

       *       *       *       *       *


STRAIGHT UNIVERSITY, NEW ORLEANS.

BY W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

Our commencement began properly with the examination of the Law
Department, and the graduation of eleven law students. The list
of graduates from this department now numbers 50 names, of whom
43 have been awarded their diplomas within the last six years. It
is an interesting fact that of our 50 law graduates 35 have been
white and 15 colored. Side by side they have been gathered in the
lecture rooms of the Professors, and have met in the crucial test
of the final examination.

The Faculty is admirably constituted both on account of legal
attainments, and real genuine interest in the young men. Four
lectures are given each week. The prospects for the incoming class
are excellent, both as to numbers and quality, the white element
predominating as usual.

The great need of this department is a reference library. Many of
the students are poor and law books are costly. Now the professors,
though at great inconvenience, permit the students to consult
their standard works. When we have a building devoted to the three
professions, the law library should become at once an accomplished
fact.

This year in the academic department we had no graduating class.
Our anniversary exercises have been somewhat out of the usual
order, but thoroughly interesting and successful. Perhaps never
have we met the popular taste more fully than this year. The old
graduates were invited to return and take part in the first public
anniversary meeting of the Alumni. Seven accepted the invitation
and entered heartily into the project, and others sent the cordial
expression of their regrets.

The meeting was held in Central Church. A large and intelligent
audience was present, and entered fully into the spirit of the
occasion.

The orations were exceedingly well written and delivered. The
oration of Rev. A. E. P. Albert, a graduate from our classical and
theological department, on the subject, “Senator Jones’ speech, or
is there to be a war of races?” was a surprise even to Mr. Albert’s
friends, on account of its brilliancy, its vigorous thought and
sustained eloquence. It is to be published in full in one of our
city papers, and I wish all unbelievers in the mental capacity of
the African would read it and pass upon its merits.

Wednesday noon occurred the Literary Exhibition in the University
Chapel. What a storm raged without! It seemed as though the
flood-gates were opened. We had it almost entirely to ourselves,
only a few good friends venturing to face the tempest. The
orations, compositions, dialogues, and select readings evinced
decided talent in writing and speaking.

In the evening a concert was given at the church, with a few
literary exercises. The musical programme was judiciously arranged,
and was thoroughly appreciated by an audience of six hundred people.

The year has marked an advance in scholarship, and the University
has acquired a firmer foothold in the city and state.

If we are quick to discern and seize upon opportunities of
enlargement, the immediate future will furnish abundant room for
the employment of busy hands and devoted hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *


TILLOTSON INSTITUTE, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

BY JUDGE C. T. GARLAND.

The Tillotson Collegiate and Normal Institute has closed its first
full year since the building of Allen Hall, and its Texas friends
are full of congratulations on the progress made.

The Baccalaureate Sermon on June 4, by President W. E. Brooks, was
listened to by a large and attentive audience, and was peculiarly
happy in its adaptation to the occasion, and to the financial,
intellectual and spiritual interests of the colored race.

On June 5 and 6, occurred the examination of the classes.
Listening to these students, and considering the time they had
spent at school, one could not see that they exhibited that mental
inferiority so often attributed to their race in the past. Let one
instance suffice. I was so much struck with the solid intellectual
qualities of one young man, a coal black negro, that I sought him
out and advised him to study law. Conversation with him elicited
the fact that his only schooling of account had been during the
last five months at the Institute, while his attainments would
indicate a good common school education, such as is ordinarily the
work of ten years.

[Illustration: VIEW ON BAYOU AT HOUSTON.]

On the evening of the 6th, a crowded audience being in attendance,
there were declamations and readings, with vocal and instrumental
music at suitable intervals. Then came addresses by Rev. Dr. E.
B. Wright, a trustee of the Institute, and by other prominent
clergymen and educators. The evening closed with a general
reception in which visitors, students and faculty gave themselves
up to a happy hour of congratulations and whole hearted social
intercourse such as colored people so much delight in.

On the 7th inst., essays, declamations, readings and music were
listened to with unwearied attention by another large audience,
including many distinguished visitors, who stayed from the
beginning to the end of the exercises.

The oration by A. S. Green, on “The Possibilities of Our People,
and how they may be realized,” was received by the audience with
special interest. At the conclusion of the exercises, addresses
were delivered by Gov. O. M. Roberts, Ex-Gov. E. J. Davis, and
other leading citizens. All the speeches were of deep interest, and
whether from Democratic or Republican lips, they were alike full of
appreciative good will toward the noble work done by such agencies
as the American Missionary Association. In particular, I wish space
and memory would permit me to write out for publication, every
word uttered by Govs. Roberts and Davis, but their words on paper
would convey but a feeble impression of the interest and emotion
exhibited by them. As might have been expected from an audience
largely colored, the addresses were listened to with breathless
attention, except at intervals marked by hearty, though decorous,
applause.

A noted feature of the exercises was the good elocution of the
students, resulting mainly from the brief training received at the
Institute. To one accustomed to the old time thick and indistinct
plantation pronunciation, the change seemed indeed wonderful.

Those who had seen the students at the beginning and at the end
of the term remarked a striking improvement in their personal
appearance. Intellectual, moral and spiritual culture had impressed
its stamp upon their countenances and was exhibited in their
deportment.

Throughout the year much interest has been shown in the Tillotson
literary and temperance societies. Their meetings have been
numerously attended by the people of Austin and its vicinity, which
has added to their zest and usefulness.

It need not be said that the moral and spiritual welfare of the
students has all along been closely looked after. If any one
of them of fair ability does not go out from the Institute a
thoroughly trained Sunday School teacher, it will be his own
fault and not that of President Brooks. Happily, both students
and outsiders have shown great interest and appreciation in their
attendance on the Sabbath services at the institution.

       *       *       *       *       *


NORMAL SCHOOL, WILMINGTON, N.C.

BY MISS A. C. CHANDLER.

The examinations at Wilmington Normal School closed Thursday, June
1. Notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather, quite a number
of interested parents and friends came in to inquire and see for
themselves what their children had been doing for the year. After
listening to various recitations and exercises, they expressed
themselves highly gratified.

Friday evening the annual exhibition took place in Memorial Hall.
About 400 were present.

No special attempt at decoration was made, yet the stage was not
wanting in floral adornments, two large, tall baskets of handsome
flowers standing one on each side. The wall back of the stage was
prettily and tastefully decorated with green boughs, moss, and a
little white drapery.

At a little past eight o’clock the school marched into the hall,
and took seats as near the front as possible. The children made
a good appearance, being neatly and some of them very prettily
dressed.

The programme consisted of about twenty parts, interspersed with
good music. The selections specially attractive were the cantata,
“Grandpa’s Birthday,” three recitations upon the subject of
temperance, a concert declamation entitled “A Leap for Life,” given
by seven young men, and the recitation, “Auction Extraordinary.”
Some of the pieces given by the little folks were very pleasing.
The selections were all well rendered, and won many complimentary
remarks from those present.

Rev. Mr. Dodge being called upon, responded with a few well-chosen
words appropriate to the occasion, after which the benediction was
pronounced.

       *       *       *       *       *


LE MOYNE INSTITUTE, MEMPHIS, TENN.

BY PROF. A. J. STEELE.

The close of the year brings us also to the close of the first
decade in the history of Le Moyne Institute. The founder of
the school has gone to his reward and his works do follow him.
The institution which he founded is but at the beginning of
its usefulness and of its possibilities. This year we graduate
a class of ten from the full course (four years), the largest
class yet sent out, and the fourth. Thus far the graduates of the
school, excepting one only, have taught almost continuously since
completing the course. The ten members of the present class will
teach; some of them expect to pursue their studies further at Fisk
University, after working a year for the means.

The public exercises at the closing this year were unusually
interesting, judging from the attendance, not only of colored
people, friends of the graduates, but also of prominent white
families of the city. Formerly gentlemen of this latter class
only came, now quite as many ladies as gentlemen are seen in the
audience that fills and overflows the church. I do not suppose that
of the many who read this account, even those who look back to the
joys and excitements of “graduation” can realize just what that
word implies to our students here, with the memory of their past
and with the difficulties of their present and future in mind.

To receive the diploma with its ribbon and “broad seal” and formal
address, to listen as the principal parties interested to the
“annual address” by the “Judge” or “General” or “Colonel” as the
case may be, and it is sure to be the one or the other of these, to
sit on the broad platform, to receive flowers and flowers, to be
cheered and complimented and envied by admiring friends—we all know
what these mean to a “graduate.” For my part, and for yours, too,
dear readers, I know it is a matter of rejoicing that in all our
land there is not a youth who may not hopefully look up and forward
to the enjoyment of these things.

I should not have taken so much of my space for this part of my
letter, for I have little now left in which to tell of the every
day experiences and work of the year. How for want of room and
accommodations we have, during the year, had to turn away over
fifty pupils who applied in person for admission; how a more
regular and steady attendance has told for good on the scholarship
and work of the school; how the Spirit blessed us in the conversion
of not less than thirty of our pupils.

In all our successes, as in all our discouragements, the good hand
of our God has been upon us, and we rejoice in it all that we see
His work going forward and yearly gaining new triumphs.

Our outlook for the coming year is most assuring, and our only
serious difficulty would seem to be want of room for all who come
to us. Our building must be enlarged.

       *       *       *       *       *


LEWIS HIGH SCHOOL, MACON, GA.

BY REV. S. E. LATHROP.

The Primary Department closed on Friday, May 26. The little folks
did well with their songs and speeches, and were neatly dressed.
There are some funny things among them sometimes in regard to
names. For example, Lily White was a coal-black Ethiopian. This
department has been crowded into a low basement room in the
Teachers’ Home this year, for lack of accommodation elsewhere. We
all rejoice with teacher and scholars that there is hope of more
roomy quarters next year.

On Saturday, the 27th, was the closing exhibition of the Sewing
Class, under charge of Mrs. Lathrop. Seventy-six girls this year
have been in the class, meeting on Saturday forenoons. Friends
in the North have helped by contributing patchwork, basted
garments, etc., and the girls have been taught plain sewing with
the making of mottoes, bookmarks, etc. Only sixteen sessions
were held, but the amount of work accomplished was surprising.
There were displayed in the main school room eighteen patchwork
quilts and one hundred and twenty-one finished garments, dresses,
aprons, underclothing, etc., all neatly made, and showing decided
improvement in sewing. There were some short readings, recitations
and singing, and then a few brief talks from Prof. Hodge and
others, and afterward the garments were distributed to those who
made them, amid thankful hilarity.

On Monday and Tuesday, 29th and 30th, were held the closing
examinations. These were more rigid and thorough than for a long
time before, but the classes generally did well, and acquitted
themselves with much credit. During the year there have been held
monthly examinations, and the classes have been more thoroughly
graded than ever, so that there will be less confusion than usual
in opening the next school year. Quite a number of visitors were in
attendance, both white and colored. Rev. B. F. Breedlove, pastor
of the largest Southern Methodist Church in the city, was present
a part of the time, and publicly expressed his gratification and
commendation of the work done.

On Wednesday, the 31st, occurred the closing exercises, beginning
at 9 A.M. The school went through with their essays, declamations,
dialogues and songs in a way that reflected credit upon them and
their teachers. The church was well filled with spectators of
all colors. Three students received certificates of graduation
from the High-School course, and these will probably go to
Atlanta University or elsewhere in the fall. After the programme
was finished, some of the visitors were called on for speeches.
Hon. Felix Corput, Mayor of the city, responded in few but
commendatory words. Hon. B. M. Zettler, County Superintendent of
Schools, made quite an extended address, with somewhat of eulogium
and considerable of good counsel. Rev. E. J. Adams, a colored
Presbyterian clergyman from Baltimore, a man of fine education
and ability, made an excellent address. He spoke very highly of
the great educational work of the A. M. A., in whose service he
has himself labored, as a missionary in Africa, and also in this
country. Mr. J. J. Clay, a prominent white citizen, spoke with much
apparent sympathy and earnestness, commending education and the
work of our school. There were several other short speeches from
former students or patrons of the school, all showing deep interest
in its work.

On Wednesday night came the grand finale in the shape of a closing
concert, conducted by our music teacher, Miss Jennie Woodworth.
Although the night was very rainy and stormy, the church was full,
with quite a number of white people, who expressed their great
gratification. The singing was good, and the concert well carried
out to the end, showing decided musical ability on the part of
all in solo, duet and chorus singing. Mr. Derry, a friendly white
citizen, made an impromptu and voluntary address, full of real
sympathy and kind words. The daily paper printed a flattering
report of the concert, and of the whole work of the school. Public
sentiment in this respect is becoming more and more friendly.

We are glad to report that both school and church have prospered
during the year. The total enrollment of students is 199, and we
rejoice to know that additional school rooms, so greatly needed,
are to be provided before another year begins. Fifteen or twenty of
the scholars were converted during the precious revival in March
last. Quite a number will engage in teaching during the summer,
and several will go to higher institutions of learning in the fall.

       *       *       *       *       *


“PINE GROVE COLLEGE,” KENTUCKY.

BY REV. B. H. FAIRCHILD, D.D.

In Jackson County, sixteen miles from Berea, there has long been
a church called Walnut Chapel, similar in character to the church
at Berea, and connected with the same association. A few families,
slightly colored, have always lived among them, belonged to the
same church and attended the same school. Indeed, their minister,
the most prosperous man among them, and long a trustee of the
public school, was said to be slightly colored. Another minister,
who preached to them a few years, exhibited more signs of color. In
this neighborhood lives Robert Jones, who, in 1856, was whipped by
a mob, thirty-three lashes on his bare back, for being a colporteur
of the American Missionary Association, and for sustaining Mr. Fee
in one of his meetings. Four of the old man’s sons live about him;
one is a preacher, as is the father himself.

When the colored school law was passed in this State, their harmony
was disturbed. It is made unlawful “for any colored child to attend
a common school provided for white children or for a white child to
attend a common school provided for colored children.” This utterly
deprived the colored children of school privileges, for there were
not enough of them to organize a school district, and there was no
prospect that there ever would be. In this emergency the church
asked advice of the Association. After due deliberation they were
advised to build a good school-house that should be open to all
children of the neighborhood, and let the common school take care
of itself. Aid was promised them, if it should be necessary.

The community accepted this advice. A plan of a school-house
was furnished them, and a promise made that if they would build
according to that plan, they should have a good teacher the first
six months without expense to them. The school-house was to be
25×30, 12 ft. from floor to ceiling, with four large windows, two
doors, and good seats and desks for 60 scholars.

This was a great undertaking, unheard of in that region. There
was no house equal to it in the county, for schools or meetings.
But enthusiasm was developed, as the work went on, and culminated
at the dedication on the 26th of June. Three times as many were
present as could be crowded into the house, and so great was the
rush for the school it was necessary to publish that only sixty
could be admitted. The children of those who aided in building
the house were to be admitted first, but must make application
within three days. At the end of the three days nearly a hundred
applications had been received.

Before the dedication the people had, in some way, named the school
“The Pine Grove College.” They were advised to drop the name
college, as their most advanced students would never get within two
years of college. But names are not easily dropped, and this seems
destined to endure.

Miss Maria Muzzy, an experienced teacher, one of Berea’s corps, had
been engaged to take the school. Very frequently she was warned by
good friends who knew the mountain people and Kentucky habits that
there would be no safety for her in that school, she would surely
be mobbed, no lady should be asked so to expose herself, she should
not think of staying a night without a pistol. She almost feared
that it was a rash undertaking. But calmer counsels, with trust in
God, sustained her. No indignity was ever offered her, and no one
ever had more friends among such a people.

At the close of the first week she wrote to Berea that she hadn’t
the heart to turn away so many, and asked for an assistant, who
should exchange with her in teaching in the woods. This arrangement
was made; and for two months a part of the school was in the house
and a part in the grove. The assistant was Miss Kate Gilbert,
another of Berea’s corps of teachers.

[Illustration: FAMILIAR SCENE IN LOUISVILLE, KY.]

She offered to forego her summer vacation, and teach in the woods,
with no promise of compensation.

Not the least difficulty was to find a boarding place for the
teacher. A lady who was to teach eighteen months in succession
without a vacation must be taken care of. Not a room could be found
in the neighborhood, with a window in it, which she could have to
herself.

A man was found who needed a new house, and for an advance of
$100, for a part of two years’ board, built a log house near the
school-house and furnished her a room fifteen feet square, with two
windows, and a lock to her door. There is no other such room in all
the region.

The school closed grandly and beautifully, with an examination and
an exhibition.

But the common school was abandoned for not a pupil could be found
to attend it.

The following are the friends who furnished the money for this
important enterprise. I thank them most heartily for their
promptness and liberality:

Asylum St. Church, Hartford, Ct., $50.00; Euclid Av. Church,
East Cleveland, O., 50.00; First Cong. Church, Cleveland, O.,
21.25; Mrs. Mary H. Penfield, Rockford, Ill., 50.00; H. Ford, E.
Cleveland, O., 8.00; Mrs. A. A. Brakenridge, Cleveland, O., 6.00;
Miss Lucy A. French, Cleveland, O., 6.00; Frank Fairchild, Mt.
Vernon, O., 20.00; Mrs. S. E. Bosworth, for Ladies’ Benev. Soc.,
Elgin, Ill., 15.00; Mary I. James, Brooklyn, N. Y., 30.00; F. S.
Sessions, Columbus, O., 25.00; Cong. Church, Muskegon, Mich.,
25.00; Sunday-school class of girls, Brooklyn, N.Y., 10.85.

For special reasons of a local character, it became necessary to
find a benevolent man who would purchase 150 acres surrounding the
school-house. Rev. Wm. Kincaid, of Oberlin, is the good man who
takes it at $1.50 per acre.

The house is situated on a lofty ridge, six or eight miles long,
the route of the main road in that part of the county, but over
which a team does not pass more than once a week, and there is no
house in sight of the school-house.

The school is managed by trustees, one of whom is a professor of
Berea College, and the present pastor of Walnut Chapel Church, to
which he preaches once a month, in the school-house. There is no
other school in the county fit to qualify young people for teachers.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.


MR. LADD’S JOURNAL.

_Monday, Jan. 2._—A good breeze sprang up in the night and we were
off. The rocks were reached about 8 A.M. Here we found a number
of sunken rocks extending for some three or four miles. We passed
the junction of the Atbara, the first tributary of the Nile, at 9
A.M. It is a good, fair stream where it joins the main river. Just
above the mouth of the Atbara there is an island called Fatlab. A
few miles beyond the island, and not at the mouth of the Atbara,
as on most maps, is the town of Darner on the east side. Here we
stopped about an hour and a half for fresh provisions. The sailors
bought salt, etc., on speculation, while Doctor and I wandered
about picking up flints on the desert on which the town is built,
and chatting with an Arab we met, who happened to understand a few
words of French. The sailors here begged us so hard to let them put
up the stars and stripes that we finally relented from our former
purpose and consented, provided we sailed into Khartoum under the
Egyptian flag. We found that the men were inclined to stop here too
long, in order to drive sharp bargains for their own profit, and
at the end of an hour and a half we ordered them to start, much
against their own will. There was not a man of them who understood
the first thing about sailing, and when we attempted to start,
their management was so bad that we turned around like a top, and
had to make the shore again and take a fresh start. The banks along
here are thickly studded with “sakias,” which make night as well
as day musical with their continuous squeak and groan. We passed a
number of huts and a town called Gelase. There are several large
islands in the river along here. The wind died down as we reached
one of the largest of them, called Zaidab, and we tied up to its
banks for the night.

_Tuesday, Jan. 3._—The morning has been unusually cool. The men
were lazy, and did not start with the first breeze. They require
more urging than is pleasant. We have seen great numbers of
crocodiles. Doctor has a cold and headache. Stopped “to get wood.”
Stopped again “to get greens.” This time was righteously indignant
and told the men they would not stop again while the wind blew.
A sharp bend in the river. The town of Sigada on the west side.
Low mountains in the distance on the east side. As we approached
them we found that they come close to the river. Sandstone and
limestone rocks. Miserable sailing! The worst I ever saw. We had
a fine breeze, and yet the sails were set in such a way that they
flapped and threatened to turn inside out. Stood it as long as I
could, then took things into my own hands and ordered the sails set
to suit me. All at once, in the afternoon, the main sheet broke,
and away went the sail. The men stood and looked at it, hoping it
would somehow get right, while we floated down stream. Saw about
20 ft. of high bank cave in with a great splash. The pyramids of
Meroe came in sight. We counted eight of them. This would be an
interesting spot to visit, but relic hunting is not our business
just now. A large island stands in front of them. We saw five large
crocodiles sunning themselves on a point of land. Doctor shot at
one of them, and the result was that he hurried off into the water.
The nights are beautiful. It is full moon, and so we sail on while
the wind lasts. While everything was going nicely, and our course
as plain by moonlight as by day, the men suddenly got frightened.
They thought there was a sand-bar just ahead. The rudder was put
hard over. We went clear to the other side of the river, where they
actually managed to find a bar and stick on it. Then they had to
pole back to where they were before, and found their former course
all right. These men really do not know any more about managing a
boat than the man in the moon.

_Wednesday, Jan. 4._—Was up in the night to see about the sailing.
Dared not trust the men. We have had a good breeze, but made
miserable time. We stopped a little while for wood, and then stood
out with a good wind. A merchant boat came up in the rear, passed
us, and left us far behind. The Doctor is feeling rather poorly. We
reached Shendy about noon, and were fully an hour in passing it.
This is a large town. We saw about a thousand cattle on the bank,
and camels coming and going. The larger proportion of the houses
that are visible from the river have been destroyed by the rains
and stand in ruins. This is said to be a very healthy place, and it
has every appearance of it. The desert comes to the river. About
eight fine sycamore trees in one place on the bank make a fine
site for a building. There are other trees near. A wall has been
built along the river to protect the bank. Here we saw a number of
whirlwinds carrying the desert sand hundreds of feet into the air.
The town of El Metammeh, on the west side, and a few miles farther
up the river is a very large place—said to be larger than Berber.
Here also the desert comes to the river. The town stands back a
little, and the banks are not quite so high. We rounded a point. A
fine wind was blowing, but the men insisted that they must put to
shore “to pick up the sail,” or in other words tighten the rigging.
Soon after I found them sitting on the bank contemplating the
rigging instead of working at it, and sailed into them lively. They
soon had it done.

_Thursday, Jan. 5._—Passed some high hills during the night. We
have had a fine breeze nearly all night and all the morning. We
passed some sandstone rocks on the west bank, which come to the
water’s edge. These are nearly opposite to Ben Naga. We have run
upon a sand-bar twice. Saw a large number of crocodiles of immense
size. A man on shore hailed us frantically, and wanted us to take
a quantity of butter for him to Khartoum! As though the Governor’s
boat, with two Americans on board, impatient to get along, was
going to be turned into a merchant vessel! The men were a little
inclined to stop, but we ordered them to go on, and the poor fellow
was left on the bank swinging his arms like a windmill and getting
red in the face. We are passing through a fine grazing country. A
new man suddenly turns up on board, who understands sailing and
steering a little better than the others. Where he came from we do
not know, but suspect that he was picked up at the last place where
we stopped. Now we are making better time. We reached the beginning
of the “cataract” at 2:20 P.M. We had a fine wind and plenty of
time before sunset, but the captain was afraid to go on and made
a variety of foolish excuses. We landed and made inquiries, and
finding there was no danger ordered him to proceed at once. We
found a few rocks and some sand banks, but there was not the
slightest difficulty. We passed some beautiful islands covered with
trees and festooning vines and high grass. By sunset we had passed
most of the rocks, and then the wind ceasing, and the men being
tired, we allowed them to tie up for the night. Ducks are plenty
about here. The Garri Mountains are in sight.

_Friday, Jan. 6._—Good breeze. Passed several rocks and small
islands. Rounded a large island and entered a wild romantic gorge,
with rocky mountains rising high on each side straight from the
river, which is here reduced to a very narrow channel. This winding
gorge, or gap, extends several miles, and it is called Sebeloga.
Came to and circled the largest island we have yet seen, called
Rowyan. There is a rocky mountain upon it. Passing out from the
gorge there are a few rocks in the river. On our left, or east
bank, we saw a round mountain called Wad El Bassal, or “Son of the
Onion.” The wind has been fair and square astern, but the men have
managed the sail so badly that it has actually turned inside out.
This is not the safest performance in a strong wind, and we thought
it was about time to take things into our own hands and ordered
the sail around where it ought to be, and threatened to take full
charge of the boat. We have found two men on board without our
permission, but concluded to let it go. At one watering-place we
saw 25 flocks of sheep, goats, cows, etc., averaging 300 in a
flock! We have left the mountains behind us. While sailing along
before a good breeze all of a sudden the main brace broke and
over went the sail, nearly upsetting the whole thing and knocking
everybody overboard. We are growing resigned, and are now ready for
almost anything. Once more, after getting things straight again,
the sail, with a fair wind, was allowed to turn inside out!! The
wind went down, and we went ashore. After awhile it blew again, and
we were off. Passed the bluff of Termaniat. Thermometer to-day:
Sunrise, 60°; noon, 81°; sunset, 70°.

[Illustration: EGYPTIANS OF UPPER EGYPT.]

_Saturday, Jan. 7._—Fine breeze. Sailed at good speed. The banks
here were lower, and the river broader. Low hills to the right. We
were approaching Khartoum. There were several islands, and then
we got a long view up the White Nile. We rounded the point of a
large island, and turned into the clearer waters of the Blue Nile.
The flags were up, and we expected to sail into Khartoum in grand
style, but the wind was so strong from the north that we had to
be towed up along the steep southern bank. We went bumping along,
running into everything that it was possible to run into, amid a
babel of sounds. Everybody seemed to think it necessary to yell
at everybody else. Amid the confusion, as we were coming smash
down upon another boat, Ibrahim called to two well-dressed young
fellows, who were lounging on the other boat, to help push off.
They heard, but were too lazy to move. He waited till he was near
enough, and then suddenly pounced upon them with his stick, and
dealt them several sharp blows. One fled precipitately one way,
and the other jumped into the river. I did not know but he would
drown, but he soon reached the bank, where the crowd had a good
laugh at his expense. All along the shore native women, with only
a rag on, were washing clothes; some without a rag on were washing
themselves. Finally we reached our landing-place, and tied up. We
had reached Khartoum at last! The American consul, a rich, one-eyed
Copt, stood on the bank waiting for us. He soon came on board.
Congratulations and compliments were exchanged. He offered to do
anything and everything for us. We told him the first thing we
wanted was our letters. They were sent for at once. I had seven!
We sat right down and devoured them. Not a word had we heard since
leaving Cairo, and now here was a feast. Better than cold water
to a thirsty soul was the good news from home. We went, at the
consul’s invitation, to see the quarters he had kindly provided
for us in one of his own houses. The rooms were really very nice
for this country. On the whole, our first impressions of Khartoum
were very pleasant. There was no apparent reason why it should not
be healthy if properly cared for. The desert stretched away on all
sides, both on the north and south banks of the Blue Nile. There
seemed to be considerable business along the river bank. There were
crowds of merchant boats loading and unloading. There were eight
steamers lying here. We noticed a number of very good buildings
facing the river. We have just heard of a formidable insurrection
south of here, on the White Nile, and in the vicinity of Fashoda,
in which 600 or more soldiers have already been killed. After
returning to our dahabeah, the consul sent us a present of oranges,
pomegranates and milk. After a while he called again with several
others. He certainly showed himself very anxious to please us.
He has placed his house at our disposal, free of charge, for any
length of time we choose to occupy it. He and his suite waited for
us till after dinner. Then we packed up what was necessary and,
following the lanterns, went up to our new quarters. Here every
possible comfort had been very thoughtfully provided. The doctor
kindly insisted on my having the best room as a sort of “divan,” or
place in which to receive company. A guard was provided for us, who
slept at our door, as the rest were to stay on board over night.
Three pretty gazelles were running about the yard in the moonlight,
and looking in at our doors. Temperature: Sunrise, 60°; noon, 81°;
sunset, 74°.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.


LETTER FROM REV. W. C. POND.

MORE HOODLUMISM.

Not more than I expected, but enough to make one blush with
mingled shame and indignation. At several of our schools scarcely
an evening has passed for some weeks in which the pupils have
been able to come and go unmolested. To hear the report of this
does not greatly stir the blood perhaps; but to see a bright
little boy, child of a Christian father, himself growing up in
the knowledge and love of Christ, because his skin has a tinge
slightly deeper than our own and his dress is not in our style and
the stock of which he comes is Mongolian and not Caucasian, stoned
by half-a-dozen cowardly youths, no one of whom would dare attack
a Chinaman of his own size on equal terms, and then to see the
wound, deep and bloody, close to the eyes, that one of the stones
has made; _seeing_ all this, I cannot but feel that I “do well to
be angry.” One of our teachers has been rebuked by a so-called
preacher of the Gospel, to whom she herself had listened in one of
our Congregational pulpits, for teaching Chinamen. And the pastor
of one of the churches of California having in it Chinese members
was told by a prominent member of his church: “I would rather see
them hung up by their queues than baptized and brought into the
church.” When facts like these come to my knowledge I confess that
I am dismayed; not so much, however, for those who are wronged as
for the wrong-doers. I tremble for California and for some of the
churches of California when I remember that God is just.

       *       *       *       *       *


STORY OF CHINA MARY.

One of our teachers relates the following touching story: “But I
must tell you about poor Ah Low, or China Mary, as we all called
her. She was brought to this country when quite young, and was won
by her husband in a raffle. As a prize she was valued at $100.
An attempt was made afterwards by some Chinese and Americans to
steal her, but she fled to Mr. Otis and was rescued. She wished
me to teach her to read, and every morning as I passed her cabin
on my way to the school-room I stopped and gave her a lesson. At
last she told me her heart troubles. Her husband, she said, was
getting big pay in a neighboring town, but was tired of her and
would give her no money. Her offence was that her child was a girl
and not a boy; and when, by and by, another little girl came, the
husband’s injury was more than he could bear. The little baby
sickens strangely. Mary tells the secret of it. ‘My husband says
if baby doesn’t die he will get another woman.’ But in spite of
it all the baby got well, and now poor Mary’s time had come. As I
stepped from the steamer to the wharf one morning I saw Mary coming
on board, looking clean and even pretty in her blue blouse with her
baby strapped upon her back. ‘Where are you going, Mary?’ I asked.
‘To San Francisco for a visit,’ she replied. Soon she returned, but
with no baby; and in the evening we learned that the purpose of her
enforced journey to the city was accomplished. She had been sold by
her husband into a Chinese house of prostitution for $300. And this
is the last we have been able to know of China Mary.”

       *       *       *       *       *


GOOD CHEER.

I must not close in this minor strain. We have much to be grateful
for. The reported enrolment and the aggregate average attendance
on our school were larger in May than ever before. Almost 900
pupils are attending the schools, and the average attendance was
433. At Santa Barbara we hear of additions to the Association, and
of three or more that seem ready to receive baptism. At Stockton
we held last Sunday evening, June 18, our anniversary, which was
well-attended and exceedingly interesting. Here are two, and
perhaps three, Chinese who have given for many months delightful
evidence of Christian character and who desire to be baptized.
The Oakland school is growing fast and with promise of greater
usefulness than ever it has given hitherto. I conclude with an
extract from a recent letter from Wong Ock, our helper in the
Petaluma school, “We have had a good school the past month; but
for one thing I feel sorry—that the scholars change all time. It
seems too bad; they don’t have but little time to learn. We can’t
help that, of course. They are all working boys, moving from place
to place. Some learn very fast and love to come to school, only
some of the hard words are difficult for them to pronounce, but
they do not fail to try. Every evening we have some words to spell,
writing them on the black-board and spelling alone and in concert.
I gave astronomy lessons to them, explaining by my own globe. They
were very much astonished because they never heard such a thing
as that the world was round, etc. The Bible lessons we have every
Saturday and Sunday evenings. I hope you will pray for the school
here and the teachers. Mr. Pond, I am hateful to myself ever since
I have known the truth, because of the earthly thoughts and fleshly
desires which lead me to go ways against my conscience, making me
heavy in heart. I feel as if I was two men then fighting all the
time. Oh, how great temptations in the spiritual life! Because of
them I often get discouraged and cold in my heart. Pray for me,
dear brother. Your humble brother,

                                                    WONG OCK.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


A TENNESSEE BAND OF HOPE.

BY MISS L. A. PARMELEE.

We were all glad to hear about Ted and his Temperance society. A
great many hundred years ago a father in Africa took his little
son, who was just as old as Ted, to the church altar and made him
promise to always hate the nation that had oppressed them. The
feeling of hate grew as the boy grew, and when he became a man he
made the oppressor and his proud armies tremble before him. Now if
the boys and girls, who are so fond of hearing about Hannibal’s
victories, will promise to hate Rum as he hated Rome, the monster
that has destroyed so many homes will be conquered.

The children are beginning to think of these things. If Ted and
his band should follow the sun, and gather all the temperance
boys and girls they could find on their way, when they reached
the Mississippi their army would be nearly as large as that other
army of young crusaders who started out to rescue the Holy Land
from desecration. Ask papa or mamma where you will find that story
to read for yourselves. I have only time to tell you of a little
company that would join this army when it stopped by the great
river to rest and get ready to cross into Arkansas, where a host
of eager recruits are learning to be loyal to home and honor and
temperance.

This Memphis company, only one of several in the city, are little
people, six, seven, eight and nine years old. Most of them had
learned to like the taste of whisky from eating the sugar left
in glasses after older people had taken a morning toddy, or from
sipping egg-nog Christmas week. Their teacher illustrated the evil
effects of alcohol by pouring a little into a saucer and dropping
a lighted match into it. As the blue flame blazed up, the children
thought it was not safe to take so dangerous an element into their
mouths. Another day they saw some alcohol poured upon the white of
an egg, and the teacher explained that the brain is composed of the
same material as the albumen of the egg. As the bright eyes eagerly
watched the yellowish white turn to milky white, just as they had
seen eggs fried in hot water and grease, they all cried out: “I
will never let any alcohol cook my brain like that.”

Once a lady showed them some large pictures of the stomach under
different conditions. She said the stomach is the kitchen of the
house we live in, and one of its most important rooms. The walls
are lined with soft, delicate pink, as pretty as the paper some
people put on their parlor walls. Alcohol is a fiery-tempered
little fellow, and when he comes into the kitchen he scratches
the beautiful walls, just as naughty boys will sometimes scratch
pins over the paper and plaster in their mother’s nice room. If he
stays long enough he will punch holes, make the clean walls black,
and ruin the room, so that the food can not be properly prepared.
The pictures explained the work of demolition, which the children
readily understood, as they knew of many people whose brains and
stomachs had been destroyed in that way.

These little people have pledged themselves never to touch or taste
the poison. More than that, they speak their convictions to their
friends and neighbors at home. “That glass of toddy will burn and
scratch your stomach.” “That whisky will cook your brain and give
you a headache; you may feel brighter for an hour or two, but then
you will be dull and stupid.”

Do you ask if all the boys and girls who signed the pledge have
been faithful to their promise? The most of them have. Two big boys
coaxed little Albert to go out of town and celebrate Easter by
drinking a bottle of beer, but he was so sorry and so ashamed of it
that the Band of Hope forgave him. Two or three others have been
enticed to drink, but the majority hold firmly to their promise.
And you young people, whose fathers and mothers never tempt you to
do wrong, can little understand how much these other little ones
have to endure in abiding by their convictions of right.

Let us help them by making the Temperance Army the strongest and
largest army in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JUNE, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $103.24.

    Calais. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         $40.00
    Castine. Trin. Cong. Sab. Sch.                             5.00
    Centre Lebanon. Mrs. S. D. L.                              1.00
    East Otisfield. Rev. J. Loring                             2.00
    Lewiston. Pine St. Cong. Ch.                              28.90
    Machias. Centre St. Ch. and Soc.                           8.00
    Machias. C. Longfellow                                     5.00
    Portland. Saint Lawrence St. Ch., Missionary
      Col., $6.83; D. P., 51c                                  7.34
    Topsham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                5.00
    Yarmouth. Rev. A. L.                                       1.00


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $223.89.

    Exeter. Mary E. Shute                                     16.00
    Francestown. Cong. Ch., 25.00; Mrs. S. E.
      Kingsbury, 10.00; Miss S. E. Kingsbury, 5.00            40.00
    Hanover. “A Brother in Christ.”                            5.00
    Henniker. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              27.00
    Hillsborough Bridge. Cong. Ch.                             4.00
    Hinsdale. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.83
    Hudson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.00
    Meredith Village. Cong. Ch.                               22.00
    Meriden. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                         0.60
    Milford. Cong. Ch., $30.08 to const. Rev.
      CHARLES H. TAINTOR, L. M.; Samuel Cragin, $2.00         32.08
    Portsmouth. “Mizpah Circle.”                               3.50
    Rochester. H. M. P.                                        0.50
    Salmon Falls. Cong. Ch.                                   17.38
    Seabrook. Mrs. Mary W. Boardman                            5.00
    Wolfborough. Rev. S. Clark                                 5.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $193.89

    LEGACY.

    Francestown. Estate of Lucy Patch, by Mrs.
      Joseph Duncklee                                         30.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $223.89


  VERMONT, $481.94.

    Bethel. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $7.62; Mrs.
      Sparhawk, $3                                            10.62
    Brattleborough. Helen J. Preston, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Castleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             27.20
    East Cambridge. H. M.                                      1.00
    East Hardwick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         12.00
    East Poultney. Mrs. J. H. D.                               0.50
    Fair Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Student Aid_         26.57
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            72.63
    Montpelier. Ladies of Bethany Ch., box of C.,
      _for Fisk U._
    New Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    Saint Albans. Mrs. M. A. Stranahan, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Saint Albans. Young Men’s Bible Class, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   10.00
    Saint Johnsbury. Hon. Franklin Fairbanks, _for
      Atlanta U._                                            100.00
    Saint Johnsbury. North Ch. Sab. Sch.                      41.00
    Townshend. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $9.45; Mrs. A.
      L. Rice, $5; Mrs. H. Holbrook, $2; Miss G. P., $1       17.45
    Vergennes. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             20.00
    Wells River. C. W. Eastman                                 5.00
    West Brattleborough. S. G. Smith                           5.00
    Westminster West. Rev. A. Stevens, D.D.                   10.00
    West Rutland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          12.12
    Windham. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                               8.85
    ——— “L.G.”                                                15.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $6,282.59.

    Abington. Mrs. S. P. L.                                    0.50
    Amesbury. S. B. T.                                         0.50
    Amherst. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        32.70
    Andover. Teachers and Pupils of Abbot Academy             67.44
    Andover. West Parish Cong. Ch.                            50.00
    Attleborough Falls. Cent’l Ch. and Soc.                    5.30
    Auburndale. “A Friend.”                                    5.00
    Ayer. Mrs. C. A. Spaulding, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Belchertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           43.61
    Boston. Sab. Sch. of Shawmut Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           35.00
    Boston. Mrs. B. Perkins                                    5.00
    Boston. Lee Hain and Wong Quong, $1 each _for
      Cal. Chinese M._                                         2.00
    Bradford. Mrs. Sarah C. Boyd, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        12.00
    Brockton. Porter Evan. Ch. and Soc.                       46.18
    Buckland. Mrs. Sally Gillett to const. HENRY
      L. WARFIELD L. M.                                       30.00
    Cambridgeport. Bbl. of C., _for Kansas Refugees_
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $55.00;
      Mrs. P. P., 50c                                         55.50
    Conway. Mrs. Austin Rice                                  24.00
    Danvers. Maple St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     48.69
    Douglas. A. M. Hill, to const. MRS. LOIEZER L.
      HILL L. M.                                              30.00
    Dorchester. Village Ch. and Soc.                          20.50
    East Weymouth. Mrs. E. E. Thompson, _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                    6.00
    Fitchburgh. G. S. Burbank                                100.00
    Florence. Hon. A. L. Williston, _for
      Professor’s house, Talladega C._                       100.12
    Georgetown. Memorial Ch.                                  30.71
    Greenfield. C. C. Phillips.                                3.46
    Greenfield. Mrs. A. J. Smead, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         1.50
    Hadley. H. L. C.                                           0.50
    Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            5.76
    Holliston. Ladies Benev. Soc., Bbl. of C. and
      $1.65 _for Freight, for Talladega C._                    1.65
    Holyoke. R. H. Seymour                                     5.00
    Housatonic. Housatonic Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      $49.92, to const. MRS. MARY M. PLATT, L. M.;
      By A. D. Whitmore, Box of S. S. books and $1
      _for Freight_                                           50.92
    Longmeadow. Gents’ Benev. Soc., $18.25;
      Ladies’ Benev. Soc., $11.83                             30.08
    Lowell. Pawtucket Ch.                                     21.00
    Lowell. S. B. S.                                           1.00
    Lynn. First Ch. and Soc.                                  18.17
    Malden. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Marblehead. Hon. J. J. H. Gregory, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                             500.00
    Marlborough. T. B.P.                                       1.00
    Medfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       83.50
    Middleton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             10.00
    Millbury. Second Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             25.00
    Mill River. Miss M. R. Wilcox                             10.00
    Montague. Mission Circle, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              1.00
    Mount Auburn. Mrs. J. T. K.                                 .50
    Newbury. First Ch. and Soc.                               17.00
    Newburyport. S. N. B.                                       .50
    Newton Centre. Ladies of First Ch., $50; Mrs.
      D. L. Furber, $2.50, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             52.50
    Newton Highlands. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Newton Upper Falls. “A Friend”                           110.00
    Northampton. Miss Helen Clark, _for Student
      Aid, Storr’s Sch._                                       2.00
    North Brookfield. First Ch. and Soc.                     100.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.25
    Norton. Young Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., Wheaton
      Sem., _for Cooking Sch., Talladega C._                  25.00
    Peabody. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           80.00
    Raynham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         16.40
    Rehoboth. E. W. R.                                         0.50
    Revere. Mrs. A. S. Steele ($10 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_) to const. ALMIRA DEWING
      STEELE L. M.                                            40.00
    Royalston. Mrs. Geo. Woodbury, Bbl. of C.,
      _for Wilmington, N.C._
    Salem. Tabernacle Ch. and Soc.                           290.70
    Scituate. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Wilmington, N.C._                                       10.00
    Somerville. Mrs. H. B.                                     0.60
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         10.00
    Southborough. Pilgrim Evan. Ch. and Soc.                  15.86
    Springfield. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Taunton. Union Ch.                                         7.00
    Tewksbury. Ladies of Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl.
      of C., _for Talladega C._
    Townsend. Cong. Ch.                                       14.19
    Uxbridge. “A Friend.”                                      2.00
    Watertown. Corban Soc.                                     8.48
    Wilbraham. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. EMELINE
      R. SPERLING, L. M.                                      56.90
    Wilmington. “A Member of Cong. Ch.,” to const.
      REV. DANIEL P. NOYES, ATHERTON NOYES,
      HERBERT NATHAN BUCK, ARTHUR O. BUCK, WILLIAM
      HENRY CARTER, 2nd, and LOIS R. CARTER L. Ms.           200.00
    Winchendon. Atlanta Soc., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             34.00
    Winchendon. “F. T. P.”                                     5.00
    Worcester. Central Ch. and Soc.                           84.44
    Worcester. Salem St. Sab. Sch., $25, _for
      Tougaloo U._, $25 _for Le Moyne Inst._                  50.00
    Worcester. Mrs. S. A. Pratt, _for horse,
      Talladega C._                                            6.00
    West Roxbury. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Straight U._                                       25.00
    West Roxbury. South Ch. ($10 of which from “A
      Friend”)                                                64.77
    West Somerville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        5.50
    West Springfield. Park St. Cong. Ch.                      48.31
    Yarmouth. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      _for Talladega C._
    ——— “A Friend, Olivet.”                                   10.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $3,053.69

    LEGACY.

    Woburn. Estate of Thomas Richardson                    3,228.90
                                                          —————————
                                                          $6,282.59


  CONNECTICUT, $22,471.16.

    Abington. S.C.                                             1.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           15.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Colchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      80.00
    Columbia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              19.61
    Durham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. $25; “Two
      Friends” $5                                             30.00
    East Hartford. Edward A. Williams.                        20.00
    Enfield. Daniel H. Abbe ($5 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                         10.00
    Farmington. A. F. Williams, to const. WALTER
      HUBERT VORCE L. M.                                      30.00
    Georgetown. Mr. Gilbert, _for Atlanta U._                 25.00
    Gilead. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from Mr. and
      Mrs. T. L. Brown, _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst._)        20.00
    Glastonbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    150.00
    Goshen. Cong. Ch.                                         32.00
    Greeneville. Cong. Ch. ($30 of which from F.
      W. Carey, to const. GEORGE EAGLESHAM L. M.)             51.54
    Greenwich. E. M.                                           1.00
    Hadlyme. Joseph W. Hungerford ($60 of which to
      const. WILLIAM E. GATES and CHARLES F.
      BURNHAM L. Ms.), $100; Cong. Sab. Sch., $27.80         127.80
    Ivoryton. Mrs. A. H. Snow                                  1.25
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch.                               52.25
    Middlebury. Cong. Ch.                                     29.69
    Naugatuck. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    New Britain. Sab. Sch. of First Ch. of Christ,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                               100.00
    New Britain. Ladies’ Sew. Soc. of Cong. Ch.,
      $5 and Bbl. of C., _for Talladega C._                    5.00
    New Hartford. Cong. Ch. ($7 of which from John
      Richards’ Bible Class, $3 from Rev. F. H.
      Adams’ Bible Class), _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         20.00
    New Haven. Centre Ch. Sab. Sch. $55, Class of
      Yew Fem Tan, Centre Ch. Sab. Sch. $2.,
      Davenport Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch. $25., H.
      S. D. $1, _for John Brown Steamer_                      83.00
    New London. First Ch.                                     38.04
    New Milford. Mrs. George Beers, _for Talladega
      C._ and to const. ARTHUR T. NETTLETON L. M.             30.00
    New Milford. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._              5.00
    North Guilford. “A Friend”                                 5.00
    North Stamford. Cong. Ch.                                  3.20
    Norwich. Moses Pierce, _for Atlanta U._                  100.00
    Old Saybrook. Mrs. G. D.                                   0.50
    Prospect. Cong. Sab. Sch., Package of Papers,
      _for Savannah, Ga._
    Rocky Hill. Cong. Church, to const. HORACE R.
      MERRIAM L. M.                                           30.15
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                        9.62
    Southport. Cong. Ch.                                     172.00
    Stafford Springs. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Suffield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               9.65
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      25.08
    Washington. “Z.”                                           1.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         60.00
    West Stafford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          7.75
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       26.33
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,482.46

    LEGACY.

    West Hartford. Estate of Eliza Butler, by
      Benj. S. Bishop, Ex.                                20,988.70
                                                          —————————
                                                         $22,471.16


  NEW YORK, $619.51.

    Antwerp. Cong. Ch.                                        33.20
    Brooklyn. Rev. W. F. Crafts                               25.00
    Brooklyn. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary at Ladies’ Isl., S.C._                       25.00
    Chittenango. “Aunt Katie Hall”                             5.00
    Deer River. Cong. Ch.                                      6.59
    Fredonia. “Friends,” _for Athens, Ala._                   25.00
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch.                                  162.54
    Gainesville. “A Friend”                                   15.00
    Java. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                     10.43
    Kingsborough. J. W.                                        1.00
    Livonia Center. Geo. W. Jackman, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         2.75
    Marion. “Life Member,” _for John Brown Steamer_            1.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._       200.00
    New York. Dr. A. S. Ball                                   5.00
    Seneca Falls. Cong. Ch., “A Friend,”                      50.00
    Spencerport. Alvin Webster                                 2.00
    West Farms. Dan’l Mapes, _for Atlanta U._                 50.00


  NEW JERSEY, $10.25.

    Jersey City. A. A. H.                                      0.25
    Montclair. Mrs. J. H. Pratt’s S. S. Class,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                          5.00
    New Brunswick. Mrs. S. L. Chester                          5.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $104.00.

    New Castle. Mrs. Joseph White                              2.00
    West Alexander. Dr. Robert Davidson                      100.00
    West Elizabeth. Miss Jane Wilson                           2.00


  OHIO, $399.16.

    Akron. Ladies’ Home Miss. Soc. of Cong. Ch.                5.00
    Ashland. Mrs. Eliza Thompson                               2.28
    Brighton. Cong. Ch.                                        4.05
    Chardon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             5.00
    Cincinnati. Vine St. Cong. Ch.                            47.53
    Cincinnati. George S. Gray, _for Yale Library
      Fund, Talladega C._                                     10.00
    Cincinnati. Rev. E. P. Wheeler, _for Atlanta U._           5.00
    Circleville. Mrs. D. B. W.                                 0.50
    Cleveland. C. T. Rogers ($30 of which to
      const. Rev. W. C. Rogers L. M.), $50, _for
      Theo. Dept., Talladega C._                              50.00
    Cleveland. G. W. C., $1; G. A. R., $1                      2.00
    Conneaut. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  8.75
    Elyria. M. W. Cogswell, First Cong. Ch.                   10.00
    Galion. Sewing Soc. Presb. Ch., $1, and Bbl.
      of C.; Mrs. F. Lindsey, $3; Miss McM., $1,
      _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._                           5.00
    Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                                   13.92
    Kelley’s Island. Cong. Ch.                                 8.60
    Martinsburgh. J. A. McFarland and Emily
      McFarland, $2.50 ea.                                     5.00
    Medina. Woman’s Miss. Soc., $10, and Bbl. of
      C. _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                      10.00
    North Bloomfield. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           35.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                30.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 18.18
    Oberlin. Rev. George Thompson, _for Mendi M._              2.00
    Peru. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Talladega C._           5.00
    Ravenna. Cong. Ch.                                        42.75
    Rootstown. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Ruggles. Cong. Sab. Sch., Box of Papers.
    Seville. Julia Hulburt                                     5.00
    Springfield. Mrs. M. G.                                    1.00
    Windham. Wm. A. Perkins                                    5.00
    Youngstown. “A Friend,”                                    1.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $362.56

    LEGACY.

    Hampden. Estate of Joel Dorman, by L. G.
      Maynard, Ex.                                            36.60
                                                            ———————
                                                            $399.16


  ILLINOIS, $1,775.87.

    Amboy. First Cong. Ch.                                    40.65
    Canton. First Cong. Ch.                                   20.00
    Canton. Mrs. D. W. Vitturn, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                20.00
    Chicago. First Cong. Ch., $106.35; New England
      Cong. Ch., $99.90; Mrs. Drake, $5                      211.25
    Chicago. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, _for Athens, Ala._             10.00
    Concord. James Joy Thorndike                               3.42
    Elgin. “Elgin Cong. Ch.,”                                 10.00
    Galena. “A Friend,”                                        2.00
    Glencoe. Cong. Ch.                                        35.00
    Granville. “Merry Workers,” _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            12.00
    Kewanee. Women’s Miss’y Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Tougaloo U._                                       19.50
    Mendon. Cong. Ch.                                         11.85
    Millburn. Cong. Ch.                                       27.24
    Moline. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., $25; Mrs. M.
      C. Ells, $2; _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                 27.00
    Newark. Horace Day                                         5.00
    Oak Park. “O. P.’s Sab. Sch. Class of Boys,”
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         13.60
    Paxton. Mrs. J. B. Shaw, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              6.00
    Princeton. Cong. Ch.                                      42.86
    Quincy. Joshua Perry                                      10.00
    Rock Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      3.50
    Tonica. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Wilmette. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Winnetka. Cong. Ch.                                       50.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $675.87

    LEGACIES.

    Belvidere. Estate of Olney Nichols                       100.00
    Mendon. Estate of Joel Benton, by W. W.
      Benton, Ex.                                          1,000.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,775.87


  INDIANA, $1,505.00.

    Dyer. Mrs. F. M. Biggs, _for Needmore_                     5.00

    LEGACY.

    Albion. Estate of Ida Loomis                           1,500.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $1,505.00


  MICHIGAN, $5,136.82.

    Adrian. C. C. Spooner                                      5.00
    Alamo. Julius Hackley                                     10.00
    Benzonia. “A Friend,” $5; Mrs. S. A. B. C., $1             6.00
    Bridgman. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Delhi Mills. Norman Dwight                                10.00
    Grand Rapids. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Rev.
      J. H. H. Sengstacke_                                    20.00
    Grand Rapids. Individuals, by Rev. E. A. Spence            3.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         17.76
    Manistee. First Cong. Ch.                                 25.06
    Memphis. “Friends,” for _Athens, Ala._                     3.00
    Olivet. William J. Hickok                                 25.00
                                                          —————————
                                                            $136.82

    LEGACY.

    Port Huron. Estate of Mary Jane Sweetser, by
      John P. Sanborn, Ex.                                 5,000.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $5,136.82


  WISCONSIN, $245.47.

    Appleton. M. R. Barteau                                   10.00
    Beloit. Mrs. S. M. Clary                                  30.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch., Box of Books, $2.20,
      _for Freight, for Talladega C._                          2.20
    Blake’s Prairie. Cong. Ch.                                 3.75
    Bloomington. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Talladega, Ala._                                         6.00
    Brandon. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., $11.57, _for
      Lady Missionary, Talladega, Ala._,
      incorrectly ack. in July number from
      Whitewater, Wis.
    Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                        39.80
    Janesville. Cong. Ch.                                     43.77
    Leeds. Cong. Ch.                                           5.90
    Madison. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Talladega, Ala._                                        24.75
    Milwaukee. Young People’s Miss’y Cir., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              16.00
    Shopiere. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                         20.00
    Tomah. Cong. Ch.                                           2.30
    Waukesha. First Cong. Ch.                                 16.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Talladega, Ala._                                         5.00


  IOWA, $258.44.

    Anamosa. Cong. Ch., _for New Orleans La. and
      Atlanta, Ga._                                           28.54
    Cresco. Cong. Ch.                                         11.67
    De Witt. J. H. Price                                      10.00
    Iowa City. Cong. Ch.                                      33.41
    Iowa City. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           11.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” _for Student Aid.
      Straight U._                                            30.00
    Maquoketa. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             34.96
    Miles. Ladies’ Missionary Soc. of Cong. Ch.               10.00
    Muscatine. Cong. Ch.                                      40.30
    New Hampton. Cong. Ch. ($5 of which from Dea.
      O. Gardner, _for Berea C._)                             11.06
    Oskaloosa. Rev. D. Lane, $5; S. R. Pettitt, $2.50          7.50
    Quasqueton. Rev. A. Manson                                 5.00
    Tabor. Ladies’ H. M. Soc., $5; Young Ladies’
      Christian Ass’n, $5: Rev. John Todd, $5,
      _for Student Aid, Straight U._                          15.00
    Toledo. Mrs. E. N. Barker                                  5.00
    Winthrop. Rev. S. W. Brintnall                             5.00


  KANSAS, $15.00.

    Anthony. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Diamond Springs. A. A. Stevens                            10.00


  MINNESOTA, $343.42.

    Leech Lake. Mr. and Mrs. Henry J. King ($10 of
      which _for John Brown Steamer_,)                        25.00
    Minneapolis. Rev. E. M. Williams, _for Atlanta U._       250.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 28.42
    Northfield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            40.00


  NEBRASKA, $4.00.

    Olive Branch. German Ass’n.                                4.00


  MISSOURI, $113.10.

    Breckenridge. Cong. Ch.                                    7.85
    Brookfield. Cong Ch.                                       5.25
    Kansas City. F. L. Underwood, _for President’s
      house, Talladega C._                                   100.00


  CALIFORNIA, $20.00.

    San Diego. Geo. W. Marston                                20.00


  WASHINGTON TERRITORY, $16.50.

    Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                      16.50


  NEW MEXICO, $1.00.

    New Albuquerque. D. L. S.                                  1.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $1.50.

    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch.                           1.50


  KENTUCKY, $3.88.

    Berea. Sab. Sen., _for John Brown Steamer_                 3.88


  NORTH CAROLINA, $182.24.

    Dudley. Tuition                                           10.75
    Wilmington. Normal Sch., Tuition                         165.99
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch., $5; Mrs. J. F. A. S., 50c.          5.50


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $276.75.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         248.75
    Charleston. Plymouth Ch., $20; Prof. W. L.
      Gordon. $8                                              28.00


  TENNESSEE, $940.27.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        175.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          176.80
    Nashville. Fisk University, Tuition                      588.47


  GEORGIA, $524.32.

    Atlanta. Atlanta U., $103.67; Rent, $17.50               181.17
    Atlanta. Storrs School, $133.20; Rent, $3                136.20
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch., $52.80; Mrs. Andrew
      Clark, _for Atlanta U._, $3                             55.80
    Macon. Cong. Ch.                                          10.40
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $106.75; Rent,
      $10                                                    116.75
    Savannah. Dr. J. J. Waring, $20; Dr. C. C.
      Schley, $4, _for Savannah, Ga._                         24.00


  ALABAMA, $351.80.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             16.75
    Marion. Tuition                                            2.25
    Mobile. Emerson Inst.                                    102.95
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Montgomery. Public Fund                                  175.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          26.25
    Talladega. “Musical Union”                                15.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch. ($3.30 of which _for Mendi M._)           8.60


  LOUISIANA, $274.75.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        223.75
    New Orleans. Central Ch., $50; Mrs. B. C. and
      Mrs. D. S., 50c. ea.                                    51.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $173.75.

    Caledonia. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Tougaloo U._                                             0.70
    Hazelhurst. E. E. S.                                       0.51
    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition, $164.04; Rent, $8.50     172.54


  FLORIDA, $50.00.

    St. Augustine. Rent                                       50.00


  TEXAS, $191.50.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst.                          191.50


  INCOME FUND, $1,035.44.

    Income Fund, _for Theo. Dept., Howard U._                457.55
    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               190.00
    Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta U._                    150.00
    Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                           50.00
    Haley Scholarship Fund _for Fisk U._                      15.11
    Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                              50.00
    C. F. Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                     37.78
    Town Bonds, Greenwich, N.Y., _for Scholarship
      Fund, Straight U._                                      35.00
    General Fund                                              50.00
                                                         ——————————
      Total                                              $44,136.56
    Total from Oct. 1 to June 30                        $235,553.64
                                                        ===========


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Rehoboth, Mass. Ellery W. Robinson                         6.05
    Fairfield, Conn. First Cong. Ch.                          60.00
    Income Fund                                                1.34
                                                              —————
      Total                                                   67.39
    Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1 to May 31          3,457.13
                                                           ————————
      Total                                               $3,524.52
                                                          =========

                                       H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.
                                            56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.


It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTATIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

    Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the Ox-Brain and
                            Wheat-Germ.

           Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.

              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.

        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                           _IF YOU WANT_

“The most popular and satisfactory Corset as regards Health,
Comfort and Elegance of Form,” be _sure_ and get

                      _MADAME FOY’S_ IMPROVED

                              CORSET

                         SKIRT SUPPORTER.

It is particularly adapted to the present style of dress. For sale
by all leading dealers. Price by mail $1.30

Manufactured only by

                        FOY, HARMON & CO.,
                                   New Haven Conn.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                   HORSFORD’S =ACID PHOSPHATE=.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          AGENTS! Get the

NEW BOOK, Our Lost Explorers. The full, complete and authentic
history, _told by the survivors_, of the ill-fated

                       Jeannette Expedition.

The adventures, discoveries, thrilling experiences and tragic
ending, all combine to make a most fascinating book. _20 copies a
day sold by live canvassers_. Agents wanted in every town. Send for
circulars, terms and agency to AMERICAN PUBLISHING CO., Hartford,
Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati or St. Louis.

☞ Mention this paper.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             HARTFORD

                       Woven Wire Mattress,

[Illustration]

Especially adapted to all climates—particularly warm countries—the
Hartford Mattress is cleanly, healthful, durable, economical,
impervious to vermin. Requires nothing but a blanket for
over-covering, making it the cheapest bed in the market. This
mattress will last a lifetime, and one-third of life is spent
in sleep. Make that portion comfortable by using the Hartford
Mattress. The Hartford Mattress is now used in all parts of the
world; it is the popular bed of the globe, as well as the most
delightful sleeping arrangement in use. Try it, buy it, and you
will have no other. It is just the mattress for the

                   MISSIONARY IN FOREIGN LANDS;

its health-giving properties will aid the weak; its freedom from
noise quiet the restless; and its luxurious comfort bring rest and
refreshment to the most wearied being. Address for catalogues,
prices, or any desired information,

               HARTFORD WOVEN WIRE MATTRESS COMPANY,

                         _P. O. BOX_ 148,

                          HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              Circulation Now 80,000, and Increasing.

          Advocating Evangelical Religion and Temperance.

           Liberty, Education and Equal Rights for all.

                         NEW YORK WITNESS

                       PUBLICATIONS for 1882

=New York Weekly Witness.=—Now in its 11th year; circulation,
80,000; ONE DOLLAR a year. Gratis copy for club of 10, with =$10=.
On trial three months, 25c.

=Sabbath Reading.=—A very handsome, small eight-page weekly,
containing in each number an excellent sermon and a choice
selection of interesting matter for reading on the Lord’s Day.
FIFTY CENTS a year club of ten, =$4=. On trial three months 15c.

=Gems of Poetry.=—A beautiful, sixteen page monthly, on fine paper,
and with an excellent portrait of some eminent poet in each number.
The contents are two serials, the Æneid of Virgil and Aurora Leigh
by Mrs. Browning; a fine assortment of selected poetry, and a great
variety of original poetry—the latter competing for two prizes each
quarter. FORTY CENTS a year; club of three, =$1=. On trial for
three months, 10c.

=Specimens= of the above publications sent free on application. All
stop when subscription expires.

WITNESS, SABBATH READING and GEMS OF POETRY, three months on trial
for fifty cents.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.

                          WITNESS OFFICE:

                  21 VANDEWATER STREET, NEW YORK.


         We demand the Prohibition of the Liquor Traffic.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

=Case’s School Furniture.=—Parties about to purchase School
Furniture are invited to correspond with us. Our work is all of
the most approved patterns, and is unequaled for strength and
durability.

=Camp’s Outline Maps.=—Set of 9 maps, with key. No. 1, Hemispheres;
No. 2, North America; No. 3, United States; No. 4, South America;
No. 5, Europe; No. 6, Asia; No. 7, Africa; No. 8, Oceanica; No. 9,
Physical World.

=Case’s Bible Atlas.=—Embracing 16 full-page maps, quarto size,
beautifully printed in colors, covering the whole ground of
Biblical Geography; also 16 pages of Explanatory Notes on the maps.
Sent by mail on receipt of price; bound in boards, $1.; cloth,
$1.50. _Agents wanted._

Circulars sent on application.

                   O. D. CASE & CO., Publishers

                                AND

                  School Furniture Manufacturers,

                         HARTFORD, - CONN


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          KELLY & JONES,

                   202 Greene Street, — — New York.

                       LOW AND HIGH PRESSURE

                               STEAM

                             AND OTHER

                        HEATING APPARATUS.


                      We make a Specialty of

             Steam Heating and Ventilating Apparatus,
                      for Churches, Schools,
                       Public Buildings and
                        Private Residences.

Plans and Specifications of the latest and most approved methods
furnished on application.


Our apparatus is in operation in the following buildings:

Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn.; Atlanta University, Atlanta,
Georgia; Third Judicial District Court House, New York City; Museum
of Art, New York City; Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.,
New York City; State College, near Bellefonte, Pa.; New York State
Reformatory, Elmira, N.Y.; Point St. School, Providence, R.I.;
Board of Education (Schools), Pittsburgh, Pa.; Van Wert Co. Court
House Van Wert, Ohio; Mahoning Co. Court House, Youngstown, Ohio;
Washington Co. Court House, Washington, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Q. N. EVANS & CO.,

                      60 Duane St., New York.

                         Cor. Elm Street,

                           STEAM HEATING

                                AND

                      Ventilating Engineers,

                      MAKERS AND DESIGNERS OF

              Steam and Water Heating Apparatus for
                   Public and Private Buildings.

We have furnished our apparatus for the following buildings:

  Office Building, 58 Broadway, N.Y. City.
      Calvary Baptist Church, Albany, N.Y.
          Stover Bros.' Block, Portland, Me.
              Boston University, Boston, Mass.
                  Florence House, N.Y. City.
                      Mason Building, Boston, Mass.
  Office Building, cor. 18th st. and B’way, N.Y. City.
        Fulton County Court House, Atlanta, Ga.
              Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga.


                      NEW ENGLAND AGENTS FOR

                        OTIS BROTHERS & CO.

                   Standard Hydraulic Elevators,

                 72 SUDBURY STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

          Prompt attention given to repairing of boilers
                      and heating apparatus.

  Q. N. EVANS.                                   H. A. JOSLIN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.


OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.—Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.—Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.—The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.—To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.

                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                             HENRY STOKES,
                                                    President.

J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration: SMITH

AMERICAN

ORGANS

ARE THE BEST.]


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

                             BARSTOW’S

                       Wrought Iron Furnace

                For Anthracite or Bituminous Coal.

              THIRTEEN SIZES—PORTABLE AND BRICK SET.

        Indorsed by the Leading Sanitarians of the Country.

                 “Barstow’s Wrought-Iron Furnace,

properly set and supplied with plenary amount of fresh air, is one
of the most efficient and delightful house-warmers it has ever
been our privilege to enjoy: this conclusion is based upon three
winters’ use, under extraordinary house exposure. Economical in
fuel, plenty of warmth, fire easily kept, no gas escape, no sore
throats.—_A. W. Bell, A.M., M.D., Editor Sanitarian._”

                        BARSTOW STOVE CO.,

            Cor. Beekman and Water Sts., N.Y., 56 and
              58 Union St., Boston; Providence, R.I.

                O’CONNOR & HARDER, St. Louis, Mo.,

                      WESTERN SELLING AGENTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                                THE

                     MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY NUMBER

                                OF

                       THE CENTURY MAGAZINE.

  Exquisite Illustrations.           Striking Summer Features.

Continuing a custom which has proved so successful in past years,
the August issue of THE CENTURY MAGAZINE is known as the “Midsummer
Holiday Number,” being especially devoted to papers and stories of
a light and entertaining character

                        For Summer Reading,

and enriched with an unusual number of choice engravings. The
appearance of this Midsummer Holiday Number has in past years been
pronounced

                “The Literary Event of the Season,”

and, in its literary and art attractions, the present issue is
fully up to the high standard thus established.

Among the special features in this number are richly-illustrated
papers on Steam Yachts; the Pilgrimage of the Zuni Indians to
Boston; “The Borderlands of Surrey;” “Some English Artists and
their Studios;” a portrait of Richard Wagner and an article, “How
Wagner makes Operas” “The Lambs,” a burlesque tragedy in blank
verse, by the author of “Confessions of a Frivolous Girl;” a story
by Noah Brooks, “The Phantom Sailor,” etc.

Persons who are not regular readers of THE CENTURY will be repaid
by getting a copy of this special number. All book-sellers and
newsdealers sell it; price, 35 cents.

                                    THE CENTURY CO., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

J. Estey & Co

Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of Fencing.
Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 18;
Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.—In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.
Unusual spellings suspected to be the original author’s were
retained.

Page number in the table of Contents corrected for several
articles.

“Steet” changed to “Street” on the inside cover in the
CORRESPONDING SECRETARY listing.

“ENVIRONMEMT” changed to “ENVIRONMENT” in the heading on page 228.

“commitee” changed to “committee” on page 233. (directed the
executive committee)

“accomodations” changed to “accommodations” on 238. (for want of
room and accommodations)

Image of Egyptians on page 245 moved to fall between paragraphs.
Page marker for page 245 removed.

Changed “it” to “is” and “blankes” to “blanket” in the Hartford
Woven Wire Mattress advertisement on page 253. (the Hartford
Mattress is cleanly....Requires nothing but a blanket)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 8, AUGUST 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.