Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration: VOL. XXXVI.      SEPTEMBER, 1882.       NO. 9

THE

American Missionary


“THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
matter.]




                             CONTENTS.


                                                         PAGE.

  EDITORIALS.

    ANNUAL MEETING—Financial                               257
    AMENDMENTS TO CONSTITUTION—School Work for Indians     258
    CASTE ON THE CARS                                      259
    ADDRESS OF THE REV. GEO. M. BOYNTON                    260
    MISPLACED BENEVOLENCE—Benefactions                     263
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians, Chinese                 264
    ITEMS FROM THE FIELD                                   266


  THE FREEDMEN.

    SOUTHWESTERN CONGREGATIONAL ASSOC.                     267
    TEACHERS’ INSTITUTE AT MEMPHIS                         269
    SUNDAY-SCHOOL INSTITUTE AT TOUGALOO                    269
    GO HOME TO THY FRIENDS—A Rice Plantation (Cut)         270
    WORK AT FLORENCE, ALA.—Topeka, Kansas                  271


  THE INDIANS.

    VARIETY IN MISSIONARY LIFE                             272
    INDIANS SPEAKING ACROSS A CHASM (Cut)                  273
    INDIANS AT HAMPTON                                     274


  THE CHINESE.

    THE PENALTY OF PROSPERITY                              275
    YAKUT VILLAGERS (Cut)                                  277


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THE BOY WHO GREW UP IN A COTTON PATCH                  278


  RECEIPTS                                                 279


  THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                284

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth, Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ——— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in ——— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.


The Annual Report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-Laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XXXVI.      SEPTEMBER, 1882.       NO. 9.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANNUAL MEETING.

The next Annual Meeting of the American Missionary Association
will be held in Cleveland, Ohio, commencing Tuesday, October 24,
at 3 P.M. On Tuesday afternoon the annual report of the Executive
Committee, including the Treasurer’s report, will be presented, and
on Tuesday evening the annual sermon will be preached by Rev. C. L.
Goodell, D.D., of St. Louis, Mo.

On Wednesday morning the report of the Committee on the Amendments
to the Constitution will be presented. The succeeding sessions of
Wednesday and Thursday will be occupied with papers and reports of
committees, with addresses. On Wednesday and Thursday evenings,
addresses will be given by Rev. A. J. F. Behrends, D.D., Rev.
Atticus G. Haygood, D.D., and other distinguished speakers. The
names of other speakers and further details will be published in
the October _Missionary_ and in the religious papers. The report of
the Committee on the Revision of the Constitution will be found on
the page following the receipts in this number of the _Missionary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL—CLOSING MONTH—PROSPECTS.

This month (September) closes the fiscal year of the American
Missionary Association, and will decide whether it is to receive
the $300,000 asked for at the annual meeting. The figures show
that the receipts for the ten months, ending July 31, were
$262,829.31; leaving a balance of $37,170.69 to be made up in
August and September. The receipts from legacies in the ten months
were $74,152.29, but for the remaining two months none of large
amount are anticipated, and as August is usually unfavorable for
collections, and as our receipts at the date of going to press
(August 14) are small, we must depend ultimately upon the receipts
of September to make up the sum needed.

We are anxious to secure the $300,000. It will not only cheer the
officers and the constituency of the Association, but the _work
absolutely demands that amount_. The fear of debt alone deters us
from making needed repairs, improvements and additions. The details
would convince our friends that economy and efficiency would be
promoted by the expenditures we have thus far withheld.

Permit us then to ask; (1) that treasurers of churches and
executors of estates remit to us at their earliest convenience
monies in their hands intended for us; (2) that pastors and church
committees take up collections that are on the list for September,
or that have been neglected during the year; and (3) that generous
friends send us contributions to meet the emergency.

       *       *       *       *       *


AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION.

The Committee appointed at the last annual meeting of this
Association, to consider and report on Amendments to its
Constitution, have held two meetings during the year, and have
given very careful thought to the subject. Their report is given
in the form of “The Proposed Constitution,” which will be found on
another page. We ask for it the deliberate consideration of our
constituency, in the hope that a unanimous decision on the subject
may be reached at the next annual meeting. The Committee consists
of the following persons: Col. Franklin Fairbanks, Pres. E. H.
Merrill, Hon. Wm. B. Washburn, Rev. L. W. Bacon, D.D., Rev. L. T.
Chamberlain, D.D., Rev. Geo. M. Boynton, Pres. E. H. Fairchild,
Hon. C. I. Walker, S. R. Heywood, Esq., Rev. A. E. P. Perkins,
D.D., Col. C. G. Hammond, Rev. A. H. Plumb, D.D., J. G. W. Cowles,
Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL-WORK FOR THE INDIANS.

The regular correspondent of the _Tribune_, in reporting a
conference with Mr. Teller, the Secretary of the Interior, upon his
Indian policy, gives this question and answer:

“What is your view of Indian education, and of the Hampton and
Carlisle schools in particular?”

“I recognize the usefulness of those schools, but I insist that
they are entirely inadequate, as any number of them would be, to
accomplish what is desired. The Hampton and Carlisle schools no
more meet the exigency than Yale and Harvard supply education to
the youth of the whole United States. There are 50,000 Indian
children. We must furnish means for their education. Hampton and
Carlisle will do for the training of teachers. But we must get the
schools, which are to educate the masses of Indian children, out
nearer to the tribes.”

This is our view, exactly. Use these and similar institutions at
the South for training the young people brought to them from the
Indian country to become teachers and mechanics. Then let them go
back to their people and serve as teachers of the home schools and
leaders in the mechanic arts.

THE reports from our schools have crowded our limited pages for
the last two months, and have compelled us to leave over a number
of articles which will be found in the pages of this number. Our
readers will agree with us that these articles contained so much
of spice that they have not become mouldy by the delay. We wish,
however, to notify our teachers and missionaries that we desire
as speedily as possible the renewed use of their pens. Nothing,
however good, can be a substitute for their fresh views and facts.

       *       *       *       *       *


CASTE ON THE CARS.

Our new-made fellow-citizens at the South are coming to such
consciousness of their civil and political rights as leads them to
demand the protection of law. The Cincinnati Southern Railway has
recently paid a fine of $1,000 for putting a colored man who had
a first-class ticket into a second-class car. The Atlanta & West
Point Railroad, for a similar offence, has been compelled to pay a
fine of $400. The Georgia Railroad, having been sued, thought it
best not to stand a trial, and paid $700 to a colored young woman
who was put off its train because she was in a first-class car
with a first-class ticket. At Nashville two or three suits have
been entered in the same line. Bishop Payne, as is well known,
having been put off from a Florida road, is seeking legal redress.
Bishop Cain, also of the African M. E. Church, having purchased
a first-class ticket on the Sunset route, in Texas, was about to
enter the car to which his ticket authorized him to go. Some white
people who were also getting aboard said that they would not go if
the black man should take a seat in that car. He then entered the
parlor car, paying the extra dollar for his seat, and now has sued
the company for $20,000.

It is a clear case that the law for common carriers requires the
companies to allow passengers who have first-class tickets to ride
in first-class cars. The 14th amendment declares that “no State
shall deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due
process of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction
the equal protection of the laws.” Justice Strong, of the Supreme
Court, referring to this language in the recent case of Strander
_v._ Virginia (10 Otto, 307), which related to the exclusion of
colored men from juries, said: “What is this but declaring that the
law in the State shall be the same for the black as for the white;
that all persons, whether colored or white, shall stand equal
before the laws of the States, and in regard to the colored race,
for whose protection the amendment was primarily designed, that
_no_ discrimination shall be made against them by law because of
their color.”

It is clear that the railway companies are doing better and
better in this matter. Some allow colored passengers to go
without hindrance where their first-class tickets would take
them. Other railway officials have instructed their train men
that if colored people with first-class tickets make request to
enter the first-class cars, they shall be allowed so to do, though
the brakemen will keep them out as long as they can. Our colored
friends must be patient while public sentiment is advancing and the
law is coming to their help. Many colored people are as sensitive
to the nicotine poison as any white ladies, and it is a cruelty,
aside from the injustice, to thrust them into the smoking-car.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADDRESS OF THE REV. GEO. M. BOYNTON

AT THE BOSTON ANNIVERSARY, MAY 31, 1882.

There are four ways in which a race in the enjoyment of power
and prosperity may deal with a race which is under the burden of
weakness and temporary debasement; God forbid that I should say
with an inferior race; for it is not ours to measure gifts until
the scale of opportunity shall have been equalized; God forbid
that I should say with a despised race, though that too nearly
represents the fact among large portions of people, even in our
own land and day;—I say, in dealing with races which are for the
present weaker and in inferior position to our own. I used to
read, when I studied geography, that the inhabitants of the world
could be classed under four heads: as barbarous, half-civilized,
civilized and enlightened. And I think the four methods in which
this race may be treated correspond somewhat with these four
divisions of human progress.

The first and barbarous cry which meets a weaker race is, “_kill
them_; put them out of existence.” The first impulse of savage
men—the question is when the savagery is all expelled from human
nature—is to put out of the way that which is offensive, that which
is in your way, that which seems in any way to compete with your
full satisfaction and enjoyment.

The next way of dealing with those of a weaker race is to _use
them_, subordinate them to your own service, make bondsmen of them,
let them be your hewers of wood and drawers of water, command their
labor and their persons, control even their instruction and their
religion, and make them absolutely yours.

The third way in which a superior race may deal with a weaker race
is by the gentler, but perhaps no less harmful, process of _letting
them alone_,—withdraw from them, hands off! Shut them out, keep
them away, make the barrier between yourself and them impassable.

There is one way more in which a race higher in circumstance and
condition and endowment may treat those who for the time are weaker
than they, and that is to _lift them up_ to its own plane just so
fast and just so far as God shall make it possible.

If we read in the Old Testament, as many are increasingly disposed
to do, a progress of development which recognizes the training of
mankind from its lowest possible basis up to its highest possible
attainment, we may find illustrations of these four methods of
treatment in that record. The first conviction of their duty, and
with Divine consent, toward the races which occupied Canaan, was
to exterminate the people of the land. At a little later stage,
when Joshua had entered the country, he made his league with the
Gibeonites and the people of the central confederacy, by which
they became his hewers of wood and drawers of water. As we read on
still further in the story, we find the Jews shutting themselves
out from all mankind, and shutting all men off from them, having no
dealings even with the Samaritans. But, when the Lord Jesus Christ
came, bringing the light of the gospel and the character of God
and heavenly opportunities on to the soil of our earth, his last
command is, “Share my gifts in every land with every creature,”
and the last word he promises that some of us shall hear before we
enter into the lasting joy of heaven, is, “Because ye have done it
unto the least of these, my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”

Our country has illustrated all these methods of treatment of the
weaker races. Its cry has been toward the Indian—its characteristic
cry almost from the very first—“Kill him; there is no good Indian
but a dead Indian;” and that sentiment, that barbarism, has not yet
altogether been exterminated from the land. Our country has said
of the great African race, “Enslave them; use them; subordinate
them to our own uses; make them our hewers of wood and drawers of
water, our chattels, our breeders of children; use them without
conscience; subordinate them to our own supposed good.” And even
now our land, this land of freedom, to which we all came strangers
at some past time, has issued its edict through its highest
courts that the Chinaman shall be shut out from all access to our
civilization and our Christianity. Brethren, the glory and joy of
this American Missionary Association is that its work has been from
the beginning to reach out to those who were weakest, who were
most in need, who were most neglected. Thank God that there is one
place where the sentiment may be centred and emphasized that “God
hath made of one blood all nations of men that dwell upon the face
of the whole earth;” and though it may be true that for a time “He
hath fixed the bounds of their habitation,” yet it is not so sure
that these bounds were in his purpose fixed to outlast the breaking
down of those barriers which the progress of Christian civilization
surely brings.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, what is it that makes these races weaker, less prosperous,
less independent than our own? It is the lack of education; it is
the lack of developed intelligence, not of native ability. And what
are the claims which ignorance may make upon intelligence? It may
not claim a right to power; it may not claim a share in property;
it may not claim an equal social position with intelligence; but
it may claim an opportunity to fit itself for all these things.
Suppose a man had been born and had lived his life at the bottom
of a pit; and he cries out, as you listen to him at the brink,
“Give me a voice in the control of your affairs up there. I am
in the United States as truly as you are, if I am at the bottom
of this hole. I want to vote and have a voice in the affairs of
the nation.” You may properly suggest to him that until he has
seen the lay of the land he can hardly decide which way the roads
had better run, that until he has lived in the upper air he can
hardly know what institutions for the general control of society
are best and wisest. He cries out to you again from the bottom of
the pit, “Give me some money; I have had no chance to earn any
down here. Throw down some greenbacks.” And you remind him that
greenbacks as a circulating medium from one pocket to another are
not a particularly profitable investment, and that if deposited in
the clay bank, in which his hole is dug, they would yield him no
great return. He says to you, “At any rate, throw down a broadcloth
suit; I want to dress as well as you.” You intimate again that even
goodly raiment would not add greatly to his comfort in his present
state. But if that much-to-be-pitied man is wise, he will cry out
for one thing only: “Reach me down a ladder, by which I may climb
up to where you are.” If he is wise, the one thing he will ask of
you is not a share in the control you have, not a share in the
possessions you have acquired, not a share in the social position
you may have attained, but it is an opportunity to fit himself for
the acquirement and use of all these things. It is our business,
brethren and friends, and it is the work of this Association, to
reach that ladder down. If you will but let our brother get his
hands upon the lowest round, he will come up and stand with us in
God’s sunshine, as we have already seen him do. If we forbear, if
we refuse, we are more guilty than the priest and the Pharisee
who went by on the other side; we are as guilty as were Joseph’s
brethren who lowered their brother into the pit and left him there
and went their way.

We are not here to-day to plead rival claims and rival causes; but
amid the whole circle of Christian graces and Christian charities,
the last in all the world to leave unfilled is that which, when
all the other miracles and glorious works of Christ had been
catalogued, was added as the crowning gem of all—“The poor have
the gospel preached unto them.” God help us ever to have sympathy
with this grand work; and in this era which is coming, an era
which will call for greater sacrifices and greater gifts than any
that have gone before—for it must be an era of endowment for these
institutions—let its claims be heard among all the rest in fair and
true proportion.


MISPLACED BENEVOLENCE.

“The sympathies of Christian people are always deeply stirred when
they come into personal contact with individuals who, in foreign
lands, have come out of the superstitions and darkness in which
they were reared and are seeking help for themselves or their
people in this country. The touching stories that can be truthfully
told of struggles in the past, and of difficulties under which they
now labor, appeal strongly to all who hear them, and it is quite
natural that gifts should be made in response to these pleas with
little thought of certain nearly inevitable results which, were
they aware of them, the donors would deeply deplore. The matter is
a delicate one to treat. On the one hand, we would have earnest
sympathy expressed for those who are seeking to elevate themselves
and their people, whether educationally or religiously, and would
have them wisely aided. It seems ungracious to do or say anything
to check the outpouring of money in response to these appeals. But,
on the other hand, when we see how, by reason of the reception
given to these special appeals, the work of our missionaries is
hindered, and their plans for the education and elevation of the
people to whom they are sent are imperiled, we are constrained to
utter again a word of caution.”

The above is quoted from a thoughtful article in the August number
of the _Missionary Herald_. It presents in a very careful manner
a warning that is at once delicate and needful. We find the same
difficulties in our work at the South, and take this opportunity
of adding our word of caution to our friends in regard to special
appeals from that quarter. Money intended for our mission work in
the South, or for student aid, can be more judiciously dispensed
by us, knowing the whole field and its wants, than if sent by the
donor directly in response to an appeal that may be overdrawn,
or relatively less important than some others, and in some cases
entirely unworthy of confidence. We have no reference in these
words of caution to the professors and representatives of our
Institutions, who visit the North duly accredited by us.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Col. Alfred Shorter, of Rome, Ga., has left $45,000 to Shorter
College, the income to be used in aiding students.

R. G. Peters, Esq., of Manistee, Mich., has given $6,000 toward the
Professorship Fund of Chicago University.

Miss Louisa Howard, of Burlington, Vt., has given $5,000 to the
University of Vermont, to establish five scholarships, to be known
by her name.

John P. Howard, of Burlington, Vt., gives the Vermont University
$25,000 for the Lafayette statue, $50,000 for rebuilding the main
edifice, making a total of $125,000, besides $150,000 given to
other religious and benevolent institutions in the city.

Mr. Moses Hopkins lately gave $50,000, and $3,000 for repairs, to
the Golden Gate Seminary, at Oakland, Cal., which is hereafter to
be called Hopkins Academy.

The estate of Christopher R. Robert, of New York City, by a
decision of the New York Court of Appeals, is now to pay $100,000
more to the endowment of Robert College at Constantinople.

Senator Jos. E. Brown, of Atlanta, Ga., has given the State
University $50,000, to be used in aiding indigent worthy young men.

Paul Dulane, of Princeton, N.J., has given $2,000,000, to be used
in building and endowing at New Orleans an institution for the
education of white young men in languages, science, literature and
art.

_We learn that a man in the South has made provision in his will
to leave $25,000 or $50,000 toward the endowment of one of our
chartered institutions in that region. This is a grateful foretaste
of what is yet to come, when the people of that land shall join
with those of the North in supporting these schools of higher
learning for the benefit of our newly-made fellow-citizens. It
also makes to other high-minded and patriotic men at the South the
suggestion—“Go thou and do likewise.”_

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES


AFRICA.

—Mr. Grattan Guinness honorable director of the Livingstone Congo
Inland Mission, has published a grammar and dictionary in the
language now spoken by the natives.

—The Bible in the Basuto language, has been issued by the British
and Foreign Bible Society at a cost of $20,000. This is the ninth
completed Bible in the native languages of Africa.

—Both roads from the coast to the level of the Upper Congo, that on
the north side of the river and that on the south, are reported to
be now open all the way. The vast basin of the Upper Congo, with
its 900,000 square miles of territory and its 150,000,000 of idol
worshippers may therefore be said to be overcome.

—Between the Zambesi River and Lake Bangueola a Missionary station
is to be established by M. Ceillard, a French Missionary, and his
wife, who have recently gone there for that purpose.

—Seven different nations are embraced by the Berlin Missionary
Society in the area of their South African Work, which extends 1000
miles in length by 500 miles in width. They have forty-two stations
within this boundary.

—Great Britain has twenty-three times as much trade with Africa
as the United States has, and France fifteen times as much. Great
Britain’s commerce on the West Coast alone amounts to over twenty
millions of dollars, and that of France to over fifteen millions.

—The C. M. S. has recently sent six men to the Nyanza Mission. They
were accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Lane and Miss Havergal, who went
out to be married to the Rev. A. D. Shaw. The same steamer took out
a large party of missionaries for the London Missionary Society’s
mission on Lake Tanganyika, and the two parties together formed a
considerable majority of the passengers.

—News has been received from Zanzibar of the death of Rev.
Charles Albert Janson, University College, Oxon, a member of the
Universities’ Mission to Central Africa. Mr. Janson died near Lake
Nyassa, making the nineteenth death among the members of this
mission.

—The Council of the Royal Geographical Society have decided on
equipping an expedition to Eastern Africa for the exploration of
the snow-capped mountains, Kenia and Kilimanjaro, and the country
between them and the eastern shores of the Victoria Nyanza. Mr.
Joseph Thomson is to be the commander, and, according to present
arrangements, he will leave England for Zanzibar to organize his
party early in the ensuing year.

—The African Lakes Company, which was formed not so much with a
view to financial profits as to co-operate with various missions
in furnishing stores for them, is developing the legitimate trade
of the country. The 2,000 miles of coast, river, and lake, which
this company are endeavoring to keep open, reaches from Quillimane
up the Kwakwa River to the Zambezi at Mazaro; from Mazaro up the
Zambezi and the Shire to Katwnga, then on towards Blantyre and
Matope on the southern shore of Lake Nyassa. Here the small steamer
“Ilala” (which is to be purchased by the company) takes goods,
etc., to the north-east of the lake, from which point Stevenson’s
Road is to be constructed, and thus unite Lake Tanganyika to this
extensive line of communication.


THE INDIANS.

—The U.S. Congress has set apart $5,220,674 for the ensuing year
for the Indian Department. Of this amount nearly $500,000 is
appropriated for the education of Indian children. Last year the
only general appropriation was $85,000.

—The Pima Indians have undertaken the erection of a small chapel at
Black Water Village. The head chief has cut his hair short, dresses
in American clothes and regularly attends church.

—At the Carlisle Indian School, “well” was given one of the boys to
incorporate in a sentence. This was the result: “Last week I sick,
and he doctor catch well for me and some other boys, too.” Another
was given “blind.” He wrote, “Blind means ‘not see’—yesterday I
was blind my marbles.”


THE CHINESE.

—The Chinese of San Francisco contributed last year $44,142.53 for
the support of the City and State governments.

—For several years past, members of the Central Presbyterian Church
of Denver have given special attention to the Chinese of that city.
They now have over 60 Chinamen in attendance at Sabbath-school,
seven of whom have been baptized and received into the Church.

—A poor Chinaman became blind, and went into the hospital. While
there he learned to read the Bible in the raised printing used
for the blind. He said to the missionary, “God make me no see
here” (pointing to his eyes); “but he make me see so muchee here”
(placing his hand on his heart), “I welly glad.”

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

PARIS, Texas.—A church has recently been dedicated here. Dr. Reed
preached the sermon, and all the white pastors took part in the
services. The house could not begin to hold the people. $313 was
subscribed towards paying the debt.

CEDAR CLIFF, N.C.—At this place Rev. A. Connet organized a
Congregational church of a dozen members, using the Confession,
Covenant and Constitution of Roy’s Manual, inserting a temperance
clause. A white citizen gives half an acre of land for the church.
A dozen white people attended service. Rev. J. N. Ray will become
the pastor of the church.

CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.—In the wake of a revival, which had already
added forty or fifty persons to our church in this city, Mrs.
Steele, the missionary, writes: “We are still wonderfully blessed.
I have been in the Howard school some as a substitute for the
principal, when he was sick. Pastor Smith thought in that way I
was prosecuting my special work, as I was getting close to the
children’s hearts. After teaching in one of the rooms for a week my
scholars asked if we might not have a prayer meeting at the close
of school on Friday afternoon. I said ‘Yes, if you will go over
to our church,’ as that was the hour for our sociable. And so the
crowd went over there, and twenty-three professed conversion. I
never before witnessed such a sight.”

MEMPHIS, Tenn.—“The little ones are quite enthusiastic over the
temperance concerts, and of course are interesting their elders. We
find the charts a great help. I have been using for supplementary
reading the ‘Gospel Temperance Book,’ and have been surprised at
the interest manifested. Yesterday I asked how many enjoyed it, and
nearly every hand went up. One young man said: ‘A while ago I tried
to talk with a young fellow about drinking, and couldn’t meet his
arguments, but since we have taken up this book I have a great deal
more to say.’”

TOPEKA, Kansas.—The relief work proves quite a tax on our time
and strength. Six mornings out of the seven are devoted to the
people for their instruction and improvement. Monday evening we
hold prayer meeting; Tuesday evening is devoted to Bible study
for the young people. A good number attend. Friday evening I have
a class in singing. The Sabbath is a busy day for each of us. We
have a full Sunday-school and need twice as much room, and Sabbath
evening the Chapel is well filled. With not a few worthy exceptions
the people are ignorant and wicked, but this does not discourage
us. Already we can perceive a change for the better. In all our
exercises the people are more orderly and attentive.

WASHINGTON, D.C.—“I have organized a Doing Good Society in the
girl’s school, which is doing effective work and interesting all.
We appoint a committee of two to visit the sick every week. I
give them something to carry in food and clothing, playthings and
picture-books, for the sick, and taking the Bible and song-book
they read and sing, often gathering a whole family in to hear them.
Each Saturday a report of their visits is read, and once a month
the school brings pennies to buy food. My prayer meetings among
the mothers and girls are often very full of tenderness. And yet,
among this people it is so easy to have good prayer meetings that I
don’t think as much of it as I used to at the North. More and more
I feel the importance of teaching them that temperance, purity and
a desire to do something for others is true religion.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.


THE SOUTHWESTERN CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION.

BY REV. W. S. ALEXANDER, D.D.

The time and place (June 1, New Orleans) proved propitious. They
gave the ministers and delegates an opportunity, by anticipating
the meeting, to be present at the anniversary exercises of the
University. I think a fire has been kindled which will not be
quenched when our brethren reach their homes, and we shall find,
when the new school year opens, that new connecting lines have been
established between Straight University and the interior towns.

The Association last met in this city, in the spring of 1877.
In 1878 and 1879 we met in New Iberia, and in 1880 and 1881 in
Terrebonne; so this is our sixth annual meeting without a break,
and we are able to report not only continuity of life, but real
progress. A little advance in the church work of this Association
means more than a far greater advance in our older religious
bodies. Here the fight has been, first upon the question, “Have
we, as Congregationalists, a right to live in Lousiana?” The
denominationalism among the colored people has been, and still is,
intense. As the Baptist and Methodist Church once covered this
entire Southern field, the Congregationalist is looked upon as
a traitor to a holy cause, who has enlisted under a strange and
piratical banner. “Who are you, anyhow?” “Where do you come from?”
“What strange faith have you picked up now?” are questions which
salute our brethren constantly, and which are designed to cover
them with confusion and discomfiture. But this battle has been
bravely and patiently fought, and the right to exist “established.”

There were 31 pastors and delegates present. The reports from the
various fields were cheering and hopeful. It has not been a harvest
year, though some churches have been refreshed by the gracious
visitation of the Holy Spirit, and all have, we hope, felt the
quickening of a new life. A revival of wonderful preciousness and
power was reported from Central Church, New Orleans, beginning with
the “Week of Prayer,” and continuing five weeks, during which time
nearly 100 souls were awakened.

Brother Clay’s church in Terrebonne has been blessed and
strengthened. There have been many hindrances in the year. The
floods have caused great suffering among the poor. Cabins have been
washed away, crops destroyed, and the plans of labor disarranged.
When the laboring class of the colored people suffer, the churches
suffer in their resources.

Let me summarize the result of our annual meeting.

I. From the reports of the churches we find that there have been
numerical losses, which, though seemingly serious, are really
gains, so far as the purity and vigorous life of the Association is
concerned. The Association has not yet laid down the pruning knife,
and it may be that more dead branches will be clipped off in the
year, without which the tree will be more beautiful and fruitful.

II. A higher stand was taken for an educated ministry. One of the
brethren, on his own volition, presented a resolution to this
effect: “That from this day we, as an Association, will neither
license nor ordain any man to preach in our churches who is not
fitted by education to perform all the sacred duties of his
office.” The brethren in the discussion preceding the vote said
that while there was formerly an excuse for an ignorant ministry,
we now have our colleges and theological seminaries, and with
a little self-denial, all who wish may fit themselves to guide
intelligently the minds and hearts of the people.

III. The necessity was deeply felt and freely expressed, of taking
a clearer and stronger denominational position, with all charity
and fellowship for all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
We, as Congregationalists, should know the ground on which we
stand, and be able to give a reason for the hope within us. It was
voted that a Manual be prepared, answering more fully than any yet
issued, the local needs of our Louisiana churches. This Manual will
be prepared during the summer, and submitted in manuscript to the
Association at its next meeting.

We were fortunate in having the presence and cordial aid of Rev.
O. D. Crawford, of Mobile. He gave an address, Wednesday night,
on the subject: “Why am I a Congregationalist?” It was scholarly,
judicious and effective.

The Moderator, yielding to the kind and earnest desire of the
brethren, occupied the evening session of Thursday in an account
of his visit to Europe, with especial reference to the Jubilee
Meeting of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, held at
Manchester in October last.

After prayer and song, and with deep gratitude to God for His
blessing upon our annual meeting, the Association adjourned, to
meet in New Iberia the first Wednesday in April, 1883.

I desire, in concluding this statement, to say that if our Northern
friends wish to see a vigorous Congregational Association in
Louisiana, the _helping hand_ must be extended, with the “God
bless you” from the lips. Weak points along the lines need to be
strengthened, the faint and weary to be encouraged and the streams
of benevolence to be directed into the barren wastes, where men of
God have only their lives to offer.


TEACHERS’ INSTITUTE AT MEMPHIS.

BY MISS ELLA A. HAMILTON.

I have thought that perhaps the readers of the MISSIONARY would
be interested to know something of the Institute held at LeMoyne
for the colored teachers of Shelby and the adjoining counties.
The Institute was continued for two weeks, beginning on the first
Monday in June. Prof. Steele was appointed conductor by the State
Superintendent. Teachers were present not only from western
Tennessee, but also from Mississippi and Arkansas. On the first day
our enrolment list reached eighty-nine, and increased during the
succeeding days to one hundred and fifteen. Our daily session began
at quarter before nine with short devotional exercises. These were
followed by the recitations in the different branches. The lessons
were given and studied by topics, and each teacher was provided
with a blank book, in which he kept the topics for study and also
any notes which he wished to remember. The Rev. Mr. Imes had charge
of reading, Prof. Steele of arithmetic, grammar, penmanship and
geology, while I took history and geography. A certain time each
day was devoted to any matters of interest which we should wish to
present. At this time several talks on school organization were
given, an object lesson on coal was presented by Miss Lovell,
principal of one of the public schools, the temperance charts
showing the effects of alcohol upon the stomach were exhibited,
and Miss Wadsworth, a worker under the W. C. T. U., addressed
the teachers, answering many questions which they asked her. The
teachers present were, without exception, earnest, enthusiastic and
anxious to get good, that they might do good. One young man said to
me at the close of the Institute: “This Institute has given me work
to do for twelve months to come; it was just what I needed.” Many
others told us of the good they had received during the Institute,
and seemed to feel that they should do their work in their
school-rooms better for the work they had done there. The county
superintendent, who was with us for two days, told us that the
colored teachers would average quite as high as the white teachers,
who were then in attendance at a similar Institute at Bartlett, the
county seat. This is about the first work of the kind that has ever
been done in Tennessee, but if the results are as good as we have
every reason to hope, we are sure it will not be the last.

       *       *       *       *       *


SUNDAY-SCHOOL INSTITUTE AT TOUGALOO.

BY MISS J. KELLOGG.

It was thought that the last Sabbath of the school year could not
be better spent than by calling in the Sunday-school workers among
the colored people and holding a Sunday-school institute.

Providence smiled upon the exercises with a most beautiful day, and
at an early hour the chapel was filled with an attentive though
miscellaneous throng, whose intelligent looks and interested,
orderly demeanor were a surprise to some of the newest workers and
evidence of progress to all.

The regular exercises of the Sunday-school were first attended to.
The lesson, “Following Christ,” with its golden text, “Whosoever
will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow Me,” seemed to furnish a peculiarly appropriate theme
for the last conference of the teachers with their classes, and
called forth thoughts and experiences, exhortations and warnings,
calculated to be helpful alike to the Christian of years, the score
or more of young converts, and the few who, with all their calls
and opportunities, still refuse the yoke of Christian service.

In closing the review the superintendent gave a blackboard
exercise suggested by the verses, “What shall it profit a man if
he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Or what shall
a man give in exchange for his soul?” This formed an impressive
introduction to the first subject brought forward—the use of
the Blackboard. Other topics presented were, Opening and closing
exercises, Duties of the superintendent, Use and abuse of lesson
helps, How to get the children in, Conversion and training of
pupils, Individual responsibility.

Two of these topics were well presented by former graduates of this
institution. The only topic which evoked general discussion was
that of success in gathering the children in and winning them to
continued attendance. Of the many who volunteered a statement of
methods to this end, all spoke briefly, pointedly, correctly and
sensibly, and the question-box when opened revealed nothing but
practical, intelligent queries.

The Institute closed with the repetition by Miss Koons of one
of our regular Sabbath-afternoon course of lectures, a lecture
on Temperance, illustrated by Sewall’s charts. A quantity of
temperance literature was distributed, to be carried away for
circulation. May the blessing of God render it very influential!

       *       *       *       *       *


GO HOME TO THY FRIENDS.

Four years ago a little ten-year-old native on the west coast of
Africa had a hungering for “big America,” and a captain beguiled
him, by false promises of educating him, to come aboard his ship.
The poor waif seemed providentially cared for in Brooklyn and
Connecticut, till an A. M. A. friend picked him up and sent him
to Atlanta University. During the winter our little Philip has
often spoken of his purpose to live for God. Last night, in his
broken English, he told us of the impression made on him by the
Sunday-school lesson of the day—the demoniac made happy and sent
home to tell what great things the Lord had done for him. Said
Philip: “It is God who put me here, where I have learned of Christ,
and now you must pray for me that I may be a good Christian and
grow strong and wise, for I must sometime go home to my friends
in Africa and tell them how the Lord had compassion on me.” His
artless words touched all hearts and turned our prayer meeting
into an impromptu missionary concert. One young man said: “Philip’s
friends are our friends. Though there is much for us to do here our
250 years of trial in America may have been only a discipline to
fit us for our greater work in Africa.”

[Illustration: A RICE PLANTATION.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WORK AT FLORENCE, ALA.

BY REV. W. H. ASH.

The closing year has been peculiarly blessed. We commenced with
dark clouds over our work in the beginning of the year, but ere
the work was well started they proved to contain blessings. The
good which the Association, under God, has accomplished here for
the poor, is only seen vividly as we compare the results of the
present year with those of four years ago. Then we had no church
edifice; begun a day-school with three scholars in an old shell of
a building for a school-house; the Sabbath-school had about ten
scholars. Now we number nearly forty. Since that time a beautiful
chapel has been built and a snug parsonage, and we now have an
enrolment of seventy scholars in the day-school.

Some of our pupils have passed a very satisfactory examination
before the Board of Examiners, and received certificates to teach
in the public schools this summer. Our work has grown this year
more than ever in the favor and confidence of both white and black.
I believe that the good effect of the closing exercises will make
the school very large next fall. One pleasing fact in connection
with the exercises was the young organist we presented to the
public. Ours is the only colored church here that has an organ, and
my wife is the only colored woman, so far as I know, in the county,
who plays the organ. Now that she has taken one of the girls and
taught her how to play, one of the colored churches has ordered an
organita for its Sabbath-school.

Another fact of interest is that the county Superintendent of
Education has consented to give to our school a portion of the
public money, so that we may teach it as a public school.

The interest of the church and school has been very much increased
by a fine bell, given by Mr. F. W. Carpenter, of the Central
Church, Providence, R.I., also a beautiful communion service,
presented by the ladies of the same church.

We have received a barrel from the ladies of the church at
Yarmouth, Mass. Many of the pieces will go to assist a poor girl
who intends entering Fisk University next fall.

We have received a box from Rev. C. L. Woodworth, which enabled us
to help worthy ones in the Sabbath-school.

My wife has planted a flower garden in front of the parsonage. I
have planted a vegetable garden, which has given me an opportunity
for physical exercise. We have every variety of vegetables, and as
fine as I ever saw anywhere. My white potatoes are particularly
fine.

       *       *       *       *       *


VISIT TO TOPEKA.

BY GEN. O. O. HOWARD.

On last Sabbath, at 3 P.M., by the invitation of your missionary
at Topeka, Rev. Mr. Markham, I visited the Tennessee Mission and
participated in the exercises of the occasion. I found a large
meeting room filled with young people, with a sprinkling of older
heads.

I had seen some thirty girls, with perhaps half as many boys, over
at the S. S. Convention Park. They had stood behind me on the
platform Sunday morning and backed me up with their inimitable
melodious songs of Zion. The large multitude of people—perhaps a
thousand—were touched by their enthusiasm, where a little of art
has not robbed nature of her best effects. So here again I find the
same bright, happy faces and more of them.

Many of the regular school exercises were set aside for my
address. They sang “Hold the Fort,” and others of Sankey’s
collection, with spirit. The young lady who teaches them, Miss
Gerrish, is remarkably faithful, full of tact and good sense. Your
missionary himself interested me a good deal. I saw him first
at the young men’s rooms at a prayer meeting. He gave a little
personal experience, showing how a child comes to the Master’s
arms. Professor Stearns, of Washburn College, spoke highly of his
disinterested work at the mission. He has worked great changes for
good. The people, for the most part, own their houses and lots.
Some houses are very neat. One soldier’s wife said: “Yes, this
little stone house is mine. My husband is a common working man.
Yes, we have paid for the house. It is little, but, you know, there
is nothing like home, if ’tis only so small!” Her husband had been
through the war near me. On Sunday, every child was well dressed,
and generally the blacks had as good clothing as the whites. I
urged these good people, who are struggling up into respectable
ways of living and moderate prosperity, to stand up for the Lord,
that He may bless them more and more.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHAT THE STRAWBERRY-BED DID.

Rev. A. Connet, of McLeansville, N.C., tells the story. Last year
we canned 12 gallons, and the people stared. This year we have
canned 20 gallons, sold $11.39 worth and have had all we wanted to
use for the last 35 days. A white neighbor whom we feasted in the
patch, and whose children were also fed on berries, said, “You have
astonished the natives.” Ours are the only cultivated strawberries
in this neighborhood. Now for the fruit. 1st, a new industry.
Example is contagious. A number, some white and some colored, have
spoken to us for plants. 2nd, the strawberry-bed is helping to
bridge the social chasm. Some of our white neighbor ladies called
on us in strawberry time. 3d, the children have just come in with
a basket of cherries and a lot of dewberries given them by the man
whom we feasted in the patch.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


VARIETY IN MISSIONARY LIFE.

REV. M. EELLS, SKOKOMISH, W. T.

Our services on one Sabbath were a decided medley of persons and
Babel of languages. The opening exercises were in English, after
which was the sermon, delivered in English but translated into the
Nisqually language, and a prayer was offered in the same manner.
At the close of the service, two infants were baptized in English,
when followed the Communion services in English. At this there were
twelve white members of the Congregational church here, and one
Indian; also two white members of the Protestant Methodist church,
one Cumberland Presbyterian, and one other Congregationalist;
there were also about seventy-five Indians as spectators. The
Sabbath School was held soon after, seventy-five being present.
First, there were four songs in the Chinook language, accompanied
by the organ and violin; then three in English. The prayer was
in Nisqually, and the lesson read in English, after which the
lessons were recited. Three classes of Indian boys, two of Indian
girls, and two of white children were instructed in English; one
class of Indian children was talked to partly in English and
partly in Chinook. There is one Bible class of Indian men who can
understand English, a part of whom can read and a part cannot,
and another of about forty Indians, whose teacher talks English,
but an interpreter translates it into Nisqually, and then he does
not reach some Indians of the Clallam tribe who are present. Next
followed a meeting of the Temperance Society, as six persons wished
to join—a white man who can write his name and five Indians who
touch the pen while the Secretary makes the mark. Three of these
are sworn in English and two in Chinook. The whole services are
interspersed with singing in English and Chinook.

[Illustration: INDIANS SPEAKING ACROSS A CHASM.]

On the trip to an Indian logging camp one evening, to hold a
meeting, my companion and myself found the tide up so high that we
had to “coon” the logs, as they were rolling in the water, in the
dark, wade a part of the time, and improvise a lantern out of cedar
sticks split up rather fine.

A Sabbath day’s work appears as follows: Began services with the
Indians at Jamestown about ten o’clock, which continued until
half-past twelve; then returned three-quarters of a mile to my
boarding-place, went into the cupboard and took a very little
lunch in my hands; walked four miles or more to Dunginess, where
I preached to the whites at two o’clock, without even a chair or
anything to sit down on; walked back two miles to the house of
a friend, where I sang and played on the organ about all of the
time, except while eating supper, until half-past six or seven,
when I walked back to Jamestown and held services from eight to ten
o’clock—thus walking thirteen miles, besides holding service over
five hours, and singing an hour or two.

The variety of one trip of about two hundred miles is recorded
thus: As to food, have done my own cooking, eaten dry crackers
only for meals, been boarded several days for nothing and bought
meals. As to sleeping, have stayed in as good a bed as could be
given me, free of cost, and slept in my own blankets in an Indian
canoe, because the houses of the whites were too far away and the
“phleeze” were too thick in the Indian houses. They were bad enough
in the canoe, but the Indians would not allow me to go further
away for fear that the panthers would catch me. As to work, have
preached, held prayer meetings, done pastoral work, helped clean
up the streets of an Indian village, been carpenter and painter,
dedicated a church, performing all the parts, been organist,
studied science, acted as agent, taken hold of law, in a case where
whiskey had been sold to an Indian, and in a will. As to traveling,
have been carried ninety miles in a canoe by Indians, free, paid
an Indian four dollars for carrying me twenty miles, was carried
twenty miles on a steamer at half fare and twenty more on another
for nothing; rode horseback, walked fifty miles, and “paddled my
own canoe” for forty-five miles.

A note is made of some people very hungry for preaching. One
lady just recovering from sickness was hardly able to walk
three-quarters of a mile to church, and as they had no horse her
husband took her on a wheelbarrow more than half the way. An
old lady, seventy-six years of age, walked over three miles to
church where the services were mainly for the Indians, then a mile
further, where the preaching was for the whites, and then returned
home.

       *       *       *       *       *


INDIANS AT HAMPTON.

BY REV. H. B. FRISSELL.

Our communion on Sunday was very interesting. There were added to
the church four colored students and three Indian boys. These three
are representatives of three different tribes. One of them was
an Apache. He came to us sixteen months ago with no knowledge of
Christ, and none of God, with the exception of what he had gained
from an old medicine man. He told me that God was like the wind
that came in at one window and went out at the other. He has been
very earnest in his study of the Bible and has come to my study
night after night when he had had a hard day’s work and an evening
study hour that he might read the Bible with me. Not long ago he
told me he wished to pray in meeting and asked me if I would write
out what he wanted to say. So I took my pen and after long pauses
he told me what he wanted to say to God. I wrote it down just as he
gave it to me. He has carried it away to learn so that he may take
part in our weekly meeting in English. The other two boys have come
to me twice before and asked to join the church but I have told
them to wait. But now it seemed as though they could wait no longer
and they were glad to profess their faith in Christ.




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE PENALTY OF PROSPERITY.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

Our schools were never before so prosperous as during the last six
or eight months. Each successive budget of monthly reports showed a
larger enrolment and a larger average attendance, in the aggregate,
than had ever been secured before. Notwithstanding that we have
closed our schools in Oroville during these hot months, and have
given a month’s vacation to the Berkeley school, the reports for
June call for their superlatives as cheeringly as did those of
April or of May. The rolls for June showed the names of 908 Chinese
pupils, and the average attendance was 437. During the ten months
now past of the present fiscal year, no less than 2,152 Chinese
have been enrolled as members of our schools, and thus, for longer
or shorter periods, have been brought to hear something of the true
God and the only Saviour. Many have been with us but a short time,
but not one, I believe, has failed to get some new idea which, it
would seem, must have set him to thinking, and thus may prove to be
in him the seed of the everlasting life.

But what is the “_penalty_” of all this? and why should there be
any penalty for it? The penalty is a depleted treasury, and the
reason for this is the unavoidably increased expenditure. How many
of our readers know what it is to have more than $1,600 coming due,
and less than $600 at command? As many as have had this experience
will understand the penalty I am just now called to suffer. I
_could_ not turn the dark souls away from what seemed to be for
them the only possible path to light, and I could not bid them
welcome without increasing our corps of laborers. I could not add
new workers without adding some new bills. The increase of expense
is not at all proportioned to the increase in work fulfilled, for
while we have reached nearly 40 per cent. more Chinese than we did
in any preceding year, the expense will be greater by only about 10
per cent. But I have been working all these years up to the utmost
limit of our resources, and now, towards the close of this fiscal
year—the annual appropriation from the parent society exhausted and
the gifts of most of our regular contributors already used—it comes
to pass that that 10 per cent. extra begins to be felt, and as the
mission purse gets lighter your superintendent’s heart gets heavier
with thoughts and plans and cares.

“Well, what are you going to do about it?” some of my readers are
asking. I answer, first of all, I mean to pray. Nothing else ever
availed in my experience to replenish a depleted treasury, like
appealing to the Giver of all good. He knows the work; He gave the
opportunity; He has, many times before this, verified His promise,
and answered my prayer. I mean to trust Him; ask His counsel and
His help, and so _move on_. While His pillar of cloud and of fire
goes before us, we need never be dismayed. “Difficulties will be
removed, in proportion as it is necessary that they should be
removed.” But I do not mean to stop with prayer. That is Müller’s
way, and, in his case, it succeeds. When he was consulted as to
the failure of others who wrought on his plan, it is said that he
replied: “They were not so called.” Every man according to his own
calling. For myself, I read the promise thus: “Ask, and it shall
be given you; _seek, and ye shall find_.” And so I feel called to
follow up my asking with seeking, and to enter every door that my
master causes to be opened to my knock. That is just what I am
doing now, in writing this paragraph. It may not reach all our
readers till after our fiscal year has closed; but the books can be
kept open till October 1, and gifts sent to make up what is now
lacking, will be gratefully acknowledged, and most carefully used.


THE CENTRAL SCHOOL.

This is held at the Central Mission house, in this city—the
headquarters of our whole work. The building is admirably located
for our purposes, and though always felt to be too small for the
most effective service, has nevertheless answered our purpose
tolerably well. As long as the attendance on the school did
not exceed 125, it was possible to move about easily in the
school-room, and by careful attention to ventilation, to keep the
atmosphere tolerably pure. But last month the _average_ attendance
was 185, and the largest attendance on any one evening was no less
than 260! Of course even standing room was at a premium. To move
about in such a mass; to attempt anything like classification; to
give to each pupil his portion of instruction, taxed the energy,
patience and skill of the teachers to the utmost. Jee Gam declares
that if we had room enough and teachers enough, we could have 300
pupils in this school every evening.

One reason for this throng of pupils, (and I am glad to say that
a like cause of prosperity exists in all our schools) is that we
have now so excellent a corps of teachers and of Chinese helpers—so
faithful, so devoted and enthusiastic—and, generally, so well
fitted for the work. About this I trust there may be nothing
temporary. Another fact,—which may not always operate so strongly
as now—and which tends specially to fill up the Central school, is
the great influx of Chinese now going on at this port. When the
new law goes into operation, this will be checked, at least, for a
time. Hastened, doubtless, by the passage of this law nearly 25,000
Chinese have come in at this port within less than six months,—a
number equal to one-fourth of the entire Chinese population in the
whole country at the beginning of this year. This multitude will
rapidly scatter, moving wherever a demand for their labor attracts
them, and then the pressure at this spot will be lessened, but the
work will remain to be done; 25,000 more of these blood-bought
souls, to be brought to a knowledge of their Redeemer; 25,000 more
out of whom to gather messengers of salvation, heralds of the
gospel of Christ’s dying love and living power to the myriads ready
to perish in their native land.

I am sorry to say that my faith in the possibility of securing
in any way a more commodious building for this school and for a
head-quarters for our entire work, is not strong. Perhaps this is
the reason why the oft-repeated petitions of our teachers for more
room, remain without response. “According to your _faith_” it is
said, “be it unto you.” One lady at the East, self-prompted, or
prompted of God, has added to many a previous kindness, a donation
of $100, to be used for this enlargement when it shall become
possible. One member of the Executive Committee of the A. M. A.,
who has visited our quarters, and seen something of the need, has
hinted that the easiest way to get relief would be to ask for the
necessary fund to buy or build. I ventured to infer that if this
request should be made, his generous heart and ever-open hand would
help the matter on. It would be much that thus we could save to our
work $1,200 per annum now paid for rent. This sum would keep _five_
teachers in the field for a full year. And then we should have a
building suited to our needs, large enough and light enough, open
enough to the pure air of heaven, to speak for itself a welcome
and to bear in itself a blessing to these crowds of needy souls.
Fifteen thousand dollars would secure this—a place where (if the
predictions of our wisest helpers may be trusted) 300 _young men_,
born in the depths of heathenism, could be brought every day of
every week throughout each coming year, to sit at Jesus’ feet and
hear his word. And a sum much less than that would put my faith
concerning it at that mustard-seed point at which our Saviour
assures us “nothing shall be impossible to you.”

[Illustration: YAKUT VILLAGERS.]




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


ONE BOY WHO GREW UP IN A COTTON PATCH.

BY MISS LAURA A. PARMELEE.

His name is Frank, his cotton patch is in Mississippi, near the
Sunflower River, and he is teaching school in that neighborhood
at this very time. Although he is quite grown, he is not so tall
as his highest cotton stalk, and doesn’t look a bit as if he had
a story. It is not an uncommon story, and might be true of a good
many Williams, or Henrys, or Johns. That is why I am so particular
to tell you his name and where he lives.

Most of his time was spent in the field, but he ate and slept
in a rough log-cabin of one room. The chimney was built outside
of the cabin, and was made of sticks and clay. The one window
was a board shutter, swinging on leather hinges. Two beds, a
table, a few dishes, two or three pots and kettles, three or four
leather-bottomed chairs and a barrel of meal furnished the house.

Poor as the building was, a good mother’s love made it a dear home
to her little children. Roses and honeysuckles bloomed around the
door all summer, and in summer and winter the white sand was swept
clean with brooms made of twigs tied together. Health and work gave
appetites for the fried bacon and hoe-cake that furnished the daily
meals. Baked sweet potatoes with pones and greens were sometimes
added to their bill of fare.

There was no father to provide for the family, so the little ones
must try the harder to care for themselves. When Frank was scarcely
more than a baby, he followed his mother and sisters to the field
and pulled trash; that is, pulled up old stalks and sticks for
burning, to clear the fields ready for the plow, and, after the
furrow was prepared, little fingers dropped the fuzzy gray seed
into the soft earth.

By the time he was five years old, Frank had his own light hoe and
“chopped cotton” almost all day. When the feeble plants had been
cut up and the strong ones cleared of weeds, there was the corn
to be hoed and the melon patch to be attended to. In August the
fleecy white fibre had pushed itself out of the green bolls and
the pickers must go to work. With a large bag tied around his neck
and shoulders, Frank went up and down the cotton patch, his nimble
fingers pulling the feathery cotton from its casings. Carefully as
he gleaned each bush, no sooner had the field been once picked than
other bolls unlocked their treasures, and again and again he must
go over the same ground. Sometimes Christmas came before the crop
was all gathered, and in January the fields must be cleared once
more for plowing. Playtime never seemed to come to Sunflower River.
To plow, pick cotton, roll logs and build rail fences—was that all
of life? Frank wondered about it.

Two Sabbaths in the month the family went to the little brown
meeting-house that nestled under the trees down by a spring of
sweet water. No bell called the people, yet they came, on foot,
on horseback, in wagons from miles around. Four or five hundred
gathered in and around the church. Three or four preachers would
occupy the rude pulpit, and often the services did not close until
sunset. Some of the ministers could not read a word; some barely
read the text and lined out the hymns. They said a great deal about

    “The green hill far away
    Without a city’s wall,
    Where the dear Lord was crucified,
    Who died to save us all.”

And as Frank thought of that wonderful scene and how

    “Dearly, dearly, He has loved,
    And we must love Him too,”

he longed to know more of His life and sayings. Must he wait to
learn of the Saviour’s words—wait until he should meet Him in
heaven?

The questioning found a happy answer when he was about fourteen. A
summer school was started in the neighborhood, and on rainy days
and at odd times he learned the alphabet, to make figures, to form
letters and to read. New thoughts came into his mind, new hopes,
new plans. He heard of a large school up the river where Northern
teachers taught eight months of the year.

One day the good mother was startled with the question, “May I
go to school at Memphis?” She could only answer, “I am too poor
to send you. I can give you nothing but my prayers.” But Frank
believed those prayers were worth more than bales and bales of
cotton, and with a few dollars in his pocket he started for the
city. He was sure that “King Jesus” would have compassion upon him
as He did upon that other young man who “was the only son of his
mother and she was a widow.”

Reaching the strange city, he soon found a Christian gentleman
who wished a boy to wait on the table. “Work for his board and go
to school,” was the good news sent home. One year went by, two,
three and four. Slow but faithful, he was going up in his classes,
winning the respect of school-mates and teachers.

One October, as he re-entered school, he modestly told his teachers
that he had taught during the summer. It was said so quietly that
little heed was paid to it, until another young man came from the
same town and announced that the unostentatious Frank had done a
remarkable work in the way of Sabbath-school, temperance and day
school. No one had thought him able to do anything of the kind.

And these long days, while you are swinging in hammocks and going
to lakes and rivers in the search for cool air, our young friend
is teaching a hundred dusky boys and girls each week day, and
directing the Bible lessons of a much larger number on Sunday. He
writes to ask for S. S. papers, for a temperance text book and for
the prayers of his teacher.

Although he did grow up in a cotton patch, he is a useful man, and
expects to one day see the King in his beauty, in the land that is
very far off.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR JULY, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $218.20.

    Brewer. Manly Hardy                                      $50.00
    Centre Lebanon. Mrs. O. A. Moody, _for Indian
      M._                                                      5.00
    Centre Lebanon. Cong Sab. Sch.                             1.35
    Dennysville. Mrs. Samuel Eastman                           5.00
    East Union. David Fowler.                                  5.00
    Hallowell. Teachers and Pupils of Classical
      Academy, _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                  15.00
    Kennebunk. Union Ch. and Soc.                             22.50
    Norway. Mrs. Mary K. Frost                                 2.00
    Oldtown. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Wilton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 6.35
    Windham. Dea. J. T. and Mrs. C. D.                         1.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $118.20

    LEGACY.

    Brewer. Estate of Miss R. S. Atwood, by Manly
      Hardy                                                  100.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $218.20


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $274.90.

    Bedford. Presb. Ch. and Soc.                               7.72
    Candia Village. Jona Martin                               10.00
    Concord. South Cong. Ch.                                  57.77
    Derry. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           13.00
    Dover. S. N. F.                                            0.50
    East Jaffrey. Mrs. Eliza A. Parker                        20.00
    Gilsum. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                29.25
    Harrisville. W. H. J.                                      1.00
    Merrimack. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       18.40
    Nashua. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          20.20
    New Hampton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           15.10
    Pittsfield. Sab. Sch., by Rev. G. E. Hill,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         27.00
    Rindge. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 1.50
    Seabrook. Mrs. Mary W. Boardman, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                         6.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               17.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $244.44

    LEGACY.

    Cornish. Estate of Mrs. Sarah W. Westgate, by
      Trustees, to const. JOSHUA B. WELLMAN L. M.             30.46
                                                             ——————
                                                            $274.90


  VERMONT, $673.20.

    Barre. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 22.27
    Bridport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              22.32
    Danville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                 10.00
    East Poultney. “Friends”                                   4.00
    Hartford. Sab Sch. of Cong. Ch.                            8.05
    Jamaica. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               11.93
    Kirby. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  4.23
    Lyndon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                31.01
    Norwich. Mrs. B. B. Newton                                 5.00
    Orwell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                28.34
    Putney. Mrs. S. H. W., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              1.00
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong Ch.                          184.25
    Springfield. A. Woolson                                  250.00
    Waterbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const. MISS
      FLORA SCEGEL L. M.                                      30.00
    Wells River.                                              24.82
    West Brattleborough. T. Adkins                             5.00
    West Fairlee. Dea. E. H. Wild, $3; “A Lady,” 40c.          3.40
    West Salisbury. Mrs. E. S.                                 1.00
    West Townsend. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.30
    Windham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                6.28
    Woodstock. William S. Lewis, $10; Harriet E.
      Hatch, $2                                               12.00


  MASSACHUSETTS, $13,245.44.

    Abington. Mrs. H. P.                                       1.00
    Amherst. Mrs. W. A. Stearns, $5; J. P. Felton,
      $2, _for Atlanta U._; Friends, $5; Miss E.
      W. B’s. S. S. Class, $1, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             13.00
    Ashfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              47.96
    Barre. Evan. Cong. Ch, and Soc., to const.
      ARTHUR M. BURR, ESTES HAWES and ABNER R.
      MOTT L. Ms.                                             94.35
    Beverly. Dane Street Ch. and Soc.                        108.08
    Blandford. Cong. Ch.                                      18.78
    Boston. Miss H. N. Kirk, $10: A. C. Tenney,
      $5: Mrs. W. P. B., 60c.                                 15.60
    Boston. Miss Carrie I. Gibson, _for McIntosh,
      Ga._                                                    10.00
    Boston. Miss Sara Leavitt, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            2.00
    Brookline. Harvard Ch. and Soc., $104.16; “F.
      A. W.,” $20                                            124.16
    Buckland. “A Friend”                                      10.00
    Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                16.94
    Chicopee. Second Cong. Ch.                                32.31
    Cohasset. Second Cong. Sab. Sch.                           6.16
    Danvers. Maple Leaf Mission Circle, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              32.00
    Easthampton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     55.24
    Enfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               70.00
    Georgetown. “A Friend”                                    30.00
    Greenfield. Friends, _for Atlanta U._                     20.00
    Haverhill. Centre Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      30.00
    Holyoke. Second Cong. Ch.                                 30.22
    Holyoke. J. S. McElwain, $10; W. A. Prentiss,
      $10; Wm. Whiting, $10; _for Atlanta U._                 30.00
    Housatonic. “A Lady”                                       5.00
    Hubbardston. “S. M. W.”                                   10.00
    Hyde Park. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             34.02
    Ipswich. South Ch. and Soc.                               30.00
    Lakeville. Mrs. A. C. S.                                   0.30
    Lawrence. Eliot Ch. and Soc., $23.75; South
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $17.63                              41.38
    Lenox. Cong. Ch.                                          30.50
    Leominster. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     25.00
    Leominster. D. W. Salsbury                                 5.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch. and Soc.                           20.38
    Lowell. L. Kimball                                        50.00
    Malden. First Ch. and Soc.                                59.88
    Manchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            20.00
    Marblehead. Ladies H. M. Soc. _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           30.00
    Marlborough. Union Ch.                                    57.20
    Medford. Mystic Ch. and Soc.                             103.23
    Medway. Village Ch. and Soc.                              83.35
    Melrose. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                4.39
    Melrose Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      7.00
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        65.70
    Miller’s Falls. Miller’s Falls Co., Two cases
      hardware, _for Ind. Dep’t Atlanta, U._
    Monson. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   33.87
    Monterey. Cong. Ch.                                       18.00
    New Bedford. H. M. L.                                      1.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch. and Soc.                               173.00
    Newton Centre. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   34.68
    Newton Highlands. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      71.80
    Newtonville. Mrs. J. D. Hayes                             25.00
    Northampton. A. L. Williston, _for Atlanta U._            25.00
    North Brookfield. Miss A. W. Johnson, _for
      furnishing room, Fisk U._                               40.00
    North Hadley. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.21
    North Wilbraham. J. P. F.                                  0.50
    Orange. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                20.00
    Orleans. First Cong. Ch.                                  10.00
    Peabody. Prof. J. K. Cole, _for Straight U._              40.00
    Pepperell. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             16.06
    Pittsfield. South Cong. Ch. and Soc., $42.49
      to const. REV. C. H. HAMLIN L. M.; First
      Cong. Ch. and Soc., $21.32. James H. Dunham,
      $25                                                     88.81
    Randolph. “Friend,” _for Straight U._                      5.00
    Reading. “A Friend.”                                       2.00
    Royalston. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       5.11
    Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. and Soc.                           100.00
    Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. S. S. _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             27.00
    Sandwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              32.61
    Shrewsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            32.00
    Springfield. South Cong. Ch., $50.20; First
      Cong. Ch., $33.39; Olivet Ch., $36.97 and $19          139.56
    Springfield. “A Friend.” _for Atlanta U._                 10.00
    South Barre. Sab. Sch.                                    10.00
    South Dennis. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
    South Egremont. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Macon, Ga._                                             10.00
    South Hadley. Teachers and Pupils of Mt. H.
      Sem., $25; First Cong. Ch. and Soc., $11                36.00
    Templeton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             19.05
    Tewksbury. Ladies, Bbl. of C., $2 _for
      freight, for Talladega C._                               2.00
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $117.30; Mrs.
      D. A., 50c.                                            117.80
    Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc., $43;
      Individuals, by N. Scamman, $6                          49.00
    Watertown. Phillips Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MISS SUSIE M. BURNHAM L. M.                             78.75
    Wellesley Hills. Grantville Ch. and Soc.                  89.78
    West Barnstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       15.00
    Westhampton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              15.22
    West Medway. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                25.00
    West Medway. Mrs. Patience Shumway                         5.00
    Westport. Pacific Union Sab. Sch.                          2.18
    West Springfield. Second Cong. Ch.                        15.80
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             15.60
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l)                     10.00
    Worcester. Union Ch. and Soc.                            197.25
    Worcester. Sab. Sch. Scholars of Plymouth Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                         20.67
    ——— “A Friend”                                            10.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                          $3,245.44

    LEGACY.

    Whitinsville. Estate of John C. Whitin, by
      Sarah E. Whitin and Jeannie W. Lasell, Adm’x.       10,000.00
                                                         ——————————
                                                         $13,245.44


  RHODE ISLAND, $13.05.

    Peace Dale. Cong. Ch.                                     13.05


  CONNECTICUT, $2,672.14.

    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                  28.30
    Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         20.00
    Birmingham. William E. Downes, _for Land,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                             100.00
    Bridgeport. Park St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   20.00
    Canaan. ———, _for Student Aid_                             5.00
    Clinton. John B. Wright, _for Land, Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        25.00
    Danbury. First Cong. Ch., $105; “Cash,” $20              125.00
    Derby. Urbane Swift, $25; Miss Sarah A.
      Hotchkiss, $5, _for Land, Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               30.00
    East Haven. Cong. Ch and Soc., _for Land,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              45.00
    Ellsworth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             13.29
    Fair Haven. D. D. Mallory, $25; Mrs. Hannah C.
      Hurd and “Friend,” $4; J. P. S., $1, _for
      Land, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                        30.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     53.44
    Greenfield Hill. Cong. Ch.                                10.65
    Guilford. Mrs. Lucy E. Tuttle, $100; Third
      Cong. Ch., $3, _for Land, Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                              103.00
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 25.00
    Guilford. “A Friend in Third Cong. Ch.,” _for
      Indian M._                                               5.50
    Hartford. Centre Ch., First Ecc’l Soc.                   482.50
    Hartford. Marshall Jewell, $50; Lewis E.
      Stanton, $25, _for Land, Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._                                                  75.00
    Hartford. F. H. Hart, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    New Britain. G. B. C., Jr.                                 0.50
    New Haven. F. W. Pardee, $50; “A Friend,” $10;
      F. J. Hart, $5; Davenport Cong. Ch., $37.40,
      _for Land, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                  102.40
    New London. “A Friend,” _for Land, Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        50.00
    North Cornwall. Cong. Ch.                                 30.67
    North Haven. Elihu Dickerman                               2.00
    North Manchester. Second Cong. Soc.                      100.00
    North Manchester. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid. Talladega C._                              10.00
    Norwich. First Cong. Ch., _for Land, Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._                                        25.00
    Mansfield Centre. Mrs. B. Swift, $15; Mrs. L.
      C. Dewing, $10, _for Parsonage, Alabama
      Furnace, Ala._                                          25.00
    Mansfield Centre. H. D. R.                                 1.00
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                50.00
    Meriden. Rev. B. M. Adams, _for Land,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               5.00
    Middletown. South Cong. Ch.                               41.44
    Mount Carmel. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    Plainville. Cong. Ch.                                     73.00
    Plainville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                23.26
    Putnam. Second Cong. Ch.                                  64.81
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                               53.00
    Rockville. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     13.00
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            104.16
    Sharon. Cong. Ch and Soc., $44.03; Miss Belle
      Terrett’s S. S. Class, $5.50; _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        49.53
    Terryville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           58.00
    Tolland. Cong. Ch.                                         6.69
    Vernon. Mrs. G. G. H.                                      1.00
    Washington. “Z.,” _for Indian M._                          1.00
    Wauregan. “Friends,” _for Straight U._                    40.00
    West Haven. E. H. Somers, $50.00; Susan P.
      Beardsley, $10; _for Land, Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               60.00
    West Haven. Mrs. E. C. Kimball                            10.00
    Winsted. James J. Preston                                  2.00
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch., $10.50, and Sab. Sch., $2             12.50
    ——— “A Friend.”                                           17.50
    ——— “A Friend.”                                           10.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,314.14

    LEGACIES.

    New London. Trust Estate of Henry P. Haven,
      _for Atlanta U._                                       300.00
    Union. Estate of Rev. S. I. Curtiss, by Rev.
      J. Curtiss, Ex.                                         58.00
                                                          —————————
                                                          $2,672.14


  NEW YORK, $1,031.73.

    Baldwinsville. Howard Carter, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Binghamton. First Cong. Ch.                              120.09
    Brentwood. E. F. Richardson.                              25.00
    Bridgewater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           12.40
    Brooklyn. “Freedmen’s Helpers,” $8.60 and Bbl.
      of C., _for Macon, Ga._                                  8.60
    Cohoes. W. L. Gilbert, _for President’s house,
      Talladega C._                                          100.00
    Crown Point. Miss Adeline McDonald                        10.00
    East Bloomfield. Cong Ch. and Soc.                        73.40
    Gloversville. Cong. Ch. ($20 of which from A.
      Judson, _for Talladega C._)                            127.00
    Homer. Miss Nancy Knight                                   2.00
    Ithaca. First Cong. Ch.                                   44.24
    Ithaca. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      35.50
    Lima. “A Friend”                                           2.00
    Lisbon Centre. MRS. SERAPH A. SHELDON to
      const. herself L. M.                                    30.00
    Malone. Mr. Hannah B. Wilson ($1 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                     6.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon ($20 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_), $270 and 100 copies music
      books; MOREY HALE BARTOW, $15, bal. to
      const. himself L. M.; Children of Colored
      Orphan Asylum, 143d st. (_by self-denial in
      going without fire-works on the 4th of
      July_), $5                                             290.00
    New York. Geo. E. Sterry, $100; Thos. G.
      Shearman, $25, _for Talladega C._                      125.00
    New York. National Temperance Soc., Box of
      books and papers, _for Macon, Ga._
    Ovid. Mrs. S. K. Dunlap                                    5.00
    Perry Centre. Miss R. J. Booth, Pkg. of papers.
    Port Byron. S. B. O. (50c. of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                          1.00
    Rochester. Miss Emma Hayes, _for Straight U._              1.50
    Sinclairville. Earl C. Preston                             2.00
    Springville. M. H. B.                                      1.00


  NEW JERSEY, $21.00.

    East Orange. Grove St. Cong. Ch.                          20.00
    Orange Valley. Ladies of Cong. Ch., Bbl. of
      Books, _for Lewis Library, Macon, Ga._
    Roseville. Mrs. S.                                         1.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $5.71.

    Clark. S. P. Stewart                                       2.00
    Philadelphia. Henry Disston & Sons, 4 Saws,
      _for Ind. Dept., Atlanta U._
    Terrytown. G. F. H.                                        1.00
    Troy. Moss Grove Sab. Sch.                                 2.71


  OHIO, $1,363.16.

    Alliance. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  4.00
    Ashtabula. First Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                      26.00
    Atwater. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               22.67
    Austinburgh. Miss Martha Cowles                            5.00
    Cherry Fork. J. W.                                         1.00
    Coe Ridge. Rev. G. E. A.                                   0.50
    Conneaut. Cong. Ch.                                        6.50
    Cuyahoga Falls. Cong. Ch., $16.11; R. J. T., $1           17.11
    Garrettsville. Cong. Ch.                                  18.00
    Greenwich. Miss Annis Mead                                 2.00
    Guilford. Trustees of First Cong. Ch. (of
      which $25 _for Tougaloo U._, $25 _for Mendi
      M._, $25 _for Berea C._)                               175.00
    Harmar. Cong. Ch.                                        122.91
    Jersey. Mrs. Lucinda Sinnet                               20.00
    Lodi. Cong. Ch.                                           15.50
    Oberlin. J. W. Merrill                                   400.00
    Oberlin. Ladies’ Soc. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Lady Missionary, Atlanta, Ga._                          50.00
    Painesville. First Cong. Ch.                              61.27
    Randolph. W. J. Dickinson                                 10.00
    Ravenna. S. H.                                             1.00
    Sandusky. “Friends,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            3.00
    Springfield. L. A. W.                                      1.00
    Tallmadge. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                24.00
    Warrensville. Mrs. Mary Walkden, _for Mendi M._           10.00
    West Peru. Sab. Sch., by Mr. Wilcox, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               3.70
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,000.16

    LEGACY.

    Freedom. Estate of Amanda Delano, by Rev. A.
      M. Hills                                               363.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,363.16


  INDIANA, $40.52.

    Michigan City. First Cong. Ch.                            40.50


  ILLINOIS, $2,502.93.

    Altona. Women’s Miss’y Soc.                                5.00
    Chicago. C. G. Hammond, $1,000; Union Park
      Cong. Ch., $361.95; Bethany Cong. Ch.,
      $14.23; Prairie State Loan and Trust Co.,
      $100; Miss H. E. DeL., 50c.                          1,476.68
    Chicago. E. W. Blatchford, _for Atlanta U._              300.00
    Chicago. Ladies of Plymouth Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary in Mobile, Ala._                             50.00
    Galesburg. Log City Sab. Sch.                              5.00
    Galva. Cong. Ch.                                          22.10
    Geneseo. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Granville. “Merry Workers,” _for Student Aid_             13.00
    Havana. J. J. T.                                           0.50
    Lyonsville. Cong. Ch.                                     13.15
    Moline. First Cong. Ch.                                  146.94
    Moline. Collected by Prof. H. S. Bennett, _for
      Endowment of Theo. Chair, Fisk U._                      96.10
    Paw Paw. Union Ch.                                         7.52
    Quincy. First Union Cong. Ch.                            143.30
    Sheffield. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                               5.80
    Sparta. Bryce Crawford, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Sparta. Wm. Rosborough, $5; Robert Rosborough.
      P. B. Gault, James Hood, Robert Hood and D.
      P. Parker. $2 ea., Others $4, by Bryce
      Crawford                                                19.00
    St. Charles. Cong Ch.                                      8.97
    Sycamore. Cong. Ch.                                      102.10
    Sycamore. M. E. W., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             1.00
    Wilmette. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           12.50
    Woodburn. Cong. Ch.                                        9.42
    Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                                       4.85


  MICHIGAN, $478.40.

    Benzonia. Dea. D. B. Spencer, $5.45; C. T.
      Hopkins, $4.45                                           9.90
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                  100.00
    Kalamazoo. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Laingsburgh. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                 5.00
    Litchfield. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                           13.00
    Olivet. Cong. Ch.                                         47.00
    Port Huron. Cong. Ch.                                     43.50
    Romeo. Miss Mary A. Dickinson, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                25.00
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $278.40

    LEGACY.

    Flint. Estate of Mrs. Sarah M. Chase, by Ira
      Chase and D. E. Salisbury Adm’s.                       200.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $478.40


  IOWA, $207.46.

    Bear Grove. Cong. Ch., _for Lady Missionary,
      Topeka, Kan._                                            5.00
    Council Bluffs. Mrs. O. S. H.                              1.00
    Denmark. Isaac Field                                      20.00
    Floris. “Mary and Martha”                                  5.00
    Grinnell. Prof. F. P. Brewer                               2.50
    Iowa City. Collected by Prof. H. S. Bennett,
      _for Endowment of Theo. Chair, Fisk. U._                18.00
    Keokuk. Mrs. E. M. Wilson                                  5.00
    Le Grand. W. V. Craig                                     10.00
    Lyons. First Cong. Ch.                                    27.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch.                               10.00
    McGregor. Woman’s Missionary Soc.                         11.82
    New Hampton. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                            3.00
    Tabor. Miss M. L. Todd, _for Straight U._                  5.00
    Waterloo. Cong. Ch. $79.14; Mayflower Mission
      Circle, $5                                              84.14
    West Liberty. “Busy Bees,” Package Material
      _for Sewing Sch., for Macon, Ga._


  MISSOURI, $17.35.

    Amity. Cong Ch.                                           10.35
    Breckenridge. Rev. T. A. H. 50c.; C. B. R., 50c.           1.00
    Webster Groves. Cong. Ch.                                  6.00


  WISCONSIN, $350.45.

    Appleton. First Cong Ch., Bbl. of C., $3 _for
      freight, for Macon, Ga._                                 3.00
    Arena. Cong. Ch.                                           8.00
    Arena. Woman’s Missionary Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             2.00
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch.                                  125.00
    Eau Claire. Cong. Ch., $40, and Sab. Sch., $17            57.00
    Evansville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                4.00
    Genesee. “Friends,” _for John Brown Steamer_               4.00
    Hartford. R. F.                                            1.00
    Hartland. Rev. S. B. Demarest, box and p’k’g
      of books and pamphlets, $2, _for freight,
      for Macon, Ga._                                          2.00
    Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch.                                   36.70
    Platteville. Cong. Sab. Ch.                                6.00
    Racine. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. (Cong. and
      Presb.), _for Lady Missionary, Talladega, Ala._         21.25
    Racine. Mrs. Smith D. Marsh, $10; H. R., 50c.             10.50
    River Falls. First Cong. Ch.                              43.00
    Ripon. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                            12.00
    Ripon. Prof. G. C. Duffle, _for Macon, Ga._                5.00
    Sun Prairie. Young People’s Miss’y Soc., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      5.00
    Waukesha. Vernon Tichenor                                  5.00


  MINNESOTA, $161.04.

    Austin. Union Cong Ch.                                    22.62
    Elk River. Cong. Ch.                                       8.86
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                      13.00
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      32.71
    Glyndon. “The Church at Glyndon”                          15.16
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      2.27
    Leech Lake. HENRY J. KING, $5, bal. to const.
      himself L. M.; Rev. S. G. W., 50c.                       5.50
    Marshall. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                              5.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch.                                 36.13
    Minneapolis. E. D., First Cong. Ch.                       13.79
    Northfield. J. W. S.                                       1.00
    Saint Peter. Mary R. Treadwell, in memory of
      Mrs. Jane A. Treadwell, deceased                         5.00


  NEBRASKA, $31.00.

    Lincoln. “K. & C.”                                         8.00
    Weeping Water. Cong. Ch.                                  23.00


  COLORADO, $19.73.

    Denver. West Denver Cong. Ch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                15.73
    Manitou. Cong. Ch.                                         4.00


  CALIFORNIA, $2,550.95.

    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                      2,550.95


  OREGON, $30.00.

    Salem. Cong Ch., to const. WILLIAM J. STAIGER
      L. M.                                                   30.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $5.00.

    Washington. Lincoln Mem. Ch.                               5.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $11.48.

    Dudley. Cong. Ch.                                          2.48
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch., $5; Tuition, $4                     9.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $45.00.

    Greenwood. Pub. Sch. Fund, $42. Tuition, $3               45.00


  TENNESSEE, $12.05.

    Nashville. Fisk University                                11.05
    Nashville. A. C. D., _for Student Aid_                     1.00


  GEORGIA, $339.80.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $111.35; Rent,
      $3                                                     114.35
    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition                              74.14
    Macon. Lewis High School. Tuition, $101.31;
      Cong. Ch., $5                                          106.31
    Macon. Rev. W. C. Bass, D.D., $5; “Friends.”
      155 vols. _for Library_, Macon, Ga.                      5.00
    Savannah. Cong. Ch., $20; Rent, $20                       40.00


  ALABAMA, $190.45.

    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                          4.00
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, $3.60; Cong.
      Ch., $2                                                  5.60
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     30.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Talladega. First Cong. Ch., $60.20; Musical
      Union, $44.15; Hon. R. H. Isbell, $15;
      Martin Jenkins, $13.50; Greene & Johnson,
      $5; _for Talladega C._                                 137.85
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                           3.00


  LOUISIANA, $13.00.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                         13.00


  MISSISSIPPI, $1.01.

    Hazlehurst. F. W. S.                                       0.50
    Vernon. W. H. T.                                           0.51


  FLORIDA, $5.52.

    Daytona. Woman’s Miss’y Soc., by Mrs. E. E. C.
      Waldron                                                  5.00
    Lake City. Mrs. A. R. M.                                   0.52
    Mandarin. Mrs. H. B. Stowe, Box of Books and
      Papers, _for Macon, Ga._


  TEXAS, $1.50.

    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch.                                  1.00
    Luling. Q. B. N.                                           0.50


  INCOMES, $717.50.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               570.00
    Income Fund, _for Theo. Dept. Howard U._                 125.00
    Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._                      22.50


  JAPAN, $25.00.

    Okayama. Rev. James H. Pettee                            $2,500
                                                         ——————————
        Total for July                                   $27,275.67
        Total from Oct. 1, to July 31                    $262,829.31
                                                         ===========


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Income Fund                                              175.00
      Previously ack. from. Oct. 1 to June 30              3,542.52
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             $3,669.52




    RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E.
      PALACHE, TREAS., from JAN. 4 TO JUNE 16,
      1882:

    FROM AUXILIARIES: Marysville, Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, $48.60; Four Annual Members,
      $8.—Petaluma, Chinese Monthly Offerings,
      $7.40.—Sacramento, Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, $44.50; First Cong. Ch.,
      $11.45.—Santa Barbara, Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, $36.60; First. Cong. Ch., $27.55;
      Chinese, $18.50; Miss M. B. L. Smith,
      $2.—Santa Cruz, Chinese Monthly Offerings,
      $24; First. Cong. Ch., $5; Collection at
      Anniversary, $8.35; Five Annual Members
      (Chinese), $10.—Stockton, Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, $18; One Annual Member, $2                  271.95
    FROM CHURCHES: Benicia Cong. Ch., One Member,
      $2.—Oakland, First Cong. Ch., $15.70.—San
      Francisco, First Cong. Ch. (coll.) $4.80;
      Two Annual Members, $4; Bethany Ch. ($18 of
      which for nine Annual Members), $39.50.—San
      Jose, Cong. Ch. Young People’s Miss. Soc., $3           69.00
    FROM INDIVIDUAL DONORS: San Francisco, Messrs.
      Balfour, Guthrie & Co., $1,000; O. W.
      Merriam, $25; Messrs. Eppinger & Co.,
      $10.—Point Pedro, Chas. W. Otis, $11; C. W.
      Broadbent, $5.—Liverpool, England, Hon. S.
      Williamson, M. P., $500; Alexander Balfour,
      Esq., $500                                           2,051.00
    FROM EASTERN FRIENDS: Warren, Me. Rev. J. E.
      Pond, $5; Miss Maltby, $5—Bridgeport, Conn.,
      Sab. Sch. of North Cong. Ch., by Mrs. M. B.
      Palmer, $24.—Norwich, Conn., Mr. S. A.
      Huntington, $125, to const. HENRY B. NORTON
      L. M.                                                  159.00
                                                          —————————
        Total                                             $2,550.95
                                                          =========

                                         H. W. HUBBARD, TREAS.
                                           56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




                  “A Book of Peculiar Interest.”

                     A HOME IN THE HOLY LAND.

  Illustrating customs and incidents in modern Jerusalem. By Mrs.
           FINN. 12mo, 491 pp., 16 illustrations, $1.50.

“Written in an easy, flowing style, and replete with instructions
concerning the customs of people in the Holy Land.”—_Gospel Banner._

“An admirable picture of things as they are at the present
day.”—_N.Y. Observer._

“Delightfully entertaining throughout and well
illustrated.”—_Golden Rule._

“We have scarcely ever seen any book on the Holy Land which gives
truer pictures of every-day events as now transpiring in modern
Palestine.”—_Christian Observer, Louisville._

“Full of information to the common reader.”—_Christian Register._

“A story of real home life in the Holy Land.”—_Christian Mirror._

“A capital book for family reading or S. S. libraries.”—_Christian
Intelligencer._

                     THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO.,

                     13 ASTOR PLACE, NEW YORK.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION.


ARTICLE I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
fifty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration, at the time or times of payment, that the sum
is to be applied to constitute a designated person a Life member;
and such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall
have been completed.

Churches, which have within a year contributed to the funds of the
Association, and State Associations or Conferences of Churches, may
appoint delegates to the Annual Meeting of the Association, each
of such Churches and Associations or Conferences to be entitled to
two delegates; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall
be members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. Members shall be entitled to vote by ballot in the
election of President, five Vice-Presidents, the Board of
Directors, and on Amendments to the Constitution; and they shall be
entitled to be present at all meetings of the Board of Directors,
and to take part in the proceedings, but not to vote.

ART. V. The Annual Meeting of the Association and of the Board of
Directors shall be held in the month of October or November, at
such time and place as may be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. VI. The Board of Directors shall consist of fifty persons, of
whom fifteen shall constitute a quorum. They shall be chosen by
ballot, the votes of absent members being receivable under such
safeguards as may be prescribed in the By-Laws of the Association.
At the first election of this Board, ten persons shall be elected
for the term of one year, and a like number for terms of two,
three, four, and five years respectively; and each year thereafter
ten persons shall be elected for the full term of five years, and
such others as may be needed to fill vacancies.

If any Director shall fail to attend two annual meetings in
succession, and to report the reason for such non-attendance, his
place on the Board shall be regarded as vacant.

ART. VII. The Board of Directors shall elect Secretaries of the
Association, Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive Committee of
fifteen members, shall ordain By-Laws, and in general shall direct
and control the operations of the Association.

ART. VIII. The powers and functions of the several officers shall
be prescribed in the By-Laws.

ART. IX. No person shall be made a Director or officer of this
Association who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. X. Missionary bodies, churches, or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. XI. Proposals for the amendment of this Constitution,
sustained by the signatures of not less than fifty members of the
Association, shall be published for not less than three months in
the official periodicals of the Association, and shall thereafter
be submitted to the vote of the members, by ballot, at the annual
meeting, under such conditions as shall be prescribed in the
By-Laws; and if the proposed amendment shall be sustained by
two-thirds of the ballots cast, it shall be declared adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *




           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.

It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest, and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

     Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the Ox-Brain
                          and Wheat-Germ.
  =Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.=
  For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.
  F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      _THE CHICKERING PIANO_

                     “THE BEST IN THE WORLD.”

Before buying elsewhere, write for circular and price list to

                        CHICKERING & SONS,

                         CHICKERING HALL,
                      130 Fifth Avenue, N.Y.

                           MANUFACTORY,
                      156 Tremont St., Boston


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                         =ACID PHOSPHATE=.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS, DIMINISHED
                         VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          AGENTS! Get the

=NEW BOOK, Our Lost Explorers=. The full, complete and authentic
history, _told by the survivors_, of the ill-fated


                       Jeannette Expedition.

The adventures, discoveries, thrilling experiences and tragic
ending, all combine to make a most fascinating book. _20 copies a
day sold by live canvassers._ Agents wanted in every town. Send for
circulars, terms and agency to AMERICAN PUBLISHING CO., Hartford,
Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati or St Louis.

☞ Mention this paper.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             HARTFORD

                       Woven Wire Mattress,

[Illustration]

Especially adapted to all climates—particularly warm countries—the
Hartford Mattress is cleanly, healthful, durable, economical,
impervious to vermin. Requires nothing but a blanket for
over-covering, making it the cheapest bed in the market. This
mattress will last a lifetime, and one-third of life is spent
in sleep. Make that portion comfortable by using the Hartford
Mattress. The Hartford Mattress is now used in all parts of the
world; it is the popular bed of the globe, as well as the most
delightful sleeping arrangement in use. Try it, buy it, and you
will have no other. It is just the mattress for the


                   MISSIONARY IN FOREIGN LANDS;

its health-giving properties will aid the weak; its freedom from
noise quiet the restless; and its luxurious comfort bring rest
and refreshment to the most wearied being. Address for catalogues
prices, or any desired information,

               HARTFORD WOVEN WIRE MATTRESS COMPANY,

                         _P. O. BOX 148_,

                          HARTFORD, CONN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              Circulation Now 80,000, and Increasing.

          Advocating Evangelical Religion and Temperance.

           Liberty, Education and Equal Rights for all.

                         NEW YORK WITNESS

                       PUBLICATIONS for 1882

=New York Weekly Witness.=—Now in its 11th year; circulation,
80,000; ONE DOLLAR a year. Gratis copy for club of 10, with $10. On
trial three months, 25c.

=Sabbath Reading.=—A very handsome, small eight-page weekly,
containing in each number an excellent sermon and a choice
selection of interesting matter for reading on the Lord’s Day.
FIFTY CENTS a year, club of ten, $4. On trial three months 15c.

=Gems of Poetry.=—A beautiful, sixteen-page monthly, on fine paper,
and with an excellent portrait of some eminent poet in each number.
The contents are two serials, the Æneid of Virgil and Aurora Leigh
by Mrs. Browning; a fine assortment of selected poetry, and a great
variety of original poetry—the latter competing for two prizes each
quarter. FORTY CENTS a year; club of three, $1. On trial for three
months, 10c.

=Specimens= of the above publications sent free on application. All
stop when subscription expires.

WITNESS, SABBATH READING and GEMS OF POETRY, three months on trial
for fifty cents.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.

                          WITNESS OFFICE:

                  21 VANDEWATER STREET, NEW YORK.

                    We demand the Prohibition
                      of the Liquor Traffic.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         CHARMING STORIES.

                     By BJORNSTJERNE BJORNSON.

  SYNNOVE SOLBAKKEN.
  ARNE.
  A HAPPY BOY.
  THE FISHER MAIDEN.
  THE BRIDAL MARCH.

                         16mo. $1.00 each.

“The reading public should know that such books are a positive
blessing, and, like the songs of the best poets, awaken these
aspirations that elevate and ennoble the mind and heart.” _New
England Journal of Education._


              REMINISCENCES OF ORIEL COLLEGE AND THE
                         OXFORD MOVEMENT.

BY T. MOZLEY, formerly Fellow of Oriel. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. $3.

The Oxford movement was not only one of the most important in
the religious history of England, but so many famous men were
conspicuous in it that it had a remarkable personal, as well as
historic interest. Newman, Pusey, Keble, and many other notable men
figure in Mr. Mozley’s engaging “Reminiscences,” which are full of
anecdotes and recollections that will be read with nearly as great
zest in America as in England. Mr. Mozley was for years one of the
leading writers on the London _Times_ and his book is crowded with
interesting facts and glimpses of interesting people.

[Illustration]

_For sale by all booksellers. Sent, postpaid, on
receipt of price by the Publishers._

                     HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.,

                              BOSTON.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    TESTED, TRIED AND APPROVED.


                  CROWELL’S S. S. LIBRARY, No. 6.

             _Edited by CHAS. F. DEEMS, D.D., LL. D.,
              Pastor of the Church of the Strangers,
                            New York._

                     50 volumes. 16mo. $29.00.

“The fifty volumes contained in this Library have been procured
at much expense, and selected from a great number of manuscripts.
They have been submitted to my inspection, and each volume has been
examined.

“There is not a sentence in any of these books to which any
Christian patriot can reasonably object, whatever may be his
denominational attachments, his political affiliations, or his
sectional residence.

“Taken as a whole, the Library may safely be commended to families
and Sunday Schools in any part of the whole country, and in any
part of the church universal, as containing nothing but good books,
many of which are very superior to the average of this class of
literature. I believe that I am serving the cause of the Master in
aiding in the circulation of these excellent volumes.”

                                    CHARLES F. DEEMS,
                      _Pastor of the Church of the Strangers_.

We refer also to the Baptist Publication Society, Congregational
Publishing Society, Lutheran Board, and Methodist Book Concern, all
of whom use our Libraries freely and will recommend them. Send for
our catalogue giving an analysis of each book contained in this
Library.

                     THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO.,

                     13 Astor Place. New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        Q. N. EVANS & CO.,

                      60 Duane St., New York,

                         Cor. Elm Street,

                          =STEAM HEATING=

                                AND

                     =Ventilating Engineers=,

                      MAKERS AND DESIGNERS OF

              Steam and Water Heating Apparatus for
                   Public and Private Buildings.

We have furnished our apparatus for the following buildings:

  Office Building, 58 Broadway, N.Y. City.
      Calvary Baptist Church, Albany, N.Y.
          Stover Bros.’ Block, Portland, Me.
              Boston University, Boston, Mass.
                  Florence House, N.Y. City.
                      Mason Building, Boston, Mass.
  Office Building, cor. 18th st. and B’way, N.Y. City.
          Fulton County Court House, Atlanta, Ga.
                  Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga.


                      NEW ENGLAND AGENTS FOR

                        OTIS BROTHERS & CO.

                   Standard Hydraulic Elevators,

                 72 SUDBURY STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

          Prompt attention given to repairing of boilers
                      and heating apparatus.

               Q. N. EVANS.            H. A. JOSLIN.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.


OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.—Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.—Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.—The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.—To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                           HENRY STOKES,
                                                    President.

J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration: SMITH AMERICAN ORGANS ARE THE BEST]


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             BARSTOW’S

                       Wrought Iron Furnace

                For Anthracite or Bituminous Coal.

[Illustration]

              THIRTEEN SIZES—PORTABLE AND BRICK SET.

        Indorsed by the Leading Sanitarians of the Country.

                 “Barstow’s Wrought-Iron Furnace,


properly set and supplied with plenary amount of fresh air, is one
of the most efficient and delightful house-warmers it has ever
been our privilege to enjoy: this conclusion is based upon three
winters’ use, under extraordinary house exposure. Economical in
fuel, plenty of warmth, fire easily kept, no gas escape, no sore
throats.—_A. W. Bell, A.M., M.D., Editor Sanitarian._”


                        BARSTOW STOVE CO.,

            Cor. Beekman and Water Sts., N.Y., 56 and
              58 Union St., Boston; Providence, R.I.

                 O’CONNOR & HARDER, St. Louis, Mo.

                      WESTERN SELLING AGENTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      AN EXTRAORDINARY OFFER!

                            ——— (O) ———

There are a number of persons out of employment in every county—yet
energetic men willing to work do not need to be. Those willing
to work can make from $100 to $500 a month clear, working for us
in a pleasant and permanent business. The amount our agents make
varies—some making as high as $500 a month, while others as low as
$100, all depending on the energy of the agent. We have an article
of great merit. It should be sold to every house-owner, and pays
over 100 per cent. profit Each sale is from $3.50 to $10.00. One
agent in Pennsylvania sold 32 in two days, and cleared $64. An
agent in New York made $45 in one day. Any man with energy enough
to work a full day, and will do this during the year, can make from
$2,000 to $6,000 a year. We only want one man in each county, and
to him will give the exclusive sale as long as he continues to work
faithfully for us. There is no competition, and nothing like our
invention made. Parties having from $200 to $1,000 to invest can
obtain a General Agency for ten counties or a state. Any one can
make an investment of from $25 to $1,000 without the least risk
of loss, as our circulars will show that those investing $25 can,
after a 30 days’ trial, return the goods unsold to us and get their
money back, if they do not clear at least $100. They show that a
General Agent who will take ten counties and invest $216 can, after
a trial of 90 days, return all goods unsold to us, and have money
returned to them if they fail to clear at least $750 in that time.
We are not paying salaries, but want men willing to work and obtain
as their pay the profits of their energy. Men not willing to work
on our terms will not work on any. _Those meaning business_ will
receive our large descriptive circular, and extraordinary offer
by enclosing a three-cent stamp, with their address. The first to
comply with our terms will secure the county or counties they may
wish to work. Address, RENNER MANUFACTURING CO.,

                        118 Smithfield Street, Pittsburgh, Pa.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

J. Estey & Co

Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of Fencing.
Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 18;
Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.—In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcribers Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected.
Unusual spellings suspected to be the original author’s were
retained. Differences in hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors.

“Steet” changed to “Street” on the inside cover in the
CORRESPONDING SECRETARY listing.

Moved the drawing of the Rice Plantation from page 270 to 271 to
allow the drawing to be placed between paragraphs.

Moved a few lines of text from the bottom of page 272 to the top of
page 274 to allow the drawing to be placed between paragraphs on
page 273.

“Aarrisville” changed to “Harrisville” in the New Hampshire section
of the Receipts on page 279.

Total for the Pittsfield entry on page 280 changed from 8.81 to
88.81 to agree with individual amounts listed on the line. Other
arithmetic anomalies in the RECEIPTS section could not be corrected.

“Sacrament”, changed to “Sacramento” on page 283.

Changed “it” to “is” and “blankes” to “blanket” in the Hartford
Woven Wire Mattress advertisement on page 285. (the Hartford
Mattress is cleanly....Requires nothing but a blanket)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.