Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, KarenD and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)









[Illustration:

  VOL. XXXVI.       NOVEMBER, 1882.       NO. 11.

  THE

  American Missionary

  “THEY ARE RISING ALL ARE RISING, THE BLACK AND WHITE TOGETHER”


  NEW YORK:

  PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

  ROOMS, 56 READE STREET.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class
  matter.]




                             CONTENTS.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                                                         PAGE.
  EDITORIALS.

    THIS NUMBER—The W. H. M. A.                            321
    LADY MISSIONARIES—Lady Missionary in New Orleans       322
    PARAGRAPH—Missionary Campaign                          323
    CHRISTIANIZATION OF OUR COUNTRY FOR THE SAKE OF
      THE WORLD                                            324
    PARAGRAPH—Benefactions                                 326
    GENERAL NOTES—Africa, Indians                          327


  THE FREEDMEN.

    LIVINGSTONE MISSIONARY HALL                            328
    LIVINGSTONE MISSIONARY HALL (Cut)                      329
    HYGIENIC DEPARTMENT OF FISK UNIVERSITY—Student
      Teaching                                             330
    PERMANENT TEMPERANCE WORK                              331
    WORK IN TOPEKA                                         333


  AFRICA.

    DR. LADD’S JOURNAL                                     334


  THE INDIANS.

    FARMING AT FORT BERTHOLD                               340
    RELIGIOUS INTEREST AT S’KOKOMISH—School at Leech
      Lake                                                 341


  THE CHINESE.

    REVIEW OF THE YEAR                                     342


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    LETTER FROM AN INDIAN BOY                              342


  RECEIPTS                                                 343


  CONSTITUTION                                             349


  PROPOSED CONSTITUTION                                    350

       *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association,

56 READE STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


  PRESIDENT, HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


  CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

    Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  TREASURER.

    H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


  DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

    Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
    Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
    Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields to
the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the “American
Missionary,” to Rev. G. Pike, D.D., at the New York office.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, Rev. C.
L. Woodworth. Dist. Sec., 21 Congregational House, Boston, Mass.,
or Rev. James Powell, Dist. Sec., 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member. Letters relating to boxes and barrels of clothing may
be addressed to the persons above named.


FORM OF A BEQUEST

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.


The Annual report of the A. M. A. contains the Constitution of the
Association and the By-laws of the Executive Committee. A copy will
be sent free on application.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          VOL. XXXVI.      NOVEMBER, 1882.        NO. 11.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


This number of the MISSIONARY will reach our readers about the
time of the assembling of our friends at the Annual Meeting. With
the sum of $300,000 so nearly reached, with no debt upon our
treasury, with a year of most successful work, with the addition
of many large, commodious and much needed buildings, and with
the dew of divine grace resting upon many of our churches and
schools, we shall meet in our annual gathering with abundant causes
of gratitude towards God for the past, and hope and courage for
another year. Prayer is the vital breath of the Christian life, and
none the less of missionary endeavor. We ask a place evermore in
the prayers of God’s people. At our Annual Meeting it is our custom
to spend a season of devotion on Tuesday afternoon in concert with
all our workers in the field, who gather in their homes and schools
and churches to lift up their voices in thanks and supplications
with us for the blessing of God upon our work. We ask those of
our Christian friends whose eyes may rest upon this page at that
hour of worship to unite with us in it; and may we not hope that
this suggestion, though received later, may stimulate to earnest
supplication in behalf of our work?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WOMAN’S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

The arrangement for co-operation between the A. M. A. and the W. H.
M. A. has ceased. A few words of explanation are proper. From an
early period of our work among the Freedmen, we have employed lady
missionaries, and found them exceedingly useful. When the W. H. M.
A. was formed, we entered into co-operation with it in the hope
that a larger number of such missionaries might be sent into the
field. It was found, however, that with the office of one society
in New York and the other in Boston, it was impossible to have such
constant consultations as to appointments, places and work as would
avoid all misunderstandings and complications. We have, therefore,
felt it our duty, though with reluctance and with all respect for
the zeal and earnest Christian purposes of the W. H. M. A., to
sever our connection with it.

As we now return to our old plan of selecting the lady
missionaries, and of supporting them from our treasury, we most
earnestly solicit the aid of the noble women of our constituency
who sympathize with our endeavor to lift up the lowly of their sex,
and to bring into their homes the refining and elevating influences
of the Gospel. Whether this aid shall be rendered by individual
gifts or by united efforts on the part of ladies of given churches
or localities, we most cheerfully leave to their good judgment
to decide. The work we know is promising, the opportunities are
abundant, and the blessings two-fold to those who give.

       *       *       *       *       *


LADY MISSIONARIES

As we intend to increase the number of our lady missionaries in
the South, it is fitting that we explain our aim in sending them
and the methods of their work. Their services are mainly in the
home with the mothers and the children. We regard the home, the
school and the church as the pivots of the Christian life, each
most effective when working with the others. A home that is not
neat, attractive and pure, cripples the efforts of the school and
the church. If a child spends six hours in a school and eighteen
hours in a disorderly and immoral home, or if a man attends service
in a church on Sunday and spends all the rest of the week in that
same home, the progress of both boy and man in the Christian life
will be slow indeed. We aim to build up _character_, and if the
school, the church and the home, co-operate in harmony “according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part,” the product
will, under God, be men and women of intelligent minds and pure
hearts, happy themselves, useful to their race and the nation, and
ornaments to the church of Christ.

       *       *       *       *       *


LADY MISSIONARY IN NEW ORLEANS.

We have appointed Miss A. D. Gerrish as lady missionary in New
Orleans, and she entered upon her work there Oct. 1. She will
devote her energies with special reference to aiding our work in
Straight University and in Central Church, in accordance with
the principles laid down in the foregoing article. There is much
benevolent and Christian work to be done in that great city, and
the A. M. A., unable, of course, to do it all, must make choice.
For the Chinamen in America, we are doing our great work on the
Pacific Coast, and those who float into Eastern and Southern
cities seem to have been brought providentially to the doors of
the large and wealthy local churches, whose duty and privilege it
is to lead these strangers to the Saviour. As to the maintaining
of orphanages, our experiment, thoroughly tried in the opening of
our work in the South, when such asylums were more needed than
now, proved to us that our broadest and best work for the colored
people could not be done in them. We are persuaded that a given sum
of money will do more for the effectual elevation of the colored
people in connection with our regular work in church, school and
home than in any other way. The lady missionary, aiding to make the
home of the pupil and parishioner neat, intelligent and pure, will
not only brighten that spot, but will render the school and the
church more effectual.

Miss Gerrish is no stranger to our work. She has been eminently
successful as missionary in Topeka, Kansas, where her remarkable
musical gifts, her magnetic enthusiasm, and her earnest Christian
character, have won all hearts within her influence. We bespeak for
her a share in the sympathies and prayers of the faithful Christian
women of the North and West, who toil for the elevation of women
who are depressed by poverty and ignorance.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE publish in consecutive pages in this number of the MISSIONARY
the Constitution of the A. M. A. as it now stands, and the Proposed
Constitution as it will be reported at our Annual Meeting for
action. They will be convenient for reference and comparison.

       *       *       *       *       *

THAT missionary campaign in Central and Western New York became a
success. Meetings, of three sessions each, were held in eighteen
places: Penn Yan, (Pa.), Norwich, Walton, Utica, Antwerp, Norwood,
Sandy Creek, Oswego, Elmira, Ithaca, Canandaigua, Fairport,
Lockport, Homer, Binghamtom, Schenectady, Poughkeepsie. Secretary
C. C. Creegan, the manager, represented the work of the A. H. M.
S. in all the country, as well as in his own State, using his huge
map of the United States. His experience as former Superintendent
of Colorado and adjacent mountain country, fits him well for
this service, in which he is enthusiastic. Dr. L. H. Cobb, out
of his ten years’ experience as Superintendent in Minnesota, and
brief work in the New West as Missionary Secretary of the A. H.
M. S., was able to say, we speak what we do know in pleading for
the housing of the new churches on the frontier. He also makes
a forceful appeal for helping them to parsonages as a piece of
policy in the economy and efficiency of home mission work. Dr.
H. C. Hayden, of the American Board, with singular felicity,
earnestness and variation, poured out his soul in behalf of the
outlying regions. He, too, had maps; they were of China, Japan
and Africa, and right eloquent were they in their appeals to the
head and heart through the eye. Dr. O. H. White, Secretary of the
British Freedmen’s Aid Society, co-operative with the A. M. A., in
behalf of Africa, for the first half of the tour represented our
cause, portraying the interest of English Christians in this work,
delineating from his ample study the country, the people, and the
prospect of missions in Africa, and also reporting the condition
and progress of our schools and churches in the South. For the
last part of the course our Field Superintendent, as a “returned
missionary” made report of his field, representing also our work
among the Indians, the Chinese on the Pacific Coast, and the Mendi
people in Africa. It was interesting to observe the harmony and
inter-play of all the addresses, and so of the several causes. At
each meeting there were representatives from neighboring churches,
up to seven or eight in number, so that, in all, the words of the
brethren were heard by messengers from one hundred churches, by
one hundred of our own ministers, by thirty-five pastors in other
denominations, and, through an estimate, by seven or eight thousand
people. These, too, were representative people; they would report
what they had heard; and when they told the non-attendants how much
they had lost, this, too, would be a valuable testimony. Pastors
not unfrequently announced a quickened interest, and promised to
be yet more diligent in presenting these related interests of all
the churches; they found that the calling in of these brethren was
of the nature of using experts in behalf of the respective modes
of Christian propagandism. The men of the corps were delighted
with the heartiness of their reception everywhere, and came back
with an increased love for the Lord’s dear people whom they had
met and tried to serve. Doubtless good was done in sowing seed,
which will appear in future fruitfulness in prayer and sympathy
and contributions for these several causes, which are one. As the
huntsman looks for his game after the fire, we shall be looking
for the A. M. A. bagging out in that country, which one of our
representatives says is the finest part of the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHRISTIANIZATION OF OUR COUNTRY FOR THE SAKE OF THE WORLD.

That is the loftiest argument for home missions. God evidently
intended that this should be made a great missionary nation. If
it had been discovered and settled much earlier we should have
had simply a transference of the old world civilization, with all
of its spiritual despotism. As it was, South America and Mexico
did receive that inheritance, and our territory, once claimed by
the Pope, and actually recognized as belonging to the Catholic
countries France and Spain, as appears from old maps and globes,
has barely escaped by the overruling of Providence, which has given
it to the English-speaking Protestantism, and by the evangelism
developed through American Christianity.

Prof. Phelps was right when he wrote: “Were I a missionary in
Canton, my first prayer every morning would be for America in
behalf of Canton.” This idea gives a grandeur to the march of the
American Home Missionary Society across the continent. The course
of missionaries is now largely changed. Once they set sail from our
shores eastward, now they cross our national domain to go westward.
We cry, all hail, to that right wing of Immanuel’s army that is
sweeping the land from ocean to ocean. Already our own American
Board is finding the West its best hunting-ground for missionaries
to go abroad. It is even going into the cabins of the frontiersmen,
as well as to the Western Theological Seminaries, to find its
consecrated men and women. And this is proving to be choice
material to make our Lord’s world-conquerors out of. Men who have
lifted up axes upon the thick trees, and have come into contact
with affairs, have the hardy stuff needed in the work abroad.

So the American Missionary Association is the left wing of the
Congregational corps that is seeking to subdue this realm to our
King, the Christ. To this end was its former work at the West,
where it had its seventy-nine home missionaries. To this end is its
scheme for helping in the evangelizing of the Aborigines, who have
made way for us to build up our nation. To this end is our movement
in behalf of the six millions of our colored fellow-citizens; a
movement which, as we are humbly grateful to be able to say, God
has made great. To this end is our mission among the Chinese, whom
God has wondrously brought to our door to receive the Gospel.

Now, all of this, primarily for the sake of our country, is
clearly, in the divine purpose, also for the sake of the world.
Why did God just now make such a junction as that of the marvelous
opening of Africa to science, commerce and the Gospel, along with
the emancipation of the African slaves in our country? Everybody
says, it must have been that these Christianized Africo-Americans
might have an open way for carrying back to their native land,
as pilgrims, the same blessings which the original pilgrims had
brought to this new world from the old. Nothing could be grander
than this process of helping our brethren of the South on to a
degree of attainment that will fit them to become the Puritan
element that may yet leaven that dark continent. Not simply may we
send over there the cultivated professional men and helping women,
but who knows but that, by and by, as Ireland has been emptied
several times into this country—live freight being easier of
shipment than dead—so may masses of our “Americans falsely called
Africans,” as Lewis Tappan used to say, go over with intelligent
purpose to take Africa for their home, almost transporting
civilization in bulk.

So our whole work on the California coast is a grand training
school to fit native missionaries for China, not simply to raise up
nominal preachers and teachers to go back to father land, but to
make Christians of the many, who, by virtue of their discipleship,
shall be commissioned of the Lord to go forth bearing the Gospel,
even as the early Christians went forth everywhere preaching the
Word. Such an infusion of Gospel leaven will be one of the most
hopeful features of the Christian propaganda in the Celestial
Empire.

And so here we find the confirmation of the field and the work of
this Association. We are put in trust with the care of these three
depressed races dwelling by our side—in trust for their good, for
our country’s welfare—in trust for the sake of Africa and China and
all the world. As these three peoples are here to stay, and as they
will ever need the foster care of their more favored brothers of
the common family, we find herein the justification and the demand
for far-sighted and long-continuous plans on the part of this body
for the lifting up of all these three classes of lowly poor, in
order to their own elevation, in order to the evangelization of our
country, in order to the salvation of the world.

Equally clear providential indications may yet point the way to
a work among the Southern white people, as soon as the caste
prejudice shall melt away under the benign influence of Gospel
light and love. And thus all the races—as in Christ Jesus there
is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free—shall be
united not only in Christian sympathy and fellowship at home, but
in the blessed work of carrying the pure Gospel of Christ to all
the lands and peoples of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

A GENTLEMAN, who for a dozen years has been a member of the Senate
of Maryland, drops in at our rooms occasionally from interest in
our work. The last time he was in he spoke of a colored young
Catholic, who was among the number of those who were taken over
to London to be educated for the priesthood and to be returned to
labor among the freedmen in that office. The Doctor said that the
young man had returned with a fine education, but had abandoned the
idea of taking orders. He was now teaching school, but his highest
ambition was to become a porter in a large library. As this is the
first and only one of those young men, of whom so much was said at
one time, to be identified by us, we are glad to hear from him. Of
course, this one case does not carry the whole, but surely it does
not augur much for a Romish propagandism among our colored fellow
citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

John Francis Clapp of the firm of Simpson, Clapp & Co., of New
York, remembered his native town, Belchertown, Mass., in his will
by the gift of $40,000 for a public library and a building for the
same.

Mr. George I. Seney has presented $25,000 to the Wesleyan Female
College, to finish the college buildings.

Mrs. Shaw, of Boston, the daughter of the late Professor Agassiz,
supports 33 kindergartens in that city and vicinity, at an expense
of $25,000 per annum.

President Peter McVicar has lately received a gift of $10,000 for
Washburn College from a friend in Massachusetts.

Not only has Rev. H. O. Ladd’s University of New Mexico at Santa Fe
received $5,000 from the estate of the late Deacon J. C. Whitin,
but other gifts are promised for the building now going up.

Bowdoin College has received $1,000 from Dr. Goodwin to found a
commencement prize, $4,000 from the estate of Mrs. Noah Woods,
of Bangor, to establish the Blake Scholarship, $1,000 from John
C. Dodge, of Cambridge, for library purposes. $3,500 was pledged
towards a new gymnasium and $1,000 for a new laboratory.

_The man who gave the $20,000 named at this place in our last
issue, calls it “stewardship.” The man who gave the $10,000 there
indicated calls it not a donation, but an “investment.” We have
some such investments to offer, with this indorsement, “He that
hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord”—an investment of
$1,000 for a scholarship, $10,000 for a library, or $25,000 for a
professorship in any of our chartered institutions._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.

—The Italian government will shortly send a messenger to the king
of Abyssinia, charged with giving him presents from King Humbert,
and renewing at the same time friendly relations between the two
countries.

—M. Antoine, who has been some time in Abyssinia, reports that the
natives endure with impunity the malaria of the lower regions,
pernicious to Europeans, and attributes their freedom from sickness
to the daily use of fumigations of sulphur.

—At the request of M. Price, founder of the establishment at Frere
Town for the freed slaves, the Committee of the Church of England
Missions has decided to send two new missionaries, a teacher, and,
if possible, a physician. The agents of the society will endeavor
to extend the work to the interior.

—The Universities’ Mission to Africa has now three great centres
of operation—Zanzibar, the Usambara country north of Zanzibar, and
the Rovuma District. It has about 1,000 natives under its care, has
transformed the old slave-market of Zanzibar, where formerly 30,000
slaves were sold annually, into mission premises, with a church,
mission-house and school, and established a chain of stations from
the coast to Lake Nyassa. The income for 1881 was £11,000 and the
mission has 34 European missionaries and 26 native evangelists. The
mission was started in 1859 at the suggestion of Dr. Livingstone,
and looks to the universities for its supply of clergy.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIANS.

—Five new Indian students have arrived at the Hampton
Institute—one, whose position in the school is not yet defined, as
it is difficult to find a class for him. This is Hampton’s first
experience in training married people in homes. Miss Fletcher
brought from Omaha two families, in one of which there is a
fine-looking baby of 18 months.

—At Hampton, in the tin shop, over 7,000 pieces of tinware have
been made for the Indian Department since the 20th of June, in
addition to the tin work done on school grounds. All the contracts
for the Interior Department are completed, and 55 cases nicely
packed have been shipped to the different agencies.

—Mr. Cowley writes from Spokan Falls that he returned recently from
session of District Court, having been summoned as interpreter in
an action of the U.S. Marshal against four white men for selling
whiskey to Indians. Two were sentenced to penitentiary, one broke
jail before trial, and the other cannot yet be found. It will break
up the traffic for a time. The jury in the last case brought in a
unanimous verdict of guilty, on the testimony of one Indian, which
gives a hint as to the intelligence and absence of race prejudice
on the part of the whites, and of the reputation of the Indians in
that region for veracity.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FREEDMEN.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT, ATLANTA, GA.

       *       *       *       *       *


LIVINGSTONE MISSIONARY HALL

Was so far completed that it was ready for occupation at the
beginning of the scholastic year, Sept. 4. The dedication has been
fixed for Monday, Oct. 30, so that persons in attendance upon the
annual meeting of the A. M. A. the previous week in Cleveland can
go on to Nashville and spend the Sabbath and be present at the
dedicatory exercises.

The Hall is 203 feet in length and 52 feet in width. The central
part is ten feet wider, and the whole building is four stories,
with a basement. The building contains a chapel, a large library
room, museum, scientific lecture room 40 by 30, Treasurer’s office,
President’s room, thirteen class and lecture rooms and sixty-six
dormitory and living rooms. It is heated by steam.

The completion of this new Hall nearly doubles the capacity of
Fisk University. The movement for the erection of this building
was begun in England in 1876, and its final success is due to
the munificence of Mrs. Stone, who gave, for the erection and
furnishing of the Hall, $60,000. It is expected that the exercises
connected with the dedication will be of great interest, and a
cordial invitation is extended to the friends of our Southern work
to be present.

[Illustration: LIVINGSTONE MISSIONARY HALL, NASHVILLE, TENN.]

       *       *       *       *       *


HYGIENIC DEPARTMENT AT FISK UNIVERSITY.

BY MRS. JULIET B. SMITH

The hygienic classes were to have begun this week, but are of
necessity postponed that I may help in the model school until the
new teacher arrives. Small-pox being in the city, I have examined
the students in all grades and vaccinated all who were unprotected.
I have had much pleasure and profit in talking over the matter of
the hygienic classes with Miss Parmelee, and she has given me many
valuable hints from her work at Memphis. We have fitted up a sick
ward to be used in case of severe or infectious disease. It is at
the top of the house, with perfect ventilation, and I feel quite
happy over its capabilities. Mr. Hawley has been prompt to answer
my calls for disinfectants, and I hope to make them tell on the
health rates for the coming year.

In the hygienic classes, as full notes as possible are to be taken
by the pupils. The magnitude of the task of teaching healthful
living grows upon me, but I am glad and grateful to have the chance
to go to work in the old field and to be better equipped than years
ago. Miss Parmelee and I have it close at our hearts to get strong
hold of our city girls, and through them of their mothers with a
view toward mother’s meetings sometime and somehow. The health of
the school is fair, the most serious ailments being among those who
have taught in the swamp lands.

       *       *       *       *       *


STUDENT TEACHING

(BY THE STUDENTS OF FISK UNIVERSITY DURING THE SUMMER VACATION.)

REV. H. S. BENNETT.

A meeting of great interest was held in Fisk University on the
night of the 15th of September. The occasion was to furnish an
opportunity to those students who had been engaged in teaching
during the summer to give the details of experience in their work.

Pres. Cravath presided. Rev. Geo. W. Moore was introduced as one
who during the past year had been studying theology and preaching
in Ohio. Mr. Moore paid a grateful tribute to Fisk University as
the place where he had studied. He thought that colored students
would do better to study in the South. He had been preaching to a
white church, or to white churches. As a colored man he would make
no apologies nor explanations. He had a message to carry to the
people. He got their confidence and love before they knew who he
was. He had three regular stations and preached to eight churches
in all. Last Sunday he was called to Sullivan, and was told that
they would oppose him on account of his race identity; but he
was cordially received, and the result was a unanimous call with
increase of salary.

Brethren Anderson and Ously have been highly esteemed in Oberlin.
They have been hard students and have won the commendations of
their teachers.

H. C. Gray taught school in Shelby County, Tenn. “My school did not
have more than thirty on the roll. I tried to give satisfaction
because four or five teachers before me had failed and left before
their time was out. During the last two months my school was much
larger than at first, but the pupils were kept out by chills and
fever. I had fifteen or twenty pupils without any books.”

H. F. Mitchell, near Fernanda, Miss. “I enrolled 104 and had two
assistants. I was quite successful. I introduced the tonic sol-fa
method of teaching music and succeeded well in it. My health was
good all summer. I was taken with a chill the last day of school.”

W. H. Ross, who had been helping in holding an institute gave an
account of his work. He had attended institutes before, but they
were not so much of the nature of a school. “We had a course of
lectures, which was a main feature in the work. We tried to inspire
the young people with a desire to pursue a course of study. All who
attended were pleased with the work done. The colored people of
Gibson Co. are far behind in the scale of intelligence. After the
institute closed I opened my school the next Monday. The attendance
was about thirty. The people have a great desire to go forward.”

Humphrey Jones taught school in Georgia, near Dalton. “I opened
school on the 10th of July with nine scholars. They wanted to
know whether I was Methodist or Baptist. I told them I was
Congregationalist. They shook their heads; they did not know
anything about that. They did not think it was anything. My school
was very small, because the people would not pay twenty-five cents
per month. The people are further behind there than in any place I
have been.”

G. A. T. Robinson: “I taught in Georgia near Mr. Jones. The people
are very poor and ignorant. They are not interested in education. A
strong prejudice exists against the public schools. The most of the
people are servants and are content to be such. A teacher is looked
upon as a bad man. I taught in a Baptist Church and they would not
let me teach in the Sunday school. They want me to come back there.”

Ella Jones, from Texas: “I had charge of the girls in the place
where I taught, Huntsville. I made up my mind to live a Christian
life. I taught eight months. I also taught in the Sabbath School.
They wanted me to teach the next year, but I felt that I must
continue my course. I tried to do whatever I did as a Christian.
There were some conversions in my school. How much of this is due
to my influence I do not know.”

Alice Vasser only taught five weeks at Booneville, Tenn. “When I
arrived they had no school-house for me to begin to teach in. They
put a floor in an old house and a roof on it, and I began to teach.
I walked two miles every day. I had fifteen scholars. I feel that
I did some good. The children wanted to learn very much. They were
very anxious to have me come back.”

G. A. McLelland taught at Tiptonville, Tenn. “My school numbered
about sixty. The children were not so far advanced in their books,
but they were more easily managed. I taught in the Sunday-school.
The older people were harder to interest. I got them in night
school. I sang Jubilee songs and told them stories, and thus got
them interested. Fisk University stands very high in the estimation
of the people.”

Henrietta Bailey taught in Mississippi for three months; had a
pleasant school, but did not get her money till after Christmas.
Afterward taught in Lincoln school; had an attendance of
forty-five, an average attendance of thirty-one.

Thus closed a very interesting exercise. Most of the students are
still out teaching. The record of the evening is a fair statement
of the work done by the students of the institution.

       *       *       *       *       *


PERMANENT TEMPERANCE WORK.

MISS LYDIA P. AULD.

The first of April, 1869, by the advice of our friends in
St. Augustine, Fla., and by express command from the State
Superintendent, who said we were working too hard, we gave up our
night school, relying more upon their judgment than upon our own
view of the case.

The young men in the night class of Miss Bowker (now Mrs. Clift),
expressed a strong desire to meet at least one evening in the week
for instruction. The idea of forming themselves into a temperance
society was suggested to them, and they decided upon a speedy
organization.

Accordingly, on the evening of April 6th, about a dozen young men
met in our little school room, and proceeded to organize the first
temperance society in St. Augustine. After the election of the
various officers, the evening was devoted to music. Miss Bowker had
previously taught them several temperance melodies. Mrs. Mayhew, of
Orange, N.J., who was boarding in town and greatly interested in
the welfare of the colored people, was present. She was a sweet
singer, and drilled them in two or three new pieces.

On the 13th, there was an increase of numbers. Mr. Berrian, from
New York, was invited to address the young men. He gave them
excellent counsel, and read the simple pledge he had prepared,
explaining its binding obligations. We did not wish any to sign
that night, as we desired them to give the subject careful
consideration.

A week later, on the 20th, there was a large attendance. The good
friend who was with them the previous week plainly stated the object
of the meeting. He exhorted them not to do anything rashly; and
read the Constitution he had drawn up for the Society, with the
following simple pledge attached:

“We hereby solemnly pledge ourselves to abstain from the use of all
intoxicating liquors, or drinks, as a beverage.”

A few moments of solemn silence followed the announcement, “We
are now ready for signatures to this pledge,” which was broken by
one after another rising and stating, in a clear and intelligent
manner, his reasons for signing the pledge. Many of their remarks
were truly affecting. One young man said, “A gentleman, who went
North to-day, offered me a bottle of whisky. I said, ‘I thank you,
sir; but I have joined a temperance society, and am going to-night
to sign the pledge, so please excuse me for not accepting it.’”
Another referred to his beastly intoxication on the Christmas day
before, and resolved that the return of that day should find him a
different man.

The first to sign was the President, who is even to this day their
leader. I think no word was uttered during the signing of the
pledge. The firm, manly footstep and scratch of the pen were the
only sounds heard. Sixteen names were affixed, and the signatures
ceased for that time. Then the organization was completed. The
name Lincoln Temperance Society (since changed to Independent
Lincoln Temperance Society) was adopted. Some temperance songs were
sung, and those young men went quietly and thoughtfully to their
homes—nobler, indeed, for the onward step they had taken.

On our return in the fall, we found that the young Society had
steadily grown in strength and numbers. Not one of the “sixteen”
had violated his pledge, though often and sorely tempted to do
so. Such abstinence was very praise-worthy in a community where
drinking was the universal custom. The Freedmen’s Bureau had
erected for us a new school building, in one of the rooms of which
the Society held its meetings every Monday evening.

April 20, 1870, the Lincoln Temperance Society celebrated its first
anniversary. The membership had rolled up to 54. Female members
had been admitted during the year, and the good the Society had
accomplished was clearly perceptible in the elevated tone and
manners of the young people. Several white friends were present on
this occasion to listen to the speeches of the members. Miss Bowker
was referred to in one of these as the “Mother of Temperance.”

A few weeks later, in May, we left St. Augustine, not to return.
Years passed, and only incidentally was the Society heard from.
In September, 1878, I was rejoiced to receive a letter from the
President, D. M. Pappy, giving an account of the nourishing
condition of the Society, from which I will make a few extracts.

“Our Temperance Society, that Mrs. Clift and yourself assisted us
in organizing, numbers now about one hundred and seventy-five. I
have remained President since you left, with an interval of two
years. Our struggle was hard, and we had much to encounter. St.
Augustine has considerably changed by so many young men abstaining
from that great evil, the intoxicating drink. Our Society has also
purchased a lot, and built a fine hall of two stories. The meeting
room is on the upper floor, and a public reading room and library
on the lower floor. The building is nicely lathed and plastered,
and painted. The young men of the Society are using every means to
elevate our people to respectability and intelligence: but, like
everything else, it takes time. Already our Society has achieved
much good, and we do tender many thanks to you and to Mrs. Clift
for your influence.

“All the young men that were in the Society when you were here are
still with us, except one. The young men, including myself, have
never regretted signing the pledge, and we promise forever to keep
it, because we have found much good in it.”

In 1881, they celebrated their twelfth anniversary, and Mr. Pappy
writes:

“Our celebration went off very nicely. We had the hall handsomely
decorated with flags, flowers and evergreens. Over the President’s
stand was a large anchor, with ‘1869’ above and ‘1881’ below it. On
the right was your name, and on the left that of Mrs. Clift. In the
centre of the hall was a mound of flowers.

“The exercises consisted of a grand reception, speeches, singing,
reading, essays, with excellent music by the brass band, an
exhibition of fire-works and a balloon ascension. These were
presented to us by some white friends. The celebration was a grand
success, and has had a deep effect on those outside. Last Monday
evening we received five new members, and shall on next Monday
receive a few more.

“I think we are just as strong and firm in the progressive spirit
as ever we were, if not more so. We number nearly 200 members now.
Our building is not quite finished yet, as everything costs so
much. It has cost us already nearly fifteen hundred dollars.

“The members of the Society, for the past month, have been holding
temperance revival meetings every Monday evening, for the benefit
of the young men. The exercises consist of speaking, singing and
prayers by the members of the various churches. It has revived the
hearts, not only of the members of the Society, but also of many
others.”

       *       *       *       *       *


WORK IN TOPEKA.

MISS A. D. GERRISH.

The younger class of people—the boys and girls—seem to gather
around us rather than the older ones; but to win the children
generally in the end secures the parents. Through music, especially
the singing of the Gospel hymns, of which all are very fond, I
feel that I am reaching a larger number than I perhaps could
in any other way. A class of some twenty-five little folks, a
second class of between thirty and forty boys and girls, a band
of twenty or more young ladies, also the “Daniel’s Band,” of nine
members,—these, besides others, are daily being brought under
our influence and control. Their improvement in singing is very
marked. Before I left (an excellent teacher having been secured)
a goodly number of the young ladies accepted my invitation to
attend Sunday-school. A few months, or even weeks ago, a similar
invitation would have met with no response from them. In the night
school a number of the older ones, who began last January with A
B C, now read quite well out of the Bible. In a Bible reading,
in which over fifty took part, I thought that the “Uncles” and
“Aunties” read quite as well as some of the young people. The
religious interest is not as great as we could wish to see; still,
the weekly meetings and Sabbath services are quite well attended.
We have now a small church organization, eight members. Three have
united on profession of their faith; two are promising young men,
members of the Band. I look for an increase of numbers in our
Sunday-school next season, and we have the promise of several new
teachers. July 30th we had a Sunday-school concert, using the A.
M. A. concert exercise. At the close, a white gentleman, one of
Topeka’s best men, said: “In looking over the crowded audience
this evening, I can but say, with many others, that a change has
already been wrought in Tennessee town. Improvement is stamping
itself upon place and people.”

       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICA.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOURNAL

OF THE ARTHINGTON EXPEDITION, KEPT BY REV. HENRY M. LADD, D.D.

  The time from Feb. 23d to March 31st was spent by the
  explorers in Khartoum. During their stay Raouf Pasha, Governor
  General of the Soudan, was deposed for not taking more active
  measures against the “False Prophet,” and Abdel Kadir Pasha
  was appointed in his place, with a residence at Cairo, while
  the Soudan was divided into four provinces, and Khartoum was
  reduced from the capital to a Mudirieh. During this time also
  they witnessed the gathering of Giegler Pasha’s army and its
  embarkation. Owing to the disturbances they experienced great
  difficulty in getting transport to Berber. The troubles in
  Egypt were also rapidly culminating, and gave them serious
  anxiety as to the possibility of returning through that
  country. They suffered from poor food. Their dragoman was ill
  with fever. The time, however, was well improved in studying
  the people, and the language with which they became quite
  familiar, in selecting and photographing sites for buildings,
  and in learning from Emin Bey, Governor of the Equatorial
  Provinces, certain important particulars in regard to that
  country.—ED.

_Friday, March 31st._—After lunch we called at Emin Bey’s, and
then walked down to our boat and little steamer. We went first to
a previously appointed rendezvous at Marquet’s. All the “élite”
of the city were present to see the party off. We felt that we
had some friends in this far-off place. There were present H. E.
Giegler Pasha, Marcopoli Bey, Emin Bey, Georgius Bey, the American
Consular Agent, English Consular Agent, and other Consuls; there
were priests and merchants, and altogether a large crowd. It was
something like a first-class funeral. Finally everything was ready,
and at 5 o’clock we went on board, amid much hand-shaking, and
even kissing, after the oriental fashion, and the waving of hats
and handkerchiefs. As we had the French Consul with us, the French
and American flags were hoisted. Soon the tug rope of the little
steamer tightened, our boat moved, we were off, and before long
we had turned the point, entered the Nile proper, and were headed
north-ward and homeward. Our quarters were fairly comfortable. We
had a covering of mats over our heads, and the room under it was
taken up with our cots. There were four of us here, and the rest
were on the steamer that towed us. We made good time. Stopped for
the night at a sandy bank. Dinner was served on the sand, and then
we went to bed in the moonlight.

_Saturday, April 1st._—No sleep! Too novel a position. Off at
sunrise. The Frenchman remarked classic beauty in the cook of the
boat! Stopped for wood at the cataract. Very hot! Off again. Passed
the cataract safely, though the water was very low, and many of the
passages dangerous. We noted several wrecks of boats about us. One
was a ship belonging to Moussalli, who is with us. Had to throw
off the line from the steamer in some places, and row ourselves
through. Struck the rocks many times, hard enough to sink ordinary
boats. Things were thrown into a little confusion by it, but no
leak sprung. Passed the wild gorge “Sebeloga.” Camped at sunset.
Several of the party ill. Took dinner on the bank. Went to bed on
the sand in the open air and the glorious moonlight.

_Monday, April 3d._—Up early; waked Ibrahim, plunged into the river
with Moussalli, to get the sand out of eyes and ears. The sick ones
are very poorly to-day. Stopped at Damer about 2:30 P.M. Had some
difficulty to get wood. Moussalli is ill. Midani, his bookkeeper,
has a high fever. I turn doctor, and nurse the crowd as well as
I can. A gale of wind has been blowing, increasing to a tempest.
Slept out in it all. We have not left Khartoum any too soon for the
health of the crowd.

_Tuesday, April 4th._—Blowing a gale. Start at sunrise. All are
ill to-day except myself. The waves are high, and the spray goes
over us. Arrived at the rocks, but it was blowing so hard that the
captain dared not try to pass them. We tied up at the bank. Tried
the pass once more, and tied up again. Finally, we made another
attempt; had a very exciting time, but got through part way very
well. Sent a boat ahead to pick out the channel. Expected every
moment to strike, and perhaps be wrecked. We did strike at last,
and were nearly capsized, but, thanks to the strength of the boat,
we came out all right. When we were finally clear of the rocks the
men cheered and praised Allah, and we gave them a backshish. A
little further on we went fast aground on a sand bank, and spent
about two hours getting off. At last Berber came into sight, and at
5 P.M. we tied up at the bank, which is now very high, as the river
is many feet lower than when we were here before. Went on shore,
selected a good site for the tents; put one of ours up, and got
into shape for the night.

_Wednesday, April 5th._—Up early, and worked hard in the hot sun.
Put up the other tent. Our tents, together with the Consul’s
and Moussalli’s and the cook’s make quite a little village by
themselves. Made arrangements for camels amid much noise and
discussion and haggling of prices. There have been some wordy
disagreements in camp among our friends. It is finally settled
that we are to start on Friday. The doctor is better, and has good
courage. To-day the Consul’s cook was stung by a scorpion, and
under the doctor’s directions I painted the wound with iodine. The
poor fellow suffered severely for a time. A guard of four soldiers
has been sent to act as sentry for us during the night. They will
probably be sound asleep as soon as we turn in. The river has risen
a few inches to-day, owing probably to heavy rains at the South,
but will doubtless fall again to-morrow.

_Friday, April 7th._—This has been a day of trials. There has
been no end of them! Everything was made ready this morning for
the start, but we could not get away till afternoon, so we paid a
visit in the meantime to Hassan Halifa’s father, the royal old Arab
who treated us so handsomely when we first came here. He kindly
consented to have his photograph taken. After the delay we thought
we should surely get off in good season, or about 3 P.M., but it
was not so foreordained. Difficulties seemed to multiply at every
move. Everything went wrong. Patience was nearly gone. It was 9
o’clock at night before we fairly started! Rode up and down the
line on my camel to see that everything was at last right. There
was a delay among the rear camels. Went back to see what the matter
was. Some of the camels had run away and smashed up their loads,
and others had fallen down, and altogether there were five loads
strewn upon the ground. The camels were a bad lot, and the men were
as bad a lot. Things were getting rather serious. A free fight was
imminent. Moussalli was on the point of returning to Berber and
entering a complaint. The rest of the party, however, had gone on,
and I thought it was better to patch up the loads the best way we
could, go on until we reached the advance party, and then hold a
council. A return to Berber would do but little good, and would
result in great delay. So on we went the best way we could in the
dark, and found the rest at the well. It was 1:30 A.M. when we took
dinner! I put up a tent for the doctor, and the rest of us took a
nap in the open air.

_Saturday, April 8th._—At 3 A.M. Moussalli’s agent and the sheik
of the camel drivers arrived. They had heard of our troubles and
brought a fresh lot of camels. After much loud talking several
changes were made. Some of the camels with their drivers were sent
back to Berber, and others substituted. We have 53 camels now. We
tried to be gay and rise above our troubles. The heat is intense.
There is one well at this point about 50 feet deep, but the water
is bad. Started the caravan at 4 P.M., and went on till 10 o’clock.
Had dinner at 12:30 A.M. Put up the tent for doctor; the rest of us
went to bed with the stars looking down upon us.

_Sunday, April 9th._—This is the holy Sabbath and we would be
glad to rest to-day, but necessity is upon us and we must move on.
On a journey like this we cannot do as we would like, and have on
several such occasions been obliged to keep going when we have
longed for the sacred quiet of the day. I was so tired last night
that an odd thing happened. I was _struck_ by sleep, as one might
be struck by lightning, only the results were not so disastrous. I
had tumbled into my cot, and was conscious of putting my hand out
to draw the sheet over me, but before I had time to do it I was
sound asleep, and awoke in the morning with the intention still
unfulfilled. After a hasty cup of coffee we were off this morning
at 6:30, and marched till 10:30. The sirocco has been blowing all
day, and the heat is something terrible. Worked hard in the hot sun
to get a tent up for our nooning. We are on an immense sandy plain,
the ideal desert, and the heat reflected from the sand burns like a
furnace.

_Monday, April 10th._—We must press on to reach water. Midani is
too ill to sit on his camel, so we have improvised a bed and placed
him on it, and in this way go slowly on. Started at 6:30 A.M. We
are still on a sandy undulating plain which seems endless, and the
march is very wearisome. The Consul and Mourgan have both suffered
from bleeding at the nose this morning. Camped for our nooning at
11:30. Poor Midani suffers exceedingly. We put up the tents, as
the heat is terrible. Started again at 4:30 P.M. From here till
one reaches the vicinity of Souakim the road is considered unsafe.
We met some rather wild-looking parties, who, the guides told us,
were brigands, but we were numerous and well armed, and they kept
a respectful distance from us. Even the camel drivers do not dare
to travel in this region without being armed with swords and spears
and pistols. Met several caravans. Came to some very steep sand
hills. The pass over the highest was so narrow and precipitous
that I thought the camels could not possibly get safely over it,
but they did. Reached the wells of _Aubak_ about 8:30 P.M. Found
many wells and excellent water, but the water is easily riled. Took
a good deep drink. Such a drink is worth a mine of gold on the
desert. There are a number of caravans here.

_Tuesday, April 11th._—The men did not want to leave the well
before the P.M. Had to force them. Almost a revolt. Quite a
little misunderstanding has sprung up between our friends. Left
at 7:30. Traversed a high plain. Fearfully hot. Camped at 11:30.
Were treated to a whirlwind of sand. Tried to amuse ourselves at
revolver practice to pass away the hours of intense mid-day heat.
Started again about 5 P.M. Passed on from plain to plain between
bare, black, rocky mountains. Camped at 10:30 in a sandy spot. Had
dinner at 12:30 A.M. We are all tired, but in pretty good spirits.

_Wednesday, April 12th._—Started at 7:30. Marched till 11:30. Found
a few bare thorn bushes and tried to spread our blankets over them
in such a way as to afford us a little shade till the caravan with
the tents came up. Even the poor little donkey that the guide
rides, and our camels, also, asked to share our scanty shade with
us. The thermometer stands at 111° in the shade. Cooked an egg in
the sand. Started again at 5 P.M. The latter part of the evening
journey I make on foot. The rest of the crowd is generally used
up. At last, Midani is able to go no further, and, on his account,
we are obliged to halt for the night. The camel drivers protest,
saying that the water is all gone, and that we shall suffer before
we reach the next well. We make a personal inspection and find
that there are five skins half full. One of these is given to the
drivers, one to the cooks, and three for our own use are placed at
the foot of my cot for safe keeping. Went to bed at 1:30 A.M.

_Thursday, April 13th._—Up at 4 A.M. Started at 5:45. We have had
a long tramp over plain after plain, on and on to the mountains
and through a high mountain pass till, at length, we have reached
the wells of Arieb. It is very hot. Crowds of camels, cattle and
donkeys are around the principal well, all drinking. The water is
not very good, but we drink it and try to imagine that it is. The
tents are up, and after a good bath we tumble into our cots, glad
of a little rest.

_Friday, April 14th._—Up early, and left at 6:30 A.M. Followed the
wady, which is full of rocks and stunted trees, and then traversed
an immense plateau. We camped for noon in a sandy spot, just before
entering another pass. At 5 P.M. we were off again, and passed
some very picturesque and really wonderful granite formations.
Traversing a fine hard gravel plain, which gave us an extensive
view, we passed the half-way mark, a huge pile of granite boulders.
We then came into a mountain region, said to be infested with
robbers. It is true that here, not very long ago, a caravan was
attacked in the night and robbed, and some of the parties killed.
We had come a long journey, the place was convenient for camping,
and some one proposed that we should spend the night here; but the
guides manifested great fear, and would not give their consent.
They said it was bad enough at the wady Kokreb, but under no
circumstances would they stop this side of the wady. Some of us
were ahead of the caravan, and we took the advice of the guides,
and pushed on for the wady. Soon after arriving and selecting the
spot for our camp, and while waiting for the caravan to come up, we
were visited by a couple of suspicious-looking men, who asked a few
questions, and after looking us well over disappeared in the bush.
The guides said they were spies of the robbers, and advised us to
fire off our guns and revolvers, to let them know that we were well
armed, which we did. In about half an hour the rest of the party
and the caravan came up. They reported having met twelve mounted
men, who acted suspiciously in the dark. Mr. Moussalli called to
them in Arabic, and demanded who they were and what they wanted.
They admitted that they were robbers. They were then told that our
party was all armed, and that if they came near the caravan they
would get into trouble. We formed our camp in a circle, spreading
our baggage around us for a protection as best we could, and
then went to sleep with our hands on our revolvers, trusting for
our safety, now that we had done what we could, in Him who never
slumbers.

_Saturday, April 15._—Examined the wady Kokreb to ascertain whether
there was water to be found here, which I suspected, but which the
guides denied. Found that there was a well a little way up the
wady, which we passed soon after starting. The guides seem to find
it easier to tell a barefaced falsehood than to speak the truth.
For some reason or other they are determined to deny the existence
of water at various points along the route, where we know it is to
be found. Left at 6:30 A.M., and followed the wady, which is quite
full of trees and rather a pleasant part of the journey. Towards
noon we arrived at Kokreb, where there is a well and a station. We
spread the fly of our tent over some old posts for a protection
from the sun. The sheik of the station kindly (for a consideration)
procured us a good drink of milk. Here we met a number of caravans.
There were many pilgrims among them returning from Mecca. One
woman, who was supposed to be irresistible, was sent among us to
beg. We offered her some food, which she indignantly refused.
The well here is shallow, and is emptied as fast as it fills. We
left at 4:20 P.M., passing through a wild, narrow defile in the
mountains. The scenery here is extremely wild and picturesque. We
ascended now very rapidly, and the sight of the mountains in the
purple glow of sunset was magnificent. As night came on it began
to grow intensely cold. We camped at a great height. The cold was
extreme. We got out our tent-flies and crawled under them.

_Sunday, April 16._—This morning we killed a scorpion that was
found under the Consul’s saddlebags. Saw several gazelles. Again
we are obliged to travel much against our wishes. There are trees
along the wadys all the way, now. Met many long caravans carrying
American oil to Berber and Khartoum. Camped at 10:30. At 4:30 we
were obliged to start again. The mountain scenery here is grand!
Toward night we entered a narrow gorge, running North and South,
between two high mountains. Here we had to keep a sharp lookout
in the dark, lest we should be left, like Absalom, hanging from a
tree. These overhanging thorn trees did, in fact, rather mar Mr.
Moussalli’s beauty, but the rest of us dodged and preserved ours.
We found several wells in between these two mountains, and here we
camped for the night. This is also a dangerous locality, on account
of robbers. The nights are very cold in these mountain heights.

_Monday, April 17._—Up early and examined the so-called wells of
Haratree. They consist of places scooped out in the gravel of the
dry bed of the river, and are only from two to five feet deep.
There is also a pond near a large rock, where one may bathe. There
are many aloes in this valley, and doves in great numbers, and in
at least three varieties. On quitting this gorge the rise is very
rapid till a pass is reached at an elevation of 3,000 feet. I am
the only one who is not ill to-day. Camped at 11 o’clock in a large
plain under a huge mimosa tree in the bed of a small river, now
dry. When we started in the afternoon there was a little trouble
with a Hadendoah Arab, who had “appropriated” one of our camels,
but his claim was soon settled, and he was glad to slink out of
sight. Off at 4 P.M., and traveled through quite a park, where
rabbits and gazelles abound. Camped at night at “Durse,” or “The
Mountain of the Molar Tooth.”

_Tuesday, April 18th._—Left at 6:30 A.M., and arrived at the Wells
of Disibil, where we found a rude shelter from the sun. I walked
the whole distance. Saw several gazelles. The wells are in the dry
bed of a river in a mountain valley. Only one is used now, the
other having filled up. After lunch went hunting after gazelles,
and when, later in the afternoon, we at last reached the rest of
the caravan, we found them camped earlier than usual. We are now in
the valley of Sinkaat. We know that we are nearing the sea, for the
night air is very damp, and our clothes are wet through.

_Wednesday, April 19th._—Had a good laugh this morning at the
Consul, who roused us during the night by loudly challenging some
parties who were prowling around the camp. They proved to be a
couple of innocent donkeys. Off as usual at 6:30, and followed the
valley and the river-bed. Camped at 10:30 at the well of _Hambouk_.
The water was not good. Left at 4 P.M. Came into a fine plain full
of green trees, and singing birds, and flocks of goats. Passed the
wells of Otaou (water bad) without stopping. At last we emerged
from the mountains, and came to the spot where we ought to have a
fine view of the sea, but it was dark. We camped finally on a broad
plain, though the drivers protested that we ought to go on beyond;
but they were informed that we intended to stop there, and that was
the end of the controversy. It is damp and warm to-night. Ibrahim,
our dragoman, is ill.

_Thursday, April 20th._—Midani and an Arab started this morning
at an early hour ahead of the caravan for Souakim, to inform our
friends of our arrival, and to prepare a place for us. We started
at 5:30 A.M. The first object to attract our attention was the sea,
the beautiful blue sea! What a thrill of joy that first sight of
the sea sends through one coming from Central Africa! It is a bond
of connection with the outer world. It is the highroad of commerce
and civilization. It is the avenue of hope, and love, and life! As
we approached Souakim we had fine views of the white, shining,
coral city. It was not long before we discovered with our glasses
a steamer lying in the harbor and another coming in. We took off
our hats and hurrahed like school-boys. Soon a delegation of
friends came out to meet us, among whom were M. Marquet’s son and
Mr. Midani’s brother. At last we entered the city. Doctor’s camel
was afraid, and had to be led in. We passed through the bazaars,
and over the causeway, and through the big gate into the city
proper, which is built on an island. The appearance of the town is
quite dazzling, as every portion of it is built of white coral.
We noticed some fine specimens in the walls as we passed. We went
directly to M. Marquet’s new house, not yet finished, where camping
room had been assigned us in the open yard, and here we sat down by
the sea waiting for the caravan to arrive. Finally we retired into
the entry of the unfinished house, where, as soon as our baggage
arrived, we spread our cots, and took up our quarters, and paid
off the camel drivers, who, for a wonder, went away contented.
There has been rather a serious misunderstanding between some of
our friends. It takes considerable self-control to keep quiet and
calm and cool amid the discomforts and annoyances of a journey
like this. Our first and great want was a bath, and this was soon
arranged in one of the upper rooms of the new building. Then we
put on some clean clothes, and felt as if we had been born again.
We made several calls, and finally went, by invitation, to dinner
at M. Marquet’s (brother of the gentleman of the same name at
Khartoum), where we spent a very pleasant evening. A small steamer
coming in to-day ran into our steamer of the Rubattino Line and
broke her mast. There are three steamers now in harbor, an unusual
thing for Souakim. We cannot sail before Saturday....

_Saturday, April 22._—Up and on deck early; friends off to say
farewell; started at 9 A.M.; had breakfast on deck. All our meals
are to be on deck, as it is so warm below. Had a fine view of
the town as we steamed slowly out of the harbor. The channel is
a tortuous and difficult one. Coral reefs abound on every side.
But after a little careful turning and twisting we were out on
the sea—the boundless sea. Oh! what a delight to be at sea again,
and breathe the refreshing salt air, after our experience during
the last few months! We have pleasant companions, and the voyage
promises to be an enjoyable one. At dinner conversation is carried
on, and jokes are cracked in French, English, Greek, Arabic, and
Italian. The captain is a pleasant, jovial, able man, and our
steamer is good and comfortable.

_Tuesday, April 25th._—A number of islands and the mainland on
both sides are in sight. Asia on one side; Africa on the other;
Arabia and Egypt, both full of historical interest. Here, towering
above others, is the peak pointed out as Mt. Sinai. We accept the
statement and fall to musing on the wonderful events that once
occurred in this vicinity. The Gulf is here from 15 to 17 miles
wide. There are great quantities of sea-weed floating about. The
shore on both sides is a desert. We are this evening only 50 miles
from Suez, and we expect to arrive about 4 o’clock in the morning.

_Wednesday, April 26th._—Arrived at Suez at 4 A.M. Cast anchor, and
waited for the Health Officer. Fourteen steamers were lying in the
roadstead, while others were entering and coming out of the canal.
Somewhere about here it was, probably, that the children of Israel
passed through the sea on dry land. The Health Officer did not take
long to give us clean papers, and we steamed slowly into dock. We
sent for a cart to take our baggage up to town, while the Consul
took a boat, then leaving Ibrahim, with Mourgan to assist him to
get the things through the custom-house, we went ashore. We were
immediately surrounded by a most importunate crowd of donkey boys
and men who in their eagerness to secure us as their legitimate
prey fought and pulled and pushed till we were nearly crowded into
the water. Seeing the necessity of immediate action, we struck
right and left with our sticks, till we had cleared a space around
us, then leaping on to the donkeys we had already selected, we
started off on a smart trot for the town; true, the donkeys had
lost their bridles in the muss, but that made no difference. We
arrived at the Suez (Eng.) Hotel with a good appetite for our
breakfast, and some time before the Consul and his party. After
breakfast we took a walk about the town. Returned and read the
papers till dinner. A mule cart with our baggage, has run away,
and smashed up some of our belongings, but we are getting above
caring much for such accidents now. At 5 P.M. we took another walk,
and then went by invitation to a dinner party at the Belgian and
Brazilian consuls. It was an extensive dinner, and the evening, till
a late hour, was passed most pleasantly.

_Thursday, April 27th._—Took the train for Cairo at 8:45. A number
of friends came to see us off. Fine views of the canal and the
desert, and then of the fertile land of Goshen. Took dinner at
Zagazig, where we changed cars and started again for Cairo at 3
P.M. At a station near Cairo Mr. Moussalli’s beautiful children
came to meet their papa, whom they had not seen for over a year.
They reminded me forcibly of my own little ones at home. Soon we
reached Cairo, and were greeted by the familiar faces of the hotel
porters and others. I started off at once to the American Consulate
for our letters, and found 27 waiting for me. What a feast for a
hungry soul! It seemed almost like getting home to get back to this
familiar hotel. Had a call from Dr. Lansing and Dr. Watson, of the
American Mission, who gave us a hearty welcome back after our long
and perilous journey. We truly have great reason to be thankful
for the way in which we have been preserved amid dangers seen and
unseen.

       *       *       *       *       *

  While in Cairo the news was received of the defeat of the army
  sent against the “False Prophet,” and the fall of Senaar, and
  of general anarchy in the Soudan. The insurrection under Arabi
  Pasha was also every day becoming more serious. People were
  already beginning to leave the country. The explorers were
  advised by Gen. Stone and others not to broach the subject of
  the proposed mission to the government in the present crisis.
  They rapidly settled up the affairs of the expedition and
  left the country none too soon for their good. They sailed
  from Alexandria May 10th. They met the English and French
  fleets, called at Malta and Gibraltar on their way and arrived
  in Liverpool May 24th. While in England they consulted Mr.
  Arthington, laid the results of the expedition before him, and
  agreed that they would have to wait for a more settled state
  of the country before the proposed plans for the mission could
  be carried out. They sailed from England June 6th, arriving in
  New York June 17th, having been gone from home nine months.
  The long journey was ended. The objects of the expedition
  had been fully accomplished in the face of many dangers and
  great difficulties. A detailed report, with maps and plans and
  photographs, is in course of preparation.—_Ed._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS

       *       *       *       *       *


FARMING AT FORT BERTHOLD.

BY AGENT KAUFFMAN.

The number of Indian men engaged in doing farm work is constantly
increasing. In issuing wagons to Indians last fall, I required
that each man receiving a wagon should farm at least five acres of
land for himself, or forfeit his wagon. All, with one exception,
complied with this condition. Agency Indians farmed this year 832
acres; they prepared the ground in the spring under the direction
of my farmer in excellent manner, and sowed 146 acres of wheat,
from which I estimate a yield, from two days’ threshing now in
progress, of 2,600 bushels of very good quality. This is the first
effort of my Indians in raising wheat, and they are greatly elated
with their success, and many are already asking for more land for
next spring sowing. This improvement in farming by the Indians is
gratifying to myself, as two years ago an Indian rarely cultivated
to exceed from one-half to three-quarters of an acre; now some have
cultivated this year 20 acres, others from four to twelve, and ask
for more land for next year. Twenty Indian men, heads of families,
have consented to go this fall 22 miles west of the agency, build
houses and remain to farm 133 acres of land which I have had broken
this summer.

These Indians are peaceable and friendly; many would assume the
position of citizens and compare favorably with the average white
man if they could have lands in severalty and the protection of
the law. During May and June last I had flouring gearing put in
position in the agency mill for grinding wheat raised at this
agency last year, and manufactured 44,000 pounds of flour of
good quality; there were also sawn during the year at the agency
saw-mill 20,812 feet of lumber.

       *       *       *       *       *


RELIGIOUS INTEREST AT S’KOKOMISH.

BY REV. MYRON EELLS.

There has been considerable religious interest among the Indians.
The Indians on other reservations have been more interested than
usual, and intercourse with these has caused a similar interest
here. Then the most severe sickness which has visited the
reservation since my residence here came upon us last winter and
awakened serious attention in the minds of many. This additional
interest has caused increased work, so that I now hold prayer
meetings at two logging camps regularly. Some of our young people
are taking hold of the work, and at times conduct meetings with the
Indians during my necessary absence.

New hymns have been made in the Twana and Clallam languages, the
native languages of the Indians. Hitherto we have used hymns in
the Chinook language, which is generally understood by most of
the Indians, yet it is by no means so good a language to convey
religious truth as the native languages.

The average attendance at Sabbath-school at S’kokomish is 47, on
church prayer meetings 30, on other prayer meetings among the
Indians 36, on public worship 67. Families under pastoral care 52.
Total contributions for benevolence $451.05.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL AT LEECH LAKE.

BY REV S. G. WRIGHT.

Twenty-seven children were boarded and clothed about eight months
of the year, and fifteen attended very regularly as day scholars.
The text books used were elementary speller, model reader, first,
second and third readers, mental arithmetic. Several of the most
advanced pupils are also familiar with the four ground principles
of written arithmetic. Nearly all made good progress in their
studies. There is no lack of ability in the Indian child to
comprehend any branch of learning. The only obstacle in his way is
that all his knowledge of books must be acquired through a strange
language. The lessons must be explained all through the second
and third years of his schooling in his own tongue; otherwise he
gets no new ideas from his books, though he may read and spell
and write ever so well. I explain the meaning of the words they
spell, and translate the lessons read in the different readers.
Much religious instruction is given in the school-room and in the
morning and evening worship. I returned to this place a year ago,
after being absent about two years, and was very happy to find the
little company of earnest, devoted Christians whom we left still
faithfully pursuing their work for God. I meet with them every week
on Thursday afternoon for prayer. They are truly the salt of the
earth, burning lights in this great darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


REVIEW OF THE YEAR.

REV. WM. C. POND.

Our fiscal year closed Aug. 31. I will state in the briefest way
the main facts as to our last year’s work. I group them under three
heads: the field, the fruit, the finances.

I. The field. This is larger than ever before in the fact that we
have one-fourth more Chinese in our country to-day than we had
a year ago. And the work—though far from covering the field and
far from being equal to the opportunity—has increased at a per
cent. equal to more than twice that of the increase of Chinese
population. Fifteen schools have been sustained, eleven of them
throughout the entire year. Thirty-one workers are employed, eleven
of them being Chinese. The total number of months of service is
356, exceeding that of last year by 70 and of any year preceding
the last by 110, that is, by more than _nine years_. During the
year no less than 2,567 Chinese were enrolled as pupils, an
increase upon the previous year of 935, or more than 57 per cent.
Let it not be understood that we had this number at any _one_
time; but for longer or shorter periods in the course of the
year, this number have come under the influence of our schools,
and have heard something about a Saviour from sin. The _average_
membership month by month was 728, and the average attendance 401.
But the membership increased steadily through the year. In August
it was 1,022, and the average attendance 459. This represents our
opportunity, our special _field_.

II. The fruits. I am not able yet to state accurately the results
in hopeful conversions, but I feel safe in saying that about 30
have given evidence to our Chinese brethren that they have passed
from death to life. This would make the total number of whom we
have cherished this hope, from the beginning of the mission,
about 355. I dare not say that in all cases this hope has proved
to be well founded. Some have gone back to idolatry and taken to
themselves, I fear, seven devils worse than the one that seemed
to be exorcised. Some seem to have left their first love, though
maintaining still a reputable exterior. Of many we have lost sight
altogether. They are in China, or in the Hawaiian Islands, or on
the frontiers in our own country, or in the Eastern or interior
cities. It is simply impossible, at least with our present working
force, to maintain our hold upon them by correspondence. We leave
them to the care of the Great Shepherd, Who is not compassed with
our infirmities and Who knows His sheep and is known by them. But,
allowing for all these drawbacks, I feel it safe to say that no
evangelizing agency in California with which I am acquainted has
been fraught, on the whole, with larger or better results than our
Chinese mission.

III. The finances. This large increase in the work accomplished
has involved inevitably some increase of expenditure. Our total
resources—on current expense account—have been $10,043.70, of which
$3,623.70 were contributed directly to our work and $6,420 came
through drafts on the treasury in New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM AN INDIAN BOY.

  MY DEAR FRIEND:

  I can tell how I get along. I was working in the shop, and I
  try to work very good, but sometimes I too late go in workshop.
  I am the wheel-wright. I come from Dakota Territory, and I
  have been school at Saint Paul’s school at Yankton Agency,
  and I try to learn how to read English. And so many Indian
  boys school over there, and to many Indian boys are like to
  study, and some boys are don’t like to go to school. And same
  is the Indian, too. They did not work at all, but when they
  want something, then go into the agent’s and ask for food. But
  some Indians are work very hard, like a white people, and they
  did not live in the reservation. I like to work in the field
  much. And few Indians work very hard, and listen the agent’s
  what he says to them; but some Indian won’t—but dancing all the
  time, but eating and sleep, that all they can do. And there is
  another tribe come back from northwest; they came back into
  Yankton Agency in Fort Randall, those Indian whole tribe are
  call Sitting Bull. I think those people are very wild. Sitting
  Bull is a great many children and big tribe, and cannot get
  any food, so the Yankton Indians try to help them, and carry
  some corn or potatoes gave to them. And that time I stay at my
  home. And that time the Hampton boys come back from Virginia
  to this school, and we are all glad to see them. And I came
  from Yankton Agency, and now I stay here at Virginia. I am
  stay here for three years, then I go back my home again. I
  receive a letter from my friend; he says the governor school
  was finished, everything inside or outside. And when I heard
  that the ten boys get from Sitting Bull I am very glad. I think
  those people going to learn how to work. So many of them do not
  know anything at all, I sometimes think those people all the
  time wild and poor; but now I think the Sitting Bull learn how
  to work, and even the other places just the same. When I came
  from Dakota, I saw a great many things, cars, and steam-boat,
  and every wonderful thing. I saw those things, I don’t know
  how to go and stop. I did not see how to make, and I never saw
  the cars before. When I go back to my home I going tell all
  this are. A great many Indian boys are here; we are all try to
  learn how to work the white men way, and sometimes we have a
  prayer-meeting in every Saturday night, and all the Indian boys
  are doing very well. I think the Indian try to do how to work;
  when they know how to work, then they cannot stop. That is all
  I am going to say. We are all well here, and I think you are
  well, too. Some boys has going to work, and those boys going to
  school this afternoon. I thank you very much.

                                Yours respectfully,

                                              DAVID STRICKER.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR. SEPTEMBER, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $468.57.

    Alfred. Mrs. NATHAN DANE, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._, and to const. herself L. M.               $30.00
    Bethel. Second Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Brewer. Cong. Ch., 10, and Sab. Sch., 6.20                16.20
    Calais. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                25.00
    Castine. Rev. A. E. Ives                                   5.00
    Eastport. Central Cong. Sab. Sch., 5; G. A.
      P., 50c.                                                 5.50
    Falmouth. First Cong. Ch.                                 20.00
    Hallowell. M. E. W.                                        1.00
    Litchfield Corners. Cong. Ch.                             10.00
    Machias. Centre St. Ch. and Soc.                           9.34
    Portland. Second Parish Ch.                              129.03
    Union. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Winthrop. SILAS BLANCHARD to const. himself L.
      M.                                                      30.00
    Woolwich. “Thank Offering,” 5; J. C. S., 50c.              5.50
    York. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            7.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $308.57

    LEGACY.

    Hallowell. Estate of Miss Susan Parsons, by
      Justin E. Smith. Exr.                                  160.00
                                                            ———————
                                                            $468.57


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $273.60.

    Atkinson. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              17.00
    Bennington. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Brookline. W. J. R.                                        0.50
    Campton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               16.00
    Colebrook. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              6.63
    Epsom. “A Friend.”                                         5.00
    Hancock. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.00
    Hanover. Dart. College Ch., 89.46; “A Thank
      Offering,” 1.                                           90.46
    Hanover. Rev. S. P. Leeds, _for Chinese M. in
      Cal._                                                   10.00
    Hebron. Rev J. B. Cook and family                          5.00
    Hillsborough Centre. Rev. A. B. P., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           1.00
    Littleton. Cong. Ch.                                       6.96
    Lyme. T. L. Gilbert                                        2.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch., 25.29; Nathan Jewett, 5;
      D. S. Burnham, 5, to const. D. MILTON HEALD
      L. M.; R. M., 1                                         36.29
    Milton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.36
    New Ipswich. Leavitt Lincoln                              20.00
    Peterborough. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              6.40
    Salem. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                  5.00
    Wentworth. Ephraim Cook                                    5.00


  VERMONT, $902.06.

    Bakersfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            9.58
    Brattleborough. “A Friend”                                 1.67
    Burlington. Miss Sarah Parker                              2.00
    Cambridge. M. and G. Safford, 38.52; O. W.
      Reynolds, 5; Mrs. Nancy Howe, 5; S. M.
      Safford, 5; B. R. Holmes, 5; Others, 11.75              70.27
    Cambridge. Mrs. M. Safford, 5; J. K., 1, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                      6.00
    Charlotte. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             43.21
    Chester. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                12.00
    Dummerston. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.32
    East Saint Johnsbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   3.25
    Enosburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             23.00
    Granby and Victory. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     2.00
    Island Pond. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           11.50
    Londonderry. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Ludlow. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Middlebury. Hon. John W. Stewart, 10; A
      Friend, 4; Miss Susan Parker, 2; Rev. C. H.,
      51c.                                                    16.51
    Newbury. Mrs. D. J.                                        1.00
    Newfane. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                3.06
    Putney. Rev. and Mrs. Foster                               5.00
    Saint Albans. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    34.52
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Parsonage Building_                                     20.00
    Springfield. F. V. A. Townsend, to const.
      AURELIA K. TOWNSEND L. M.                               30.00
    Springfield. “Member Cong. Ch.,” _for Avery
      Inst., Charleston S.C._                                 15.00
    West Brattleborough. Cong. Ch. and Soc. to
      const. HIRAM WEATHERHEAD L. M.                          31.05
    West Dover. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             5.63
    West Westminster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 17.40;
      “A Friend,” 15                                          32.40
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             6.10
    Windham. Cong. Sab. Sch., 5.20; “A Friend of
      the Colored Man,” 10                                    15.20
    Windsor. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 75.50; Mrs. John
      Freeman, “thank offering,” 25; G. F. H., 1             101.50
    Woodstock. Frederick Billings                            100.00
                                                           ————————
                                                            $624.77

    LEGACIES

    Royalton. Estate Mrs. Welthia D. Skinner, by
      Geo. M. Dewey                                          200.00
    Wilmington. Estate of Mary Ray, by Israel
      Haynes                                                  77.29
                                                           ————————
                                                            $902.06


  MASSACHUSETTS, $5,826.17.

    Abington. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        50.58
    Andover. South Ch. and Soc.                              100.00
    Attleborough. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                  100.00
    Bernardston. Cong. Soc.                                    2.00
    Boston. REV. C. L. WOODWORTH, 30, to const
      himself L. M.; Mrs. H. H. Hyde, 20; “A
      Friend,” 5                                              55.00
    Boston. Mrs. E. B. Hooker, books _for
      Freedmen’s Library, Macon, Ga._
    Buckland. Dea. S. Trowbridge, 10; C. W.
      Thayer, 5; “A Friend.” 5                                20.00
    Braintree. First Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), to
      const. REV. THOMAS A. EMERSON L. M.                      5.00
    Braintree. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       21.46
    Brimfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              8.00
    Brockton. Mrs. Mary E. Perkins                             5.00
    Cambridge. Mrs. J. D. S.                                   1.00
    Campello. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             100.00
    Centreville. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               5.00
    Charlton. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (ad’l), to const.
      H. W. WAKEFIELD L. M.                                   20.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._                         50.00
    Chelsea. T. E. G.                                          1.00
    Concord. Trinity Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       28.85
    Dorchester. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 848.55;
      and Sab. Sch., 51.85                                   900.70
    Dunstable. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             15.00
    Duxbury. Mrs. R. R. Holmes                                 2.00
    East Bridgewater. Union Ch. and Soc.                       6.89
    East Charlemont. Cong. Ch.                                23.82
    Everett. Mrs. C. K. Farrington                             2.00
    Falmouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Fall River. Central Ch.                                   10.25
    Fitchburgh. Rollstone Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 100.00
    Foxborough. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                   30.02
    Grafton. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         62.13
    Granville Corners. Mr. and Mrs. C. Holcomb                10.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              49.56
    Greenfield. Miss E. F. Osgood’s S. S. Class,
      _for Ind. Dept., Atlanta U._                            10.00
    Hatchville. V. N. H.                                       1.00
    Hatfield. Rev. R. M. Woods, Trustee                       25.00
    Haverhill. North Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      200.00
    Holland. “Friends”                                         5.00
    Hyde Park. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             10.00
    Hyde Park. Mrs. L. S. Sanderson, _for Chinese
      M., Cal._                                                5.00
    Jamaica Plain. R. W. Wood, M.D.                          100.00
    Lancaster. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       25.33
    Lawrence. E. F. E.                                         0.50
    Littleton. “A Friend”                                     20.00
    Lowell. Juvenile Dept. of High St. Sab. Sch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                10.00
    Malden. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          53.98
    Malden. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      5.00
    Middleborough. Central Ch. and Soc., 53.63;
      First Cong. Ch., 12.67                                  66.30
    Millbury. Tyler Waters                                     5.00
    Miller’s Falls. The Langdon Mitre Box Co., one
      new Langdon mitre box, with saw and joiner
      gauge, _for Atlanta U._
    North Amherst. North Ch. and Soc., to const.
      MRS. S. A. LAMB and MISS PRISCILLA COOLEY L.
      Ms.                                                     60.00
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                    7.52
    Northborough. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.80
    North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      100; Union Ch. and Soc., 75                            175.00
    North Chelmsford. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.               42.00
    Northfield. Miss. M. L. H.                                 0.50
    Northampton. A. L. Williston, 500; Edwards
      Church, 54.34; Dea. Jerry Clark, 10                    564.34
    North Weymouth. Pilgrim Ch. and Soc.                      17.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           5.50
    Newton. Eliot Ch. and Soc.                               185.00
    Newton Centre. “L. R. T.,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Phillipston. Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bundle of C.
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          25.00
    Revere. Collected by Mrs. Steele _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._, and to const. MISS KATE B.
      DAVIS, MISS LIZZIE ELKINS, DANIEL DAVIS and
      REV. JOSEPH E. SMITH L. Ms.                            120.00
    Rockland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              83.47
    Roxbury. Immanuel Ch. and Soc.                             3.00
    Sandwich. Miss H. H. N., 1; “A Friend” 1                   2.00
    Saundersville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.00
    Shelburne Falls. E. Maynard                                5.00
    Somerville Falls. Franklin St. Cong. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    50.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          8.17
    Southbridge. “A Friend,” _for Parsonage,
      Talladega C._, and to const. EDWIN S. SWIFT,
      SAMUEL L. MORSE and EZRA B. WELD L. M’s.               100.00
    South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    30.00
    Southville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             8.00
    South Weymouth. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc., 51
      (16 of which from Ladies’ Mission Soc.), to
      const. FRANK BLANCHARD and HORACE SPEAR L. Ms.;
      Union Ch. and Soc., 50, to const. MRS.
      JOSIAH REED L. M.                                      101.00
    Springfield. “H. M.,” 500; A. C. Hunt. 10;
      Mrs. Edward Clarke. 5                                  515.00
    Springfield. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              1.00
    Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        50.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            75.00
    Taunton. Winslow Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       44.09
    Topsfield. Charles Herrick                                20.00
    Upton. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           48.26
    Upton. Cong. Sab. Sch. (ad’l.), _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           5.00
    Warren. Mrs. Joseph Randall (5 of which _for
      Chinese M., Cal_)                                        6.00
    Webster. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 12; G. W. F., 1.             13.00
    Wellfleet. First Ch. and Soc.                             40.00
    Wenham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                 5.00
    Whately. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               15.39
    West Barnstable. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           3.75
    West Boxford. First Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Macon, Ga._                                         9.07
    West Boylston. Polly W. Ames, 3; Geo. W. Ames,
      3                                                        6.00
    West Brookfield. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                 35.00
    Westfield. Mrs. C. W. Fowler                               2.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              18.00
    West Medford. D. H. B.                                     0.50
    Westport. Pacific Union Sab. Sch.                          1.93
    Winchendon. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                         32.00
    Worcester. Union Ch. and Soc., 179.25; Hiram
      Smith and Family, 30; “A Friend,” 1                    210.25
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,174.91

    LEGACIES.

    Boston. Estate of Rev. Dr. H. B. Hooker, by A.
      W. Tufts.                                              200.00
    Woburn. Estate of Dea. Thomas Richardson, by
      L. G. Richardson, Agt.                                 451.26
                                                           ————————
                                                          $5,826.17


  RHODE ISLAND, $1,423.21.

    Bristol. Mrs. M. De W. Rogers, 250; Miss. C.
      De Wolf, 250; “A Friend,” 2                            502.00
    Central Falls. Cong. Ch.                                  89.50
    Providence. Central Cong. Ch., 800; North
      Cong. Ch., 10; “A Friend in Camp St.,” 10.             820.00
    Westerly. Pawcatuck Cong. Ch.                             11.71


  CONNECTICUT, $4,779.21.

    Birmingham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Bridgeport. D. H. Terry, _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               25.00
    Bristol. G. L. Goodrich (10 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                         20.00
    Brooklyn. First Trin. Ch., 29.50; M. W. C., 50c           30.00
    Canaan. First Cong. Ch.                                    2.92
    Cheshire. “A Friend,” 20; Cong. Ch., 14.38                34.38
    Chester. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. HIRAM CLARK
      L. M.                                                   40.00
    Clinton. Geo. W. Hull, _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                              100.00
    Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and Soc.,
      to const. FREDERICK W. FRANKLIN, MISS ALICE
      G. PATTEN and MISS ELIZABETH DARLING L. Ms.             90.00
    East Haddam. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     64.90
    East Hartford. First Ch.                                  20.00
    East Windsor Hill. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.               30.00
    Falls Village. Cong. Ch.                                   2.80
    Gilead. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas L. Brown                       5.00
    Green’s Farms. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         60.50
    Griswold. First Cong. Ch.                                 35.52
    Groton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   12.00
    Guilford. First. Cong. Ch., 22; Third Cong.
      Ch., 20                                                 42.00
    Haddam. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Hartford. “A Friend”                                       5.00
    Hebron. “An Old Friend”                                    5.00
    Kensington. Edward Cowles                                  5.00
    Mansfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       9.28
    Meriden. Edmund Tuttle, to const. LOTTIE M.
      LUCAS L. M.                                             30.00
    Meriden. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                           25.00
    New Britain. First Church of Christ                      210.64
    Nepaug. “A Friend.”                                        5.00
    New Haven. “A Friend,” _for Land, Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                           50.00
    New Haven. “A Friend,” 5; “R. E. R.” 5; “A
      Friend in Central Ch.,” 3                               13.00
    New Haven. George Watkinson, 10 cases of
      rubbers, _for Talladega, Ala._
    New London. First Ch. of Christ (of which 25
      _for Tillotson C. and N. Inst. and 25 for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                    83.98
    Newington. Cong. Ch.                                      27.64
    Norfolk. Rev. John F. Gleason                             50.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                      35.00
    North Stonington. Dudley R. Wheeler                       10.00
    Norwich. “A Friend,” (1,000 of which _for
      Land, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._)                    1,500.00
    Norwich. Broadway Cong. Ch., 200; First Cong.
      Ch., 90                                                290.00
    Oxford. Cong. Ch.                                         26.00
    Pequabuck. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Plantsville. Henry D. Smith, _for Atlanta U._            100.00
    Plantsville. Henry D. Smith, _for Land,
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                              50.00
    Putnam. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Indian
      Student Aid, Hampton N. and A. Inst._                   30.00
    Preston City. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          30.00
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch.                              100.25
    Rockville. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     17.50
    Saybrook. Cong. Ch.                                       13.59
    Seymour. “A few Friends,” by Rev. F. S. Root,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                14.25
    South Killingly. Cong. Ch.                                 7.00
    Terryville. Cong. Ch., to const. LAURA H.
      HARE, JULIA E. HEMINGWAY, HATTIE T. COOK,
      HATTIE L. ELLS, ALICE M. HOTCHKISS and
      ROLLIN J. PLUMB L. Ms.                                 274.17
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      31.45
    Torrington. L. Wetmore, 100; Third Cong. Ch.,
      20.27                                                  120.27
    Vernon Center. Cong. Ch. (10 _of which for
      Fisk U_)                                                36.56
    Voluntown and Sterling. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.           16.00
    Washington. “Z” _for Indian M._                            2.00
    Watertown. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             56.00
    Waterbury. C. D. Kingsbury, _for Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                           10.00
    Weatogue. “A Friend,”                                      2.00
    Westbrook. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Westford. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    West Hartford. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    West Haven. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            23.38
    Wethersfield. First Ch. of Christ                         57.23
    Windham. Cong. Ch.                                         9.00
    Windsor. Cong. Ch., 135, and Sab. Sch., 27
      (_of which 87 for John Brown Steamer_)                 162.00
    Windsor. Mrs. Mary E. Pierson, _for Student
      Aid, Hampton N. and A. Inst._                           70.00
    Windsor Locks. Cong. Sab. Sch., 50; Geo. P.
      Clark, 5; Miss C. B., 1; E. A. Holt, 5, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     61.00
    —— “A Friend”                                            200.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             20.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,579.21

    LEGACY.

    New London. Trust Estate of H. P. Haven, _for
      Land, Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                       200.00
                                                           ————————
                                                          $4,779.21


  NEW YORK, $1,093.12.

    Albany. C. A. Beach                                       25.00
    Albany. Nelson Lyon, _for Talladega C._                    5.00
    Amsterdam. C. Bartlett                                    10.00
    Beaver Brook. Samuel West                                  2.00
    Black Creek. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
    Brooklyn. John Erhardt                                     5.00
    Cambria. Soc. of Willing Workers, _for Emerson
      Inst., Mobile, Ala._                                    10.00
    Champion. Cong. Ch. and S. S., Bundle of Books.
    Chenango Forks. Cong. Ch., 5.90; Rev. E. B.
      Turner and Wife, 5.                                     10.90
    Dansville. Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Learned, _for
      John Brown Steamer_                                     10.00
    Dansville. Mrs. D. W. N.                                   0.50
    East Wilson. H. Halsey, 20; C. M. Clark, 3                23.00
    Elmira. Miss C. Thurston                                   5.00
    Franklin. Sab. Sch. Concert Coll.                          6.13
    Harlem. Cong. Ch.                                         26.27
    Homer. Mrs. E. B. Dean (2 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                          7.00
    Jamestown. Rev. W. D. Henry                               10.00
    Lebanon. Thomas Hitchcock, Marvin Day and
      Alfred Seymour, 5 ea.; J. A. H., J. F. and
      J. H. W., 1 ea.; Coll., 2; M. Day, T.
      Hitchcock and Alfred Seymour, 10, to const.
      S. W. SEYMOUR L. M.                                     30.00
    Livonia. Mrs. William Calvert                              5.00
    Mexico. Geo. G. French, 25; Dea. S. Smith, 2;
      Mrs. M. F. Eddy, 2; Miss C. W., 1; A. W., 1             31.00
    New York. Z. Stiles Ely, 250; “X. Y. Z.,” 100;
      Dr. A. S. Ball, 5                                      355.00
    New York. C. R. Agnew, M.D., _for Memorial
      Scholarship, Talladega C._                             100.00
    New York. A. S Barnes, _for Land, Tillotson C.
      and N. Inst._                                          100.00
    New York. “A Friend,” _for Hampton N. and A.
      Inst._                                                 100.00
    New York. S. T. Gordon, _for Chinese M. in
      Cal._                                                   25.00
    Nunda. “A Friend,” (5 of which _for Chinese M.
      in Cal._)                                               15.00
    Onondaga Valley. A. L. G.                                  1.00
    Owasco. A. S.                                              1.00
    Portland. J. S. Coon and wife, 20; Mrs. C. R.,
      1                                                       21.00
    Reed’s Corners. Cong. Ch.                                 12.00
    Sag Harbor. G. B. B.                                       1.00
    Schenectady. Evang. Cong. Ch., _for Talladega
      C._                                                     20.00
    Sherburne. F. L. Rexford, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Silver Creek. Mrs. S. Howe, 10: W. Chapin, 5              15.00
    Smyrna. First. Cong. Ch., Mission School                  10.00
    Tarrytown. S. M. MINASIAN, to const. himself
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Union Valley. Wm. C. Angel                                10.00
    Utica. Mrs. Sarah H. Mudge                                10.00
    Verona. Presb. Ch.                                        20.00
    West Groton. Cong. Ch.                                    12.32
    West Groton. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           5.00


  NEW JERSEY, $180.05.

    Chester. First Ch. and Sab. Sch.                          25.71
    Chester. “A Friend of Missions”                           25.00
    Jersey City. Mrs. Henry O. Ames                            2.00
    Manchester. G. P., _for John Brown Steamer_                1.00
    Newark. Belleville Av. Cong. Ch., 59.84; M. F.
      P., 50c.                                                60.34
    Newark. Belleville Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., 25; “A
      Friend,” 1, _for John Brown Steamer_                    26.00
    Parsippany. Mrs. Jane Ford                                10.00
    Paterson. P. Van Houten                                    5.00
    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        25.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $1,283.49.

    Allegheny City. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                        12.75
    Cambridgeborough. Ladies’ Miss. Soc. of Cong.
      Ch.                                                      5.00
    Canton. H. Sheldon                                        10.00
    Coultersville. A. G.                                       0.50
    East Smithfield. Miss Polly M. Tracy, 14; Rev.
      C. H. Phelps, 5                                         19.00
    Guy’s Mills. Randolph Ch. 11.66; Children’s
      Miss’y Soc., of Randolph Cong. Ch., 15.                 26.66
    Philadelphia. Mrs. S. P. Fairbanks                         2.00
    Riceville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.50
                                                           ————————
                                                             $77.41

    LEGACY.

    Avery Estate. Sale of Land in Iowa                     1,206.08
                                                           ————————
                                                          $1,283.49


  OHIO, $501.53.

    Bellevue. Cong. Ch., 11.50, and Sab. Sch., 4              15.50
    Berlin Heights. Cong. Ch.                                  6.76
    Brownhelm. O. H. Perry                                    10.00
    Claridon. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Cleveland. Euclid Av. Cong. Sab. Sch., 20;
      John Jay Low, 10; Individuals, 6, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          36.00
    Four Corners. Cong. Ch.                                    7.75
    Gomer. Welsh Cong. Ch.                                    51.38
    Greensburgh. Mrs. H. B Harrington, _for Indian
      M._                                                      5.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Ch.                                     25.50
    Lindsville. D. H., _for Theo. Dept., Talladega
      C._                                                      1.00
    Mantua. Cong. Ch.                                          8.00
    Medina. C. King                                            5.00
    Middlefield. Mrs. Lois S. Buel                             5.00
    Mount Vernon. James Martin, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Mount Vernon. J. W. F. Singer                              5.00
    Newark. Plymouth Cong. Ch.                                 8.00
    North Kingsville. Rev. E. J. Comings                      10.00
    North Ridgefield. Cong. Ch.                                3.40
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          20.00
    Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 61.89; “A Friend,” 5            66.89
    Salem. David A. Allen, _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               25.00
    Steuben. Levi Platt                                        2.00
    Twinsburgh. L. W. and R. F. Green, 5; J. R.
      Parmelee, 2.                                             7.00
    Unionville. Mrs. H. B. Fraser, _for Chinese M.
      in Cal._                                                25.00
    Wadsworth. Cong. Sab. Sch., 2.65; “Busy Bees,”
      1.17, _for John Brown Steamer_                           3.82
    Willoughby. Miss Mary P. Hastings                         10.00
    Windham. First Cong. Ch.                                  26.08
    York. Cong. Ch., 23.50; Lafayette Cong. Ch.,
      7.50, to const. Dea. REUBEN GARDNER L. M.               31.00
    Youngstown. “A Congregationalist”                          2.50
    Zanesville. Mrs. M. A. Dunlap, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 2.00
    —— “A Friend”                                             40.00
                                                             ——————
                                                            $489.58

    LEGACY.

    Cleveland. Estate of Brewster Pelton                      11.95
                                                             ——————
                                                            $501.53

  ILLINOIS, $498.75.

    Bowensburgh. Edward D. Weage                               5.00
    Brimfield. Cong. Ch.                                      17.00
    Buda. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of Sundries, Val., $61.
    Byron. Mrs. T. H. Read                                     5.00
    Chenoa. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                                3.70
    Chicago. Lincoln Park Cong. Ch.                           23.90
    Chicago. “H. E. De L.,” _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Clifton. Cong. Ch.                                         3.00
    Collinsville. J. F. Wadsworth                             10.00
    Danvers. Cong. Ch.                                        16.50
    Earlville. Charlie E. and L. Parker Murray,
      _for Indian M._                                          2.00
    Evanston. First Cong. Ch.                                 45.01
    Fairview. Cong. Ch.                                        0.60
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., 5; Infant Class,
      1. _for John Brown Steamer_                              6.00
    Gridley. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                              17.00
    Hennepin. Cong. Ch.                                        4.25
    Homer. Cong. Ch., _for John Brown Steamer_                 6.00
    Hutsonville. C. V. Newton                                 10.00
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                        31.34
    La Prairie Centre. John Crawford, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    La Salle. Cong. Ch.                                       18.00
    Maple Park. J. I. Snow                                     5.00
    Mendon. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   26.00
    Oak Park. Mr. Packard’s Sab. Sch. Class, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              12.00
    Paxton. “A Friend”                                        30.00
    Peru. First Cong. Ch.                                     11.36
    Port Byron. Mission Circle                                 6.00
    Princeton. Mrs. Polly B. Corss. 15; Mrs.
      Amelia R. Clapp, 10; Mrs. C. C., 1                      26.00
    Roscoe. Mrs. A. A. Tuttle                                  2.50
    Sandwich. E. G. Coe                                        5.00
    Shabbona. Cong. Ch. (30 of which to const.
      REV. SAMUEL SHEPARD L. M.)                              73.29
    Sycamore. Cong. Cab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Victoria. Cong. Ch.                                        3.25
    Waukegan. Cong. Ch.                                       15.05
    Wauponsie. Ladies’ Soc. of Cong. Ch., 14, and
      Bbl. of C. _for Mobile, Ala._                           14.00
    Wythe. Cong. Ch.                                           5.00


  MICHIGAN, $598.34.

    Almont. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                26.72
    Ann Arbor. First Cong. Ch.                                21.80
    Benzonia. Amasa Waters, to const. MISS GRACIE
      H. GRIDLEY L. M.                                        30.00
    Bradley. First Cong. Ch.                                   3.22
    Calumet. “A Friend,” 100; Miss Lucy Dobbie,
      10; Mrs. Margaret Dobbie, 6, _for Theo.
      Dept., Talladega C._                                   116.00
    Canandaigua. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Clinton. Cong. Ch.                                         4.90
    Clio. Cong. Ch.                                            5.50
    Grand Rapids. South Cong. Ch.                              6.81
    Grand Rapids. E. G. Furness (1 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                     5.00
    Grass Lake. Cong. Ch.                                     14.00
    Hersey. Cong. Ch.                                          5.00
    Hillsdale. John W. Ford                                    2.00
    Homestead. Morris Case                                     5.00
    Hopkins. Second Cong. Ch., 8.75; First Cong.
      Ch. 2.39                                                11.14
    Jackson. First Cong. Ch.                                 300.00
    Ludington. Cong. Ch., 10; H. B. B., 1.                    11.00
    Morenci. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Saint Johns. A. J. B.                                      1.00
    Sheridan. Cong. Ch.                                        2.75
    Wayne. Cong. Ch.                                          11.50


  IOWA, $176.02.

    Alden. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Clear Lake. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00
    Clinton. C. B.                                             1.00
    Denmark. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  25.00
    Des Moines. Plymouth Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          15.00
    De Witt. First Cong. Ch.                                  40.66
    Exira. Rev. Lyman Bush                                    10.00
    New Hampton. Ladies of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 5.50
    Quasqueton. W. S. Potwire, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Red Oak. Cong. Ch., 13.03; Rev. J. A., 50c.               13.53
    Waterloo. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., 10; Rev. Moses K. Cross, 5                         15.00
    Winterset. Mrs. S. J. Dinsmore, 5; Mrs. H. F.
      Parlin, 2                                                7.00
    Winthrop. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 3.33


  WISCONSIN, $503.19.

    Appleton. Cong. Ch.                                       72.90
    Arena. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                                 2.16
    Beloit. “O. W. H.”                                         5.00
    Brandon. First Cong. Ch.                                  17.20
    Chippewa Falls. J. E. Lee                                  1.60
    Delavan. Cong. Ch.                                        35.00
    East Troy. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Elkhorn. Mrs. D. L. F.                                     1.00
    Emerald Grove. Mrs. O. F. Curtiss, _for
      Chinese M. in Cal._                                      5.00
    Fox Lake. First Cong. Ch.                                  4.33
    Geneva. E. S. Warner                                      10.00
    Hartford. Cong. Ch.                                       12.50
    Ironton. Cong. Ch.                                         5.00
    Madison. First Cong. Ch., to const. Mrs. R. R.
      SMITH, Mrs. M. A. MUNNS and Mrs. BYRON PAINE
      L. Ms.                                                 100.00
    Madison. Primary Sab. Sch. for “Ted’s”
      _temperance work, Atlanta, Ga._                          5.00
    Mondovi. Cong. Ch.                                         3.26
    Muscoda. Pleasant Hill Ch.                                 2.27
    Mukwanago. Cong. Ch.                                       3.50
    Pewaukee. Cong. Ch.                                        4.00
    Racine. Presb. Ch., 40.42; First Cong. Ch., 30
      to const. JOHN LANE VAN ORNUM, L. M.                    70.42
    Rio. Cong. Ch.                                             5.25
    Ripon. Cong. Ch.                                         100.00
    River Falls. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                           4.00
    Salem. Munson & Bailey                                     6.00
    Shullsburgh. Cong. Sab. Sch.                               4.10
    Stoughton. Miss A. B. S.                                   0.50
    Wauwatosa. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Talladega, Ala._                             9.75
    Wyocena. Cong. Ch.                                         3.75


  MISSOURI, $98.50.

    North Springfield. First Cong. Ch. (60 of
      which from Chas E. Harwood, to const. ISABEL
      HOWE HARWOOD and AURELIA L. HARWOOD L. Ms)              98.50


  MINNESOTA, $159.62.

    Clear Water. Cong. Ch.                                     3.07
    Freeborn. Cong. Ch.                                        1.45
    High Forest. Cong. Ch.                                     5.00
    Lake City. J. P.                                           1.00
    Medford. Cary Memorial Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           8.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 16.92; Second Cong.
      Ch. 4.                                                  20.92
    Minneapolis. Pilgrim Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        45.00
    Minneapolis. E. D. First Cong. Ch.                         5.43
    Sauk Rapids. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00
    Sleepy Eye. Cong. Ch.                                      5.65
    South Minneapolis. Mrs. A. V. S. F.                        9.10
    Stewartville. Cong. Ch.                                    2.00
    Winona. Cong. Ch., to const. W. P. LAIRD L. M.            50.00


  KANSAS, $64.25.

    Bavaria. Dea. A. M.                                         .50
    Brookville. Rev. S. G. Wright, 4; Mrs. E. E.
      S., 50c.                                                 4.50
    Kinsley. Cong. Ch.                                         2.00
    Lawrence. Plymouth Cong. Ch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Manhattan. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          19.00
    Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                                      7.00
    Osawatomie. Mrs. Emma F., and Sarah F.
      Remington, 1 each; Rev. S. L., C. S., Addie
      and Grace Adair, 1 each, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 6.00
    Ottawa. Mrs. Lucy B. Perry                                10.00
    Wabaunsee. First Church                                    5.25


  NEBRASKA, $80.10.

    Camp Creek. Cong. Ch.                                      4.00
    Crete. Cong. Ch.                                          10.35
    Fairmont. Cong. Ch.                                       43.00
    Harvard. Cong. Ch.                                         9.50
    Steele City. Cong. Ch.                                     5.25
    Sutton. Cong. Ch.                                          3.00
    West Point. Rev. and Mrs. James Oakey                      5.00


  COLORADO, $9.50.

    Colorado Springs. Cong. Ch.                                9.50


  CALIFORNIA, $1,368.30.

    Santa Barbara. Mrs. Mary B. Van Winkle                     5.00
    San Francisco. Receipts of the California
      Chinese Mission                                      1,362.30
    Covello. Rev. W. E. R.                                     1.00


  WASHINGTON TER., $10.

    Cheney. Rev. Cushing Eells                                10.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $25.00.

    Washington. Gen. E. Whittlesey                            25.00


  DELAWARE, $1.00.

    Wilmington. Mrs. N. T. J.                                  1.00


  MARYLAND, $100.00.

    Baltimore. “A Friend”                                    100.00


  VIRGINIA, $15.00.

    Herndon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                15.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $15.00.

    McLeansville. Cong. Ch.                                    5.00
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00


  GEORGIA, $56.50.

    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Macon. Cong. Ch., 5; Rent, 1.50                            6.50
    Savannah. Rent                                            20.00


  ALABAMA, $69.05.

    Mobile. Stone St. Bap. Ch., 10.50; Hon.
      Gustavus Horton, 10; J. K. Randall, 5; W.
      Wing, 1.20; D. F., 1; F. T., 50c.; A Pupil,
      5c., _for rebuilding Emerson Inst._                     28.25
    Mobile. Cong. Ch.                                          2.00
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     30.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch. (1.50 _of which for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                          8.80


  INCOMES, $3,241.66.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                             2,370.00
    Le Moyne Fund, _for Le Moyne Sch., Memphis,
      Tenn._                                                 520.00
    Dike Fund, _for Straight U._                              50.00
    Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                           46.88
    De Forest Fund, _for President’s Chair_,
      77.62; Scholarship Fund, 37.50; Luke
      Memorial Scholarship Fund, 4.48; Yale
      Library Fund, 2.06, _for Talladega C._                 121.66
    Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                           23.75
    Theological Fund, _for Howard U._                         31.51
    Scholarship Fund, _for Straight U._                       27.86
    General Endowment Fund                                    50.00


  SANDWICH ISLANDS, $250.00.

    Kohala, Hawaii. “A Friend”                               250.00


  AFRICA, $10.00.

    Mendi Mission. Rev. J. M. Hall, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
                                                          —————————
        Total for September                              $24,080.79
        Total from Oct. 1 to Sept. 30                    297,584.45
                                                         ==========




    RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E.
      Palache, Treas., from June 16 to Sept. 19,
      1882.
    FROM AUXILIARY MISSIONS: Marysville, Chinese
      Monthly Offerings, 23.05; Eleven Annual
      Members, 22; “A Friend,” 50c.—Petaluma,
      Chinese Monthlies, 2.70.—Sacramento, Chinese
      Monthlies, 21; Twenty-three Annual Members,
      46; Chinese Pupils, 25, to const. their
      teacher, Mrs. S. E. CARRINGTON, L. M.—Santa
      Barbara, Chinese Monthlies, 20; Chinese
      Annual Members, 4; Mrs. Bates, 4; Mrs.
      Jennings, 1.—Santa Cruz, Chinese Monthlies,
      10.50; Thirteen Annual Members,
      26.—Stockton, Chinese Monthlies, 9; Annual
      Meeting coll, 4; Ten Annual Members, 20.               238.75
    FROM CHURCHES: Benicia. Cong. Ch.,
      4.65.—Berkeley, Cong. Ch., 11.45.—Ferndale,
      Rev. P. Coombe, 5.—Oakland, First Cong. Ch.,
      13.95; Four Annual Members, 8; Sixteen
      Chinese Members, 32; Plymouth Av. Ch., coll.
      (in part), 20; Annual Member, 2.—Rio Vista
      Cong. Ch., Mrs. Gardner, 1.50; Chinese,
      1.—Riverside. Cong. Ch., 7.—San Francisco,
      Cong. Ch., 106.50; Plymouth Ch., Annual
      Member, 2.—Bethany Ch., Seventy-seven Annual
      Members, 154; Chinese Offerings, 25, to
      const. Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH L. M.;
      Americans, 34.50 to const. Dea. JOHN A.
      SNOOK L. M.—San Jose, Cong. Ch., 5; Suison,
      Cong. Ch. 4.                                           437.55
    FROM INDIVIDUAL DONORS: Parrott & Co., 100;
      Taber, Harker & Co., 25; Williams, Dimond &
      Co., 25; Macondray & Co., 25; C. Adolph Low
      & Co., 25; M. C. Hawley & Co., 25; E. Ransom
      & Co., 25; Rogers, Meyer & Co., 25; Hon. F.
      F. Low, 25; W. T. Coleman, 25; J. J. Felt,
      25; Cal. Fum. Mfg. Co., 25; “Friend,” 25; O.
      W. Merriam, 20; John F. Merrill, 20; E. W.
      Playter, 10; I. W. Knox, 10.                           460.00
    FROM EASTERN HELPERS: Bangor, Me., “Almost
      Home.” 25.—Amherst, Mass., Mrs. Rhoda A.
      Lester, 100.—New York, N.Y., A. S. Barnes,
      100.—Grinnell, Iowa. Prof. F. B. Brewer, 1.            226.00
                                                             ——————
        Total                                              $1362.30
                                                           ========


  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    New York. Note of Gen. Clinton B. Fisk, _for
      Scholarship, Fisk U._                                  500.00


  FOR ARTHINGTON MISSION.

    Income Fund                                              550.00
      Previously acknowledged from Oct. 1 to Aug.
      31                                                   4,622.92
                                                           ————————
        Total                                              5,172.92
                                                           ========

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.
                                          56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

INCORPORATED JANUARY 30, 1849.


ART. I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations, and diffuse a
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures in our own and other countries
which are destitute of them, or which present open and urgent
fields of effort.

ART. III. Any person of evangelical sentiments,[A] who professes
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not a slaveholder, or in the
practice of other immoralities, and who contributes to the funds,
may become a member of the Society; and, by the payment of thirty
dollars, a life member; provided that children and others who have
not professed their faith may be constituted life members without
the privilege of voting.

ART. IV. This Society shall meet annually, in the month of
September, October or November, for the election of officers and
the transaction of other business, at such time and place as shall
be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. V. The annual meeting shall be constituted of the regular
officers and members of the Society at the time of such meeting,
and of delegates from churches, local missionary societies,
and other co-operating bodies, each body being entitled to one
representative.

ART. VI. The officers of the Society shall be a President,
Vice-Presidents, a Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretaries,
Treasurer, two Auditors and an Executive Committee of not less than
twelve, of which the Corresponding Secretaries shall be advisory
and the Treasurer ex-officio members.

ART. VII. To the Executive Committee shall belong the collecting
and disbursing of funds; the appointing, counselling, sustaining
and dismissing (for just and sufficient reasons) missionaries and
agents; the selection of missionary fields; and, in general, the
transaction of all such business as usually appertains to the
executive committees of missionary and other benevolent societies;
the Committee to exercise no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
missionaries; and its doings to be subject always to the revision
of the annual meeting, which shall, by a reference mutually
chosen, always entertain the complaints of any aggrieved agent or
missionary; and the decision of such reference shall be final.

The Executive Committee shall have authority to fill all vacancies
occurring among the officers between the regular annual meetings;
to apply, if they see fit, to any State Legislature for acts of
incorporation; to fix the compensation, where any is given, of all
officers, agents, missionaries, or others in the employment of the
Society; to make provision, if any, for disabled missionaries, and
for the widows and children of such as are deceased; and to call,
in all parts of the country, at their discretion, special and
general conventions of the friends of missions, with a view to the
diffusion of the missionary spirit, and the general and vigorous
promotion of the missionary work.

Five members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.

ART. VIII. This society, in collecting funds, in appointing
officers, agents and missionaries, and in selecting fields
of labor, and conducting the missionary work, will endeavor
particularly to discountenance slavery, by refusing to receive the
known fruits of unrequited labor, or to welcome to its employment
those who hold their fellow-beings as slaves.

ART. IX. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to
the principles of this Society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. X. No amendment shall be made to this Constitution without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present at a regular
annual meeting; nor unless the proposed amendment has been
submitted to a previous meeting, or to the Executive Committee in
season to be published by them (as it shall be their duty to do, if
so submitted) in the regular official notifications of the meeting.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] By evangelical sentiments, we understand, among others, a
belief in the guilty and lost condition of all men without a
Saviour; the Supreme Deity, Incarnation and Atoning Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world; the necessity
of regeneration by the Holy Spirit, repentance, faith and holy
obedience in order to salvation; the immortality of the soul; and
the retributions of the judgment in the eternal punishment of the
wicked, and salvation of the righteous.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION.


ARTICLE I. This Society shall be called “THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATION.”

ART. II. The object of this Association shall be to conduct
Christian missionary and educational operations.

ART. III. Members may be constituted for life by the payment of
fifty dollars into the treasury of the Association, with the
written declaration, at the time or times of payment, that the sum
is to be applied to constitute a designated person a Life member;
and such membership shall begin sixty days after the payment shall
have been completed.

Churches, which have within a year contributed to the funds of the
Association, and State Associations or Conferences of Churches, may
appoint delegates to the Annual Meeting of the Association, each
of such Churches and Associations or Conferences to be entitled to
two delegates; such delegates, duly attested by credentials, shall
be members of the Association for the year for which they were thus
appointed.

ART. IV. Members shall be entitled to vote by ballot in the
election of President, five Vice-Presidents, the Board of
Directors, and on Amendments to the Constitution; and they shall be
entitled to be present at all meetings of the Board of Directors,
and to take part in the proceedings, but not to vote.

ART. V. The Annual Meeting of the Association and of the Board of
Directors shall be held in the month of October or November, at
such time and place as may be designated by the Executive Committee.

ART. VI. The Board of Directors shall consist of fifty persons, of
whom fifteen shall constitute a quorum. They shall be chosen by
ballot, the votes of absent members being receivable under such
safeguards as may be prescribed in the By-Laws of the Association.
At the first election of this Board, ten persons shall be elected
for the term of one year, and a like number for terms of two,
three, four, and five years respectively; and each year thereafter
ten persons shall be elected for the full term of five years, and
such others as may be needed to fill vacancies.

If any Director shall fail to attend two annual meetings in
succession, and to report the reason for such non-attendance, his
place on the Board shall be regarded as vacant.

ART. VII. The Board of Directors shall elect Secretaries of the
Association, Treasurer, Auditors, and an Executive Committee of
fifteen members, shall ordain By-Laws, and in general shall direct
and control the operations of the Association.

ART. VIII. The powers and functions of the several officers shall
be prescribed in the By-Laws.

ART. IX. No person shall be made a Director or officer of this
Association who is not a member of some evangelical church.

ART. X. Missionary bodies, churches or individuals agreeing to the
principles of this society, and wishing to appoint and sustain
missionaries of their own, shall be entitled to do so through the
agency of the Executive Committee, on terms mutually agreed upon.

ART. XI. Proposals for the amendment of this Constitution,
sustained by the signatures of not less than fifty members of the
Association, shall be published for not less than three months in
the official periodicals of the Association, and shall thereafter
be submitted to the vote of the members, by ballot, at the annual
meeting, under such conditions as shall be prescribed in the
By-Laws; and if the proposed amendment shall be sustained by
two-thirds of the ballots cast, it shall be declared adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *




           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.

It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

     Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the Ox-Brain
                          and Wheat-Germ.

           Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.

              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.

        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                       THE CHICKERING PIANO

                     “THE BEST IN THE WORLD.”

Before buying elsewhere, write for circular and price list to

                        CHICKERING & SONS,

                          CHICKERING HALL,
                      130 Fifth Avenue, N.Y.


                           MANUFACTORY,
                      156 Tremont St., Boston


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS, DIMINISHED
                         VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

                Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge,
                               Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                      BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND
                             BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration: SMITH

AMERICAN

ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at:

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.


OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.—Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.—Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.—The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.—To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.


                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                            HENRY STOKES,
                                                   President.

J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

  For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
  For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
  And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
  And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

  Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
  The half risen sun every package should bear;
  For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
  And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              Circulation Now 80,000, and Increasing.

          Advocating Evangelical Religion and Temperance.

           Liberty, Education and Equal Rights for all.

                         NEW YORK WITNESS

                       PUBLICATIONS for 1882

=New York Weekly Witness.=—Now in its 11th year; circulation,
80,000; ONE DOLLAR a year. Gratis copy for club of 10 with $10. On
trial three months, 25c.

=Sabbath Reading.=—A very handsome, small eight-page weekly,
containing in each number an excellent sermon and a choice
selection of interesting matter for reading on the Lord’s Day.
FIFTY CENTS a year; club of ten, $4. On trial three months 15c.

=Gems of Poetry.=—A beautiful sixteen page monthly, on fine paper,
and with an excellent portrait of some eminent poet in each number.
The contents are two serials, the Æneid of Virgil and Aurora Leigh
by Mrs. Browning; a fine assortment of selected poetry, and a great
variety of original poetry—the latter competing for two prizes each
quarter. FORTY CENTS a year; club of three, $1. On trial for three
months, 10c.

=Specimens= of the above publications sent free on application. All
stop when subscription expires.

WITNESS, SABBATH READING and GEMS OF POETRY, three months on trial
for fifty cents.

                        JOHN DOUGALL & CO.

                          WITNESS OFFICE:

                  21 VANDEWATER STREET, NEW YORK.

         We demand the Prohibition of the Liquor Traffic.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

J. Estey & Co

Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             WEBSTER’S

                            UNABRIDGED.

=Latest Edition has 118,000 Words=, (=3000= more than any other
English Dictionary,) =Four Pages Colored Plates, 3000 Engravings=,
(nearly three times the number in any other Dict’y,) also contains
a =Biographical Dictionary= giving brief important facts concerning
=9700 noted persons=.

[Illustration: Ancient Castle.]

          On page =203=, see the above picture and names
             of the =24= parts,—showing the value of
                        Webster’s numerous

                     Illustrated Definitions.


           It is the best practical English Dictionary
                extant.—_London Quarterly Review._

             The Book is an ever-present and reliable
                    school master to the whole
                  family.—_Sunday School Herald._

        =G. & C. MERRIAM & CO.=, Pub’rs, Springfield, Mass.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors and
tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of
Fencing. Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS. It has also a
mission in AFRICA.


STATISTICS.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 6; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 13; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 1; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 18;
Mississippi, 4; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 1.
Total, 82.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La.; and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 35. Total, 54.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 319;
among the Chinese, 28; among the Indians, 9; in Africa, 13. Total,
369. STUDENTS.—In theology, 104; law, 20; in college course, 91;
in other studies, 8,884. Total, 9,108. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing numbers of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

Before sending boxes, always correspond with the nearest A. M. A.
office as directed on second page cover.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on a paying basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of 20,000 copies monthly and that
goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will not our
friends aid us to make this plan a success?

We nevertheless renew the offer hitherto made, that the MISSIONARY
will be sent gratuitously, if desired, to the Missionaries of
the Association; to Life Members; to all Clergymen who take
up collections for the Association; to Superintendents of
Sabbath-schools; to College Libraries; to Theological Seminaries;
to Societies of Inquiry on Missions; and to every donor who does
not prefer to take it as a subscriber, and contributes in a year
not less than five dollars.

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade street, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions corrected. Ditto
marks replaced by text they represent.

Corrected table of Contents, which incorrectly included the monthly
section The Freedmen on the line for the General Notes article.

“Steet” changed to “Street” on the inside cover in the
CORRESPONDING SECRETARY listing.

“brethern” changed to “brethren” on page 324. (the calling in of
these brethern)

“evenning” changed to “evening” on page 340. (the evening, till a
late hour)

The amount in the Mukwanago entry on page 347 is not printed
clearly. Best estimate used.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER, 1882 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.