Produced by hekula03, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                                  88
                              FAVOURITE
                           CAROLS AND HYMNS
                                 FOR
                              CHRISTMAS.


                                OTLEY:
                       WILLIAM WALKER AND SONS.




                           CHRISTMAS HYMNS.




                                  1.


  Christians awake, salute the happy morn,
  Whereon the Saviour of the world was born;
  Rise to adore the mystery of Love,
  Which hosts of angels chanted from above:
  With them the joyful tidings first begun,
  Of God Incarnate and the Virgin’s Son.

  Then to the watchful shepherds it was told,
  Who heard the angelic herald’s voice: “Behold,
  I bring glad tidings of a Saviour’s birth,
  To you and all the nations upon earth;
  This day hath God fulfilled his promised word,
  This day is born a Saviour—Christ the Lord.

  “In David’s city, shepherds, ye shall find
  The long foretold Redeemer of mankind,
  Wrapt up in swaddling clothes, the Babe divine
  Lies in a manger—this shall be your sign.”
  He spake, and straightway the celestial choir
  In hymns of joy unknown before conspire.

  The praises of redeeming love they sung,
  And heaven’s whole arch with hallelujahs rung!
  God’s highest glory was their anthem still,
  Peace upon earth, and mutual good will.
  To Bethlehem straight the enlighten’d shepherds ran,
  To see the wonder God had wrought for man.

  Artless and watchful as these favour’d swains,
  While virgin meekness in their hearts remains;
  Trace we the Babe, who has retriev’d our loss,
  From his poor manger to his bitter cross;
  Tread in his steps, assisted by his grace,
  Till man’s first heavenly state again takes place;

  Then we may hope, the angelic thrones among,
  To find redeem’d a glad triumphant throng;
  He that was born upon that joyful day,
  Around us all his glory shall display:
  Sav’d by his love, incessant we shall sing
  Eternal praise to heaven’s all-powerful King.




                                  2.


  Shepherds, rejoice, lift up your eyes,
    And send your fears away;
  News from the regions of the skies,
    A Saviour’s born to-day!

  Jesus, the God whom angels fear,
    Comes down to dwell with you;
  To-day he makes his entrance here,
    But not as monarchs do.

  Go, Shepherds, where the Infant lies,
    And see his humble throne;
  With tears of joy in all your eyes,
    Go, shepherds, kiss the Son.

  Glory to God, who reigns above!
    Let peace surround the earth!
  Mortals shall know their Maker’s love,
    At their Redeemer’s birth.

  Lord! and shall angels have their songs,
    And men no tune to raise?
  O may we lose these useless tongues
    When we forget to praise!

  Glory to God who reigns above,
    That pitied us forlorn!
  We join to sing our Maker’s love,
    For there’s a Saviour born.




                                  3.


  Hark! hark! what news the angels bring;
  Glad tidings of a new-born King!
  Born of a maid, a Virgin pure,
  Born without sin, from guilt secure.

  Hail, mighty Prince—eternal King!
  Let heaven and earth rejoice and sing;
  Angels and men with one accord
  Break forth in songs to praise the Lord.

  Behold! he comes and leaves the skies;
  Awake, ye slumbering mortals,—rise!
  Awake to joy, and hail the morn,
  The Saviour of the world is born.

  With endless love He comes to dwell
  On earth, to save mankind from hell;
  In chorus then, with joy and mirth,
  We’ll celebrate our Saviour’s birth.

  Echo shall waft the strains around,
  While list’ning angels hear the sound;
  And all the heavenly hosts above
  Shall join to sing redeeming love.




                                  4.


  At Jacob’s well a stranger sought
    His drooping frame to cheer:
  Samaria’s daughters little thought
    That Jacob’s God was near.

  This had she known, her fainting mind
    For richer draughts had sighed;
  Nor had Messiah, ever kind,
    Those richer draughts denied.

  This ancient well—(no glass so true,)—
    Britannia’s image shows:
  Now Jesus travels Britain through,
    But who the Stranger knows?

  Yet Britain must this Stranger know,
    Or soon her loss deplore:
  Behold the living waters flow;
    Come, drink, and thirst no more.




                                  5.


  Lift up your heads in joyful hope,
    Salute the happy morn:
          Each heavenly power
          Proclaims the glad hour;
  Lo! Jesus the Saviour is born.

                               CHORUS.

  Then let us join the heavens above,
    Where hymning seraphs sing;
          Join all the glad powers,
          For their Lord is ours,
  Our Prophet, our Priest, and our King.

  Let joy abound, like rivers flow,
    Flow on and still increase!
          Spread o’er the glad earth,
          At Jesus’s birth,
  For heaven and earth are at peace!
                      Then let us join, &c.

  All glory to God on high!
    To Him all praise is due;
          The promise is seal’d,
          The Saviour reveal’d,
  And that proves the record is true.
                      Then let us join, &c.

  Now the good-will of heaven is shewn
    Towards Adam’s helpless race;
          Messiah is come,
          To ransom his own,
  And save them by Infinite grace.
                      Then let us join, &c.




                                  6.


  Awake up my glory, awake up my lute!
  On this happy morning how can I be mute?
  Come, mortals, assist me, your music all bring,
  To welcome the birth-day of Christ our King.

      Chorus.—Glory to God our King!
        Let men with angels sing,
      All glory to God, Hallelujah. Amen.

  Hark! angels delighted proclaim the glad news,
  While shepherds benighted the wonder reviews;
  How sweet were the tidings on this blessed morn,
  When Christ our Saviour was in Bethlehem born!
                          All glory, &c.

  The wise men directed to that happy place,
  With joy and with wonder beheld his dear face;
  They worshipp’d the Saviour whom angels adore,
  And bowing before Him, presented their store.
                          All glory, &c.

  While we the glad story repeat in our verse,
  May each of us glory his deeds to rehearse;
  And shout out “Salvation to Jesus belongs!”
  Till each list’ning nation re-echoes our songs.
                          All glory, &c.




                                  7.


  God rest you merry gentlemen!
    Let nothing you dismay!
  Remember Christ the Saviour
    Was born on Christmas day,
  To save poor souls from Satan’s power,
    Who had long time gone astray,

  From God, that is our Father,
    The blessed angels came,
  Unto some certain shepherds,
    With tidings of the same,
  That there was born in Bethlehem
    The Son of God by name.

  “Go, fear not,” said God’s angels,
    “Let nothing you affright,
  For there is born in Bethlehem,
    Of a pure Virgin bright,
  One able to advance you,
    And throw down Satan quite.”

  The shepherds at those tidings
    Rejoiced much in mind,
  And left their flocks a-feeding
    In tempest storms of wind,
  And straight they came to Bethlehem,
    The Son of God to find.

  With sudden joy and gladness
    The shepherds were beguil’d
  To see the Babe of Israel
    Before his mother mild;
  O then with joy and cheerfulness
    Rejoice each mother’s child!

  God bless the ruler of this house,
    And send him long to reign,
  And many a merry Christmas
    May he live to see again,
  Among your friends and kindred,
    That live both far and near,
  And may God send you a happy new year!




                                  8.


  The first good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of ONE,—
  To see her own Son Jesus
  Sucking at her breast-bone.
          Sucking at her breast-bone, good Lord;
          And blessed may we be!
          Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
            To all eternity.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of TWO,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
          Making the lame to go, Good Lord, &c.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of THREE,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
          Making the blind to see, Good Lord, &c.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of FOUR,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
    Reading the Bible o’er;
          Reading the Bible o’er, good Lord, &c.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of FIVE,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
    Making the dead to live;
          Making the dead to live, good Lord, &c.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of SIX,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
    Wearing the crucifix;
          Wearing the crucifix, good Lord, &c.

  The next good joy that Mary had,
    It was the joy of SEVEN,—
  To see her own Son Jesus Christ
    Ascending into heaven;
          Ascending into heaven, good Lord, &c.




                                  9.


  A virgin unspotted, the prophets foretold
  Should bring forth a Saviour which now we behold,
  To be our Redeemer from death, hell, and sin,
  Which Adam’s transgressions involved us all in.

    Chorus—Then let us be merry, cast sorrow away!
    Our Saviour Christ Jesus was born on this day.

  Through Bethlehem’s city, in Judah it was,
  That Jesus and Mary together did pass;
  And there they were taxed when thither they came,
  For Cæsar Augustus commanded the same.

  Now Mary’s full time being come as we find,
  She brought forth her first-born to save all mankind.
  The inn being full, for this heavenly Guest
  No room was there found to lay Him to rest.

  Then Mary, blest Mary, so meek and so mild,
  Soon wrapt up in swaddlings this heavenly Child;
  Contented she laid Him where the oxen did feed!
  The great God of Nature approved of the deed.

  To teach us humility all this was done,
  And learn us from hence haughty pride to shun;
  A manger his cradle, though He came from above!
  The great God of Mercy, of Peace, and of Love.




                                 10.


  Angels, from the realms of glory
    Wing your flight o’er all the earth!
  Ye who sang Creation’s story,
    Now proclaim Messiah’s birth!
        Come and worship,
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

  Shepherds in the field abiding,
    Watching o’er your flock by night,
  God with man is now residing!
    Yonder shines the Infant light:
        Come and worship,
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

  Sages, leave your contemplations,
    Brighter visions beam afar;
  Seek the great Desire of Nations,
    Ye have seen his natal star:
        Come and worship,
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

  Saints before the altar bending,
    Waiting long with hope and fear,
  Suddenly the Lord descending,
    In his temple shall appear:
        Come and worship,
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.

  Sinners wrung with new repentance,
    Doomed for guilt, to endless pains,
  Justice now repeals the sentence,
    Mercy calls you—breaks your chains!
        Come and worship,
    Worship Christ, the new-born King.




                                 11.


  The moon shines bright, and the stars gave light,
    A little before it was day:
  The Lord our God then called to us,
    And bade us awake and pray.

  Awake, awake, good people all
    Awake, and you shall hear,
  Our blessed Lord died on the cross,
    For us whom he loved so dear.

  O fair, O fair Jerusalem!
    When shall we come to thee?
  When will our grief be at an end,
    Thy joys when shall we see?

  For saving of our precious souls,
    Christ died upon the cross:
  We ne’er can do for Jesus Christ
    What he hath done for us.

  The life of man is but a span,
    And cut down like a flower;
  We are here to-day—to-morrow gone,
    The creatures of an hour!

  God bless the master of this house,
    Mistress and children dear!
  Joyful may their Christmas be,
    And happy their New-year!




                                 12.


  Hark, the herald angels sing,
  Glory to the new-born King,
  Peace on earth, and mercy mild,
  God and sinners reconcil’d!
  Joyful all ye nations rise,
  Join the triumph of the skies.
  With the angelic host proclaim,
  Christ is born in Bethlehem.
        Hark, the herald angels sing,
        Glory to the new-born King!

  Christ, by highest heaven ador’d,
  Christ the everlasting Lord,
  Late in time behold him come,
  Offspring of a Virgin’s womb;
  Veil’d in flesh the Godhead He,—
  Hail the Incarnate Deity!
  Pleased as Man with men to appear,
  Jesus our Immanuel here.
        Hark, the herald angels, &c.

  Hail the heaven-born Prince of Peace!
  Hail the Sun of Righteousness!
  Light and life to all He brings,
  Risen with healing in his wings!
  Mild He lays his glory by,
  Born that man no more may die!
  Born to raise the sons of earth,
  Born to give them second birth.
        Hark, the herald angels, &c.




                                 13.


  Let men and angels sing,
  Glory to God our King,—
      Jesus is born!
  Praise Him who left his throne,
  Bow’d his heavens and came down,
  His matchless love made known,
      On this glad morn.
                Chorus—Praise Him, &c.

  Angels to swains appear;
  Tending their fleecy care,
      Light shines abroad:
  “Rise,” says the messenger;
  “Shepherds,” dismiss your fears:
  Jesus to-day appears!
      Glory to God!    Cho: Rise, &c.

  Since the Redeemer’s birth,
  Sweet peace shall be on earth:
      Good-will to men,
  Far as creation’s bound,
  Tidings of joy shall sound;
  Through all the nations round,
      Jesus shall reign!
      Chorus—Far as creation’s bound,
              Tidings of joy shall sound;
              Through all the nations round,
                    Jesus shall reign!




                                 14.


  Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
  Dawn on our darkness, and lend us thine aid!
  Star of the east, the horizon adorning,
  Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

  Cold on his cradle the dew-drops are shining,
  Low lies his head with the beasts of the stall;
  Angels adore Him in slumber reclining,
  Maker, and Monarch, and Saviour of all!

  Say, shall we yield Him in costly devotion,
  Odours of Edom, and off’rings divine;
  Gems of the mountain, and pearls of the ocean,
  Myrrh from the forest, and gold from the mine?

  Vainly we offer each ample oblation;
  Vainly with gold would his favour secure:
  Richer by far is the heart’s adoration!
  Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.




                                 15.


  While shepherds watch’d their flocks by night,
    All seated on the ground,
  The angel of the Lord came down,
    And glory shone around.

  “Fear not,” said he, (for mighty dread
    Had seiz’d their troubled mind,)
  “Glad tidings of great joy I bring
    To you and all mankind.

  “To you, in David’s town, this day
    Is born of David’s line,
  A Saviour, who is Christ the Lord,
    And this shall be your sign:

  “The heavenly Babe you there shall find,
    To human view display’d;
  All meanly wrapt in swaddling-clothes,
    And in a manger laid.”

  Thus spake the seraphs, and forthwith
    Appear’d a shining throng
  Of angels praising God, and thus
    Address’d their joyful song:

  “All glory be to God on high,
    And on the earth be peace!
  Good-will henceforth from Heaven to men
    Begin and never cease!”




                                 16.


  Here we come a-wassailing, among the leaves so green,
  Here we come a-wandering, so fair to be seen.

      Chorus—Love and joy come to you,
              And to your wassail too,
      And God send you many a happy New-year,
                        A new-year;
      And God send you many a happy New-year!

      Our wassail-cup is made of the rosemary-tree,
      So is your beer of the best barley.

  We are not daily beggars that beg from door to door,
  But we are neighbours’ children, whom you have seen before.
  Call up the butler of this house, put on his golden ring;
  Let him bring us a glass of beer, and the better we shall sing.

  We have got a little purse, made of stretching leather-skin;
  We want a little of your money to line it well within.
  Bring us out a table and spread it with a cloth;
  Bring us out a mouldy cheese, and some of your Christmas loaf.

  God bless the master of this house, likewise the mistress too,
  And all the little children that round the table go!
  Good master and mistress, while you’re sitting by the fire,
  Pray think of us poor children, who are wandering in the mire.




                                 17.


  ’Twas Jesus the Prince of the kings of the earth,
  That of Mary, the Virgin, this day was brought forth;
  Tho’ the world He created, with heaven’s noble frame,
  To be laid in a manger how joyful He came!

    Chorus—Glory to Thee, Almighty Jesus!
              Thy love awakes each tuneful string;
            Angels and men shall sing thy praises,
              ’Till heaven’s high court shall loudly ring
            With hallelujah! glory to our exalted King!

  Lo! angels descended on that blessed night,
  To publish the advent with joy and delight;
  Good-will towards men was the theme of their song,
  And to God in the highest doth glory belong.
                  Glory to Thee, &c.

  He saw the sad state which poor mortals were in,
  He left his high honours, and died for their sin;
  On the cross were extended his hands and his feet,
  For sweet-smelling savour and offering complete.
                  Glory to Thee, &c.

  He arose from the dead, and ascended on high,
  And clothed with glory, his Father sits by;
  The dear cause of his people incessant he pleads,
  And every believer to Paradise leads.
                  Glory to Thee, &c.




                                 18.


  Thou Child Divine, Emmanuel,
    O welcome in thy humble manger!
  With heartfelt joy thy birth we hail,
    And greet with songs the heavenly Stranger.
        Our doubts, and fears, and sadness,
        Are turn’d to joy and gladness:
    Good-will to man, and peace on earth,
    Are now declared by our Saviour’s birth.

      Thou Child Divine, Emmanuel,
    O welcome in thy humble manger!
    With heartfelt joy thy birth we hail,
    And greet with songs the heavenly Stranger.




                                 19.


  Behold, the grace appears,
    The promise is fulfilled:
  Mary, the wondrous Virgin, bears,
    And Jesus is the Child.

  To bring the glorious news,
    A heavenly form appears;
  He tells the shepherds of their joys,
    And banishes their fears.

  “Go, humble swains,” said he,
    “To David’s city fly;
  “The promis’d Infant born to-day
    “Doth in a manger lie.

  “With looks and hearts serene,
    “Go visit Christ your King;”
  And straight a flaming troop was seen,
    The shepherds heard them sing—

  “Glory to God on high,
    “And heavenly peace on earth!
  “Good-will to men, to angels joy,
    “At their Redeemer’s birth!”




                                 20.


  Angelic hosts, who dwell above,
  And taste the streams of sacred love,
  Descend and teach mankind to sing
  The honours of our new-born King.

  ’Tis done: behold the opening skies,
  A band celestial meets our eyes;
  Hark, hark! their well-tun’d harps of gold,
  The wondrous tale of love unfold.

  “Good-will to men, from God on high;
  “Good-will the lawns and groves reply;
  “Peace on earth, the Saviour reigns,”
  Peace re-echoes through the plains.

  In flesh behold the mighty God,
  Who rules creation with a nod!
  In Bethlehem, lo! Emmanuel’s born;
  Hail, heaven and earth, the joyful morn!




                                 21.


  Give ear, O earth, while angels sing,
  Good news to sinful men they bring;
  And while angelic hosts rejoice,
  Sure gratitude should tune our voice.

                               CHORUS:

  Rejoice, happy mortals, cast sorrow away,
    Glad tidings salute your ears;
  Break forth into singing and join the sweet lay,
  The promised Redeemer is born to-day,
    The glory of Israel appears.

  The God of peace, the God of love,
  Has left his shining realms above,
  And to this lower world came down,
  To purchase us a heavenly crown.
            Rejoice, &c.

  This welcome sound the shepherds hear,
  While watching o’er their fleecy care;
  “In David’s city,” Gabriel cries,
  “The Saviour in a manger lies!”
            Rejoice, &c.




                                 22.


  The lands that long in darkness lay now have beheld a heavenly
              light;
  Nations that sat in death’s cold shade are blest with beams divinely
              bright.
  The Virgin’s promised Son is born; behold the expected Child appear!
  What shall his name or titles be?—“The Wonderful, the Counsellor!”

  The Infant is the mighty God, come to be suckled and adored;
  The Eternal Father, Prince of Peace, the Son of David, and his Lord.
  The government of earth and seas upon his shoulders shall be laid;
  His wide dominions still increase, and honours to his name be paid.




                                 23.


  Hark! the glad sound! The Saviour comes, the Saviour promised long!
  Let every heart prepare a throne, and every voice a song.

  He comes the prisoners to release, in Satan’s bondage held;
  The gates of brass before him burst, the iron fetters yield.
  Our glad hosannas, Prince of Peace, thy welcome shall proclaim;
  And heaven’s eternal arches ring with thy beloved Name.




                                 24.


  Hark; the celestial heralds sing, and hail the birth-day of their
              King!
  Come, sinners, wipe your flowing tears, the Hope of Israel now
              appears!

                               CHORUS:

    Welcome news the angels bring on this solemn morn;
    Good-will to men they sweetly sing, all glory to our heavenly
              King,
                    A Saviour born!

  Hark! ’tis Gabriel’s heavenly voice, that bids the favour’d swains
              rejoice!
  Now, shepherds, cast your fears away; the promis’d Saviour’s born
              to-day.
                        Cho.—Welcome news, &c.

  Christ the Eternal Son of God, has left his Father’s bright abode,
  To save a lost and ruin’d race, that they may ever sing his praise.
                        Cho.—Welcome news, &c.




                                 25.


  What good news the angels bring! what glad-tidings of our King!
  Christ, the Lord, is born to-day; Christ who takes our sins away.
  Lift your hearts and voices high, with hosannas fill the sky;
  Glory be to God above, God is infinite in love!
  Shout ye nations of the earth, sing the triumphs of his birth;
  All the world by Him is blest! sound his praise from east to west.




                                 26.


  All glory to God in the sky, and peace upon earth he restored;
  O Jesus! exalted on high, appears our Omnipotent Lord!
  Who meanly in Bethlehem born, didst stoop to redeem a lost race,
  Once more to thy creatures return, and reign in thy kingdom of
              grace!

  When Thou in our flesh didst appear, all Nature acknowledg’d thy
              birth;
  Arose the acceptable year, and heaven was opened on earth:
  Receiving its Lord from above, the world was united to bless
  The Giver of concord and love, the Prince and the Author of Peace.

  O wouldst Thou again be made known, again in thy Spirit descend,
  And set up in each of Thine own a kingdom that never shall end!
  Thou only art able to bless, and make the glad nations obey,
  And bid the dire enmity cease, and bow the whole world to thy sway!




                                 27.


  Man, by Satan’s wiles deceived, forfeits God’s image bright;
  But Christ hath this loss retrieved, brought redemption plain to
              light.
  Glorious mystery! God reveal’d, in flesh our fall made good.

  He the mighty—He the holy, condescends with man to dwell!
  See your Saviour, meek and lowly, hail your God—Emmanuel!
  We wait for Him—he will bless us, in his name we will be glad.

  We unite to render praises unto our incarnate God;
  Sing hosannas to Christ Jesus, who assumed our flesh and blood:
  Blessed, blessed he that cometh in the name of Christ the Lord!




                                 28.


  The scene around me disappears, and borne to eastern regions,
  While time recals the flight of years, I see angelic legions
  Descending in an orb of light! amid the darkness of the night,
                I hear celestial voices!

  “Tidings, glad tidings from above to every age and nation!
  Tidings, glad tidings! God is love, to man He sends salvation.
  His Son beloved, his only Son, the work of mercy hath begun:
                Give to his Name the glory!”

  In David’s city I behold, and all around are sleeping;
  A light directs to yonder fold, where lonely watch is keeping:
  I enter—ah, what glories shine! Is this Emmanuel’s earthly shrine?
                Messiah’s infant temple?

  It is, it is! and I adore this Babe so meek and lowly,
  As saints and seraphs bow before the throne of God—thrice holy:
  Faith, through the veil of flesh can see the face of Thy divinity,
                My Lord, my God, my Saviour!




                                 29.


  Arise, and hail the sacred day, cast all low cares of life away,
      And thoughts of meaner things:
  This day to cure our deadly woes, The Son of Righteousness arose
                      With healing in his wings.

                               Chorus:
    O then let heaven and earth rejoice! Creation’s whole united
              voice,
                      To hail the happy day;
    When Satan’s empire vanquish’d fell, and all the powers of death
              and hell
                      Confess’d His sovereign sway.

  If angels on that sacred morn, the Saviour of this world was born,
      Pour’d forth their grateful songs;
  Much more should we of human race adore the wonders of his grace
                      To whom that grace belongs!
                              Cho: O then let, &c.

  How wonderful, how vast His love, who left the shining realms above,
      Those happy seats of rest!
  How much of human kind he bore, their peace and pardon to restore,
                      Can never be express’d!
                              Cho: O then let, &c.




                                 30.


  Shepherds keeping watch by night, saw around a glorious light;
  Heard an angel thence proclaim,—“Christ is born in Bethlehem.”
  Soon a bright and heavenly throng, “Glory to the Almighty” sung.
  “Peace on earth, good-will to men, Christ is born in Bethlehem!”

  Joyful tidings to mankind, richest grace they now may find;
  Children all his grace may claim: “Christ is born in Bethlehem.”

  O how great his grace and love, thus to leave his throne above;
  Thus to bear our guilt and shame, and be born in Bethlehem!




                                 31.


  Bright and joyful is the morn, for “to us a Child is born;”
  From the highest realms of heaven, “Unto us a Son is given.”
  “On his shoulders he shall bear,” power and majesty;—and wear
  “On his vesture and his thigh,” names most awful, names most high.

  Wonderful in Counsel, He—the Incarnate Deity;
  Sire of ages, ne’er to cease, King of Kings and Prince of Peace.
  Come and worship at his feet, yield to Him the homage meet;
  From his manger to his throne, homage due to God alone.




                                 32.


  Christ is born! go tell the story; tell the nations of his birth;
  Tell them that the “Lord of Glory” comes from heaven to dwell on
              earth:
      Let the tidings fill the world with sacred mirth!

  See, He lies in yonder manger; “Prince of Life” his Title is;
  ’Midst his own, and yet a stranger, all things seen, and unseen,
              his;
      Yet neglected—Wonder, O ye heavens, at this!

  See fulfill’d prophetic vision, “Unto us a Child is born.”
  Tho’ an object of derision, tho’ the theme of human scorn:
      Yet his people hail his birth, and cease to mourn.




                                 33.


  Sing, ye ransomed nations, sing praises to our new-born King!
  Son of Man our Saviour is, Lord of Hosts and Prince of Peace.
  Lo, He lays his glories by! emptied of his Majesty,
  See, the God who all things made, humbly in a manger laid!
  Let us then our peace proclaim, let us chant Emmanuel’s name;
  Publish, at his wondrous birth, praise in heaven and peace on earth.




                                 34.


  The King of Glory sends his Son, to make his entrance on this earth!
  Behold the midnight bright as noon, and heavenly hosts declare his
              birth!

  Simeon and Anna both conspire, the Infant Saviour to proclaim;
  Inward they felt the sacred fire, and blest the Babe and own’d his
              Name.
  Let Jews and Greeks blaspheme aloud, and treat the holy Child with
              scorn;
  Our souls adore the Eternal God, who condescended to be born.




                                 35.


  Come, behold the Virgin mother fondly leaning o’er her Child;
  Nature shows not such another, glorious, meek, and mild!
        ’Tis the Saviour! Heaven upon his birth-day smil’d.

  Bethlehem’s ancient walls enclose Him, dwelling-place of David once;
  Now no friendly homestead knows Him, tho’ the noblest of his sons:
        See the Saviour, shelt’ring ’mid the scatt’red stones!

  Royal Bethlehem, how deserted, all its pomp and splendour lost!
  Is a stable, vile and dirtied, all the welcome you can boast?
        Must the Saviour thus be spurn’d by every host?




                                 36.


  Hark! what mean those holy voices, sweetly sounding thro’ the skies?
  Lo! the angelic host rejoices; heavenly hallelujahs rise.
  Listen to the wondrous story, which they chant in hymns of joy!
  “Glory, in the highest, glory! Glory to God most high!

  “Peace on earth, good-will from heaven,” reaching far as man is
              found;
  Souls redeemed and sins forgiven, loud our golden harps shall sound.
  Christ is born, the great Anointed, heaven and earth his praises
              sing:
  O receive whom God appointed for your Prophet, Priest, and King!

  Hasten, mortals, to adore Him! learn his name and taste his joy:
  Till in heaven ye sing before Him, Glory be to God most high!




                                 37.


  Give thanks to God our King, and make a joyful noise;
  Let every tongue his praises sing, and every heart rejoice.

                               CHORUS:
            Let the trumpet’s joyful sound
            Tell the listening world around,
            A ransom for lost man is found.

  The love that fill’d his breast, and brought Him from the skies,
  Doth heavenly blessings now impart unto his enemies.
  For such amazing love let mortals tune their lays,
  And sing with all the hosts above, the Saviour’s worthy praise.
            Cho: Let the trumpet, &c.




                                 38.


  Little children, can you say—Why you’re glad on Christmas-day?
  Little children, can you tell—Why you hear the sweet church-bell?
              Can you tell us who was born—
              Early on the Christmas morn?

  I hope you will at once reply, Yes, we are glad, and we know why:
  The day is joyful upon earth, in honour of a Saviour’s birth.
              Angels came from heaven to say,
              That Christ was born on Christmas day.

  Christ is our Saviour, and we know, when little children to Him go,
  For all the good He gives, to pray, He will not turn his face away!
              His word in God’s own book we see,
              “Let little children come to me.”

  This is the birth-day of our King, and we our little offering bring:
  This is our Saviour’s holiday, and therefore we are glad and gay;
              We’ll sing and pray, and read His word,
              And keep the birth-day of our Lord.




                                 39.


  Hail, sacred morning! whose bright rays
  Beheld the new-born Prince of Peace
  Come from the shining realms above,
      To win the nations with His love.

                               CHORUS:
      Sound, sound the trumpet, sound!
      Let the sacred mirth abound,
    And banish every slavish fear away:
      Exalt his praises high,
      With angels in the sky,
  For Christ, the King of Glory’s born to-day.

  No more shall Gentiles lie forlorn;
  God’s everlasting Son is born!
  Left all the grandeur of the sky,
  For man, vile man, to bleed and die.

  Behold the Lamb of God appears,
  To chase away our gloomy fears;
  Born greater blessings to restore,
  Than our first parents lost before.
                        Sound, sound, &c.




                                 40.


  Let children proclaim their Saviour and King!
  To Jesu’s dear name—Hosannas we sing;
  Our best adoration to Jesus we give,
  Who purchas’d salvation—for us to receive.

  The meek Lamb of God—from glory came down,
  To ransom with blood—and make us his own.
  He patiently suffered—our souls to redeem:
  Let songs then be offer’d—to Jesu’s dear name.

  To Him let us give—our earliest days,
  And thankfully live—to publish his praise:
  Our lives shall confess Him—who came from above,
  Our tongues ever bless Him—and tell of his love.




                                 41.


  What good news the angels bring! what glad-tidings of our King!
  Christ, the Lord, is born to-day; Christ, who takes our sins away.

  Lift your hearts and voices high, with hosannas fill the sky;
  Glory to God above! God is infinite in love.
  Shout ye nations of the earth! sing the triumphs of his birth;
  All the world by Him is blest; sound his praise from east to west!




                                 42.


  Behold, to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given!
  Unto the wretched and forlorn, descends the Lord from heaven!
  The promised seed Emmanuel, the everlasting God,
  Comes down to save from death and hell, poor sinners, by his blood.
  Great is the hidden mystery, that God became a man;
  He had, from all eternity, in mercy formed a plan
  To save from misery and distress, the fallen human race!
  And now the Sun of Righteousness his healing beams displays.




                                 43.


  Lo! the Eastern Magi rise, at a signal in the skies!
  Brighter than the brightest gem, shines the Star of Bethlehem.
  Balaam’s mystic words appear, full of light, divinely clear;
  And the import wrapt in them, is the Star of Bethlehem.

  Now the holy wise men meet at the royal Infant’s feet,
  Offerings rich are made by them to the Star of Bethlehem.
  Night’s terrific shades give way, open dawns the promised day,
  And on us as well as them, shines the Star of Bethlehem.




                                 44.


  How shall I meet my Saviour? How shall I welcome Thee?
  What manner of behaviour is now required of me?
  Let Thine illumination guide heart and hand aright,
  That this my preparation be pleasing in Thy sight.

  While with her sweetest flowers thy Zion strews the way,
  I’ll raise with all my powers to Thee a grateful lay;
  To Thee, the King of Glory, I’ll tune a song divine;
  And make Thy love’s bright story in grateful numbers shine.

  I lay in fetters groaning, Thou camest to set me free;
  My shame I was bemoaning, with grace Thou clothedst me:
  Thou raisedst me to glory, endowd’st me with Thy bliss,
  Which is not transitory, as worldly treasure is.

  This caused Thy incarnation; this brought Thee down to me;
  Thy thirst for my salvation contrived my liberty!




                                 45.


  When marshall’d on the nightly plain,
    The glittering hosts bestud the sky,
  One star alone of all the train
    Can fix the sinner’s wandering eye.
  Hark, hark! to God the chorus breaks,
    From every host, from every gem;
  But one alone the Saviour speaks,—
    It is the Star of Bethlehem.
  Once on the raging sea I rode,
    The storm was loud, the night was dark,
  The ocean yawn’d, and rudely blow’d
    The wind that toss’d my found’ring barque.
  Deep horror then my vitals froze,
    Death-struck, I ceas’d the tide to stem;
  When suddenly a Star arose,—
    It was the Star of Bethlehem.
  It was my guide, my light, my all,
    It bade my dark forebodings cease;
  And through the storm and danger’s thrall,
    It led me to the port of peace.
  Now safely moor’d, my perils o’er,
    I’ll sing first in night’s diadem,
  For ever, and for evermore,
    The Star—the Star of Bethlehem!




                                 46.


  Songs of praise the angels sang, heaven with hallelujahs rang,
  When Jehovah’s work begun, when He spake and it was done.
  Songs of praise awoke the morn, when the Prince of Peace was born;
  Songs of praise arose when He captive led captivity.

  Heaven and earth must pass away, songs of praise shall crown that
              day;
  God will make new heaven and earth, songs of praise shall hail their
              birth.
  Saints below, with heart and voice, still in songs of praise
              rejoice;
  Learning here by faith and love, songs of praise to sing above.

  Borne upon the latest breath, songs of praise shall conquer death;
  Then amidst eternal joy, songs of praise their powers employ.




                                 47.


  The world lay hushed in slumber deep,
    And darkness veiled the mind,
  When rose upon their shadowy sleep,
    The Star that saves mankind!

  It dawns o’er Bethlehem’s lowly shed,
    And scattering at the sight,
  Heaven’s idol-host at once have fled
    Before that awful light.

  Led by the solitary star
    To glory’s poor abode,
  Lo! wondering Wisdom from afar,
    Brings incense to her God.

  Humility, on Judah’s hills,
    Watching her fleecy care,
  Turns to an Angel-voice that fills
    With love the midnight air.

  Like voices through yon bursting cloud
    Announce the almighty plan,
  Hymning in adoration loud,
    “Peace and good-will to man.”




                                 48.


  Sing all in heaven, at Jesu’s birth,
  Glory to God, and peace on earth:
  Incarnate love in Christ is seen,
  Pure mercy and good-will to men.

  Praise Him, extolled above all height,
  Who doth in worthless worms delight;
  God reconciled in Christ confess,
  Your present and eternal peace.

  Then swift to every startled eye,
  New streams of glory light the sky;
  Heaven burst her azure gates to pour
  Her spirits to the midnight hour.

  On wheels of light, on wings of flame,
  The glorious hosts of Zion came;
  High heaven with songs of triumph rang,
  While thus they struck their harps and sang.




                                 49.


  All hail the power of Jesu’s name! let angels prostrate fall;
  Bring forth the royal diadem, and crown Him Lord of all!
  Crown Him, ye martyrs of your God, who from his altar call;
  Extol the stem of Jesse’s rod, and crown Him Lord of all.

  Ye chosen seed of Israel’s race, a remnant weak and small;
  Hail Him who saves you by his grace, and crown Him Lord of all.
  Ye Gentile sinners, ne’er forget the wormwood and the gall;
  Go spread your trophies at his feet, and crown Him Lord of all.

  O that with yonder sacred throng, we at his feet may fall;
  There join the everlasting song, and crown Him Lord of all!




                                 50.


  Of all the wonders and delights, which raise our best surprise,
  The glorious themes, the lovely sights, with which we feast our
              eyes,
  There’s none for excellence, and joy, and wonder can compare,
  With what at Christmas may employ our serious thoughts and prayer.

  If travellers through the darksome night rejoice the day to see;
  If prisoners bound in woful plight, are glad when they get free;
  If sick and dying men rejoice to see th’ physician’s face,—
  Then, sinners, listen, tune your voice, and hail the Saviour’s
              grace.

  From heaven the Son of God descends, and takes the form of man.
  To reconcile his foes as friends, was all his gracious plan.
  For now the promis’d Saviour’s born, to Israel long foretold,
  A lovely babe—the great ones’ scorn—see a rough stable hold!

  But though He comes in lowly guise, ’tis David’s Royal Son,
  And He that in the manger lies, shall fill his Father’s throne.




                                 51.


  To us a child of royal birth, Heir of the promises, is given;
  The Invisible appears on earth, the Son of man the God of heaven.
  A Saviour born, in love supreme he comes our fallen souls to raise:
  He comes his people to redeem, with all his plenitude of grace.

  The Christ by raptured seers foretold, fill’d with the eternal
              Spirit’s power;
  Prophet, and Priest, and King behold, and Lord of all the worlds
              adore.
  The Lord of Hosts, the God most high, who quits his throne on earth
              to live,
  With joy we welcome from the sky, with faith into our hearts
              receive.




                                 52.


  Hail this day of grace and peace, of bright celestial dawn,
  ’Tis glory, not the sun, awakes this consecrated morn.

  Hear the tidings from on high, Messiah’s wondrous birth!
  Hear the angel tell the swains, He now inhabits earth.

  And hear the host from heaven sing “Glory to God on high,
  Peace on earth, good will to men,” the greeting from the sky.

  See the lowly infant laid, a manger for his bed,
  See a new-made star appear, to crown that infant head.

  Then was heard the high command, “Angels before Him fall,
  Worship your incarnate God, and crown Him Lord of all.”

  “Glory to God” the angels sung, “Glory to God,” we sing,
  And equal glory be to Thee, O Saviour, Lord and King.




                                 53.


  Awake, arise good Christians, let nothing you dismay;
  Remember Christ our Saviour was born upon this day.

  The self-same moon was shining that now is in the sky,
  When a holy band of angels came down from God on high;

  Came down on clouds of glory, arrayed in shining light,
  Unto the shepherd-people who watched their flocks by night.

  And through the midnight silence the heavenly hosts began,
  “Glory to God in the highest; on earth good-will to man!

  “Fear not! we bring good tidings, for on this happy morn,
  The promised One—the Saviour, in Bethlehem town was born.”

  Up rose the simple shepherds, all with a joyful mind:
  “And let us go with speed,” say they, “this holy Child to find.”

  Not in a kingly palace the Son of God they found,
  But in a lowly manger where oxen fed around.

  The glorious King of Heaven, the Lord of all the earth,
  In mercy condescended to be of humble birth.

  Long looked the simple shepherds with holy wonder stirred,
  Then praised God for all things which they had seen and heard,

  And homeward went rejoicing upon that Christmas morn,
  Declaring unto every one that Jesus Christ was born.

  And like unto the shepherds we wander far and near,
  And bid you wake, good Christians, the joyful news to hear.

  Awake, arise, good Christians, let nothing you dismay,
  Remember Christ the Saviour was born upon this day.




                                 54.


  The voice of free grace cries, Escape to the mountain!
  For Adam’s lost race Christ hath opened a fountain:
  For sin and uncleanness, and every transgression,
  His blood freely flows in streams of salvation.
      Hallelujah to the Lamb who has bought us a pardon!
    We will praise Him again when we pass over Jordan.

  Our Jesus proclaims His great Name all victorious,
  He reigns over all, and His kingdom is glorious!
  To Jesus our King—in the great congregation—
  With triumph we’ll sing, ascribing salvation.
                                Hallelujah, &c.

  On Zion we stand when escaped to the shore,
  With palms in our hands we shall praise Him the more;
  We’ll range the sweet plains on the banks of the river,
  And sing of salvation for ever and ever.
                                Hallelujah, &c.




                                 55.


  Little children, praise the Saviour,
    He regards you from above;
  Praise Him for his great salvation!
    Praise Him for his precious love.
        Sweet hosannas to the name of Jesus sing!

  When He left his throne in glory,
    When He lived with mortals here,
  Little children sang his praises,
    And it pleased his gracious ear. Sweet, &c.

  When the anxious mothers round Him,
    With their tender infants, press’d;
  He with open arms received them,
    And the little ones He bless’d. Sweet, &c.

  Up in yonder spirit regions,
    Angels sound the chorus high;
  Twice ten thousand times ten thousand
    Send his praises through the sky. Sweet, &c.

  Little children, praise the Saviour;
    Praise Him, your undying Friend;
  Praise Him till in heaven you meet Him,
    There to praise Him without end. Sweet, &c.




                                 56.


  And now, my soul, another year
    Of my short life is past;
  I cannot long continue here,
    And this may be my last.

  Much of my dubious life is gone,
    Nor will return again;
  And swift my passing moments run,
    The few that do remain.

  Awake, my soul, with utmost care
    Thy true condition learn:
  What are thy hopes, how sure, how fair,
    And what thy great concern?

  Now a new scene of time begins,
    Set out afresh for heaven;
  Seek pardon for thy former sins,
    In Christ, so freely given.




                                 57.


  Blest is the man whose heart expands
    At melting pity’s call;
  And the rich blessings of whose hands
    Like heavenly manna fall.

  Children our kind protection claim,
    And God will well approve,
  When infants learn to lisp his name,
    And their Creator love.

  Be ours the bliss, in wisdom’s way
    To guide untutored youth;
  And lead the mind that went astray,
    To virtue and to truth.

  Almighty God! thine influence shed
    To aid this good design;
  The honours of thy name be spread,
    And all the glory thine.




                                 58.


  Behold a stranger at the door; He gently knocks, has knock’d before,
  Has waited long, is waiting still: you use no other friend so ill.
  Rise, touch’d with gratitude divine, turn out his enemy and thine;
  Turn out the hateful monster, sin, and let the heavenly Stranger in.

  Admit Him, ere his anger burn, lest He depart and ne’er return;
  Admit Him, or the hour’s at hand when at his door denied you’ll
              stand.
  Yet know, nor of the terms complain, where Jesus comes, He comes to
              reign!
  Sovereign of souls! Thou Prince of Peace! Oh, may Thy gentle reign
              increase!




                                 59.


  Let Christians now in joyful mirth,
    The young and old, both great and small,
  Still think upon a Saviour’s birth,
    Who brought salvation to us all.

  And thus when God his Son did send,
    Whom cruel Jews did hold in scorn,
  No pompous train did there attend
    This King of Kings, when he was born.

  No place but in an ox’s stall,
    The place of his nativity.
  Indeed, this should instruct us all
    To learn of him humility.

  ’Twas in King David’s city, then,
    As Holy Scriptures make appear,
  And in the time of taxing, when
    They came in throngs both far and near.

  The Virgin Mary, then by name,
    And Joseph most exceeding kind,
  When they into the city came,
    No habitation could they find.

  But in a stable mean, where they
    Continued till the blessed morn:
  Let us rejoice and keep this day,
    Whereon the Lord of Life was born.




                                 60.


  Awake, ye Christians! arise and sing,
    And hail the happy morn
  Whereon your glorious heavenly King
    In Bethlehem was born.

  No earthly crown bedecked his brow,
    No splendour there displayed;
  The humble Jesus, meek and low,
    Was in a manger laid.

  Though meek and lowly he appeared
    Amongst the sons of men,
  The glorious tidings soon were heard
    Through Judah’s fertile plain.

  As shepherds watched their flocks by night,
    A glorious sight appeared;
  Filled with amazement at the sight,
    An angel’s voice they heard.

  The heavenly choir in view appeared,
    With sweet seraphic voice,
  And soon the Saviour’s name was heard,
    They bade mankind rejoice.

  To Bethlehem, then, the shepherds went,
    To worship at his feet;
  Their minds were filled with sweet content,
    Their Saviour God they greet.

  Come, own the sins of all the year,
    Of all your lives, and pray;
  Don’t add more crimes and vengeance dare,
    Abusing Christmas-day.




                                 61.


  Come, thou long-expected Jesus, born to set thy people free;
  From our fears and sins release us, let us find our rest in Thee:
  Israel’s strength and consolation, hope of all the earth Thou art;
  Dear Desire of every nation, joy of every longing heart.

  Born thy people to deliver, born a Child and yet a King;
  Born to reign in us for ever, now Thy gracious kingdom bring;
  By Thine own eternal Spirit, rule in all our hearts alone;
  By Thine all-sufficient merit, raise us to thy glorious throne.




                                 62.


  High let us swell our tuneful notes,
    And join th’ angelic throng,
  For angels no such love have known,
    T’ awake a cheerful song.

  Good-will to sinful men is shown,
    And peace on earth is given;
  For, lo! the incarnate Saviour comes
    With messages from heaven.

  Justice and grace with sweet accord
    His rising beams adorn;
  Let heaven and earth in concert join,
    To us a Child is born.

  Glory to God in highest strains,
    In highest worlds be paid;
  His glory by our lips proclaimed,
    And by our lives displayed.

  When shall we reach those blissful realms,
    Where Christ exalted reigns;
  And learn of the celestial choir
    Their own immortal strains?




                                 63.


  Welcome, sweet day of rest,
    That saw the Lord arise;
  Welcome to this reviving breast,
    And these rejoicing eyes.

  The King himself comes near,
    And feasts his saints to-day;
  Here may we sit, and see him here,
    And love, and praise, and pray.

  One day amidst the place
    Where thou, my God, art seen,
  Is sweeter than ten thousand days
    Spent in the joys of sin.




                                 64.


  Blest be the wisdom and the power,
    The justice and the grace,
  That joined in council to restore
    And save our ruined race.

  Blest be the Lord, who sent his Son
    To take our flesh and blood;
  He for our lives gave up his own,
    To make our peace with God.

  He honoured all his Father’s laws,
    Which we have disobeyed;
  He bore our sins upon the cross,
    And our full ransom paid.

  Behold Him rising from the grave,
    Behold Him raised on high!
  He pleads his merits there to save
    Transgressors doomed to die.

  There on a glorious throne he reigns,
    And by His power divine,
  Redeems us from the slavish chains
    Of Satan and of sin.

  Thence shall the Lord to judgment come,
    And, with a sovereign voice,
  Shall call and break up every tomb,
    While waking saints rejoice.

  O may I then with joy appear
    Before the Judge’s face,
  And with the blest assembly there,
    Sing His redeeming grace!




                                 65.


  As Jacob on travel was weary by day,
  At night on a stone for a pillow he lay;
  A vision appeared—a ladder so high,
  Its foot on the earth, and its top in the sky.

    All glory to Jesus who died on the tree,
    To raise up a ladder of mercy for me!
    Press forward! press forward! the prize is in view,
    A crown of bright glory is waiting for you.

  The vision was glorious; a bright heavenly throng
  Was ascending with joy, and descending thereon;
  And God, rich in mercy, was standing above,
  Proclaiming to Jacob his goodness and love.
                      All glory to Jesus, &c.

  This ladder is Jesus, the Saviour of man,
  Whose blood, richly streaming, from Calvary ran;
  And through His atonement to heaven we may rise,
  And sing in the mansions prepared in the skies.
                      All glory to Jesus, &c.

  Then let us ascend, and be bold, never fear;
  It has stood every tempest, and always will bear;
  For millions have tried it, and reached Zion’s hill,
  And thousands, by faith, are ascending it still.
                      All glory to Jesus, &c.

  Our fathers upon it have mounted to God,
  Have finished their labours, and reach’d their abode;
  And we’re climbing after, and soon shall be there,
  To join in their rapture, their happiness share.
                      All glory to Jesus, &c.




                                 66.


  Hosanna! Christ is here,
  Within these hallowed walls;
  Where the hymn of praise, the cry of prayer,
  On the great Jehovah calls,
  And lisping childhood’s willing tongue
  Lifts high to heaven the choral song,
      Hosanna! Christ is here!




                                 67.


  Jesus is our Shepherd, wiping every tear;
  Folded in His bosom, what have we to fear?
  Only let us follow whither He doth lead,
  To the thirsty desert, or the dewy mead.

  Jesus is our Shepherd: well we know his voice,
  How its gentlest whisper makes our hearts rejoice;
  Even when it chideth, tender is its tone;
  None but He shall guide us! we are His alone.

  Jesus is our Shepherd; for the sheep He bled;
  Every lamb is sprinkled with the blood He shed:
  Then on each he setteth His own secret sign;
  “They that have my Spirit, these,” saith he, “are mine.”

  Jesus is our Shepherd; guarded by His arm,
  Though the wolves may raven, none can do us harm;
  When we tread death’s valley, dark with fearful gloom,
  We will fear no evil, victors o’er the tomb.

  Jesus is our Shepherd, with His goodness now,
  And His tender mercy, He doth us endow:
  Let us sing his praises, with a gladsome heart,
  Till in heaven we meet Him, never more to part.




                                 68.


  Jesus Christ is risen to-day,
  Our triumphant holy day;
  Who did once, upon the cross,
  Suffer to redeem our loss.    Hallelujah!

  Hymns of praise then let us sing
  Unto Christ, our heavenly King;
  Who endur’d the cross and grave,
  Sinners to redeem and save.    Hallelujah!

  But the pains which he endured
  Our salvation have procured;
  Now above the sky he’s King,
  Where the angels ever sing.    Hallelujah!




                                 69.


    Angels from on high proclaim,
      Now he comes—earth’s sovereign King!
    Cherubs, seraphs, sound His fame!
      Should not, then, all children sing
  Hosanna to the Son of David,
  Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!

    See the Babe of Bethlehem!
      Wise men to Him presents bring;
    We are not so rich as they,
      Yet we can, though children, sing
                              Hosanna, &c.

    See the men who throng around,
      At his wisdom wondering;
    We adore Him—and are found
      Joined in chorus; children sing
                              Hosanna, &c.

    Pharisees and scribes all hate,
      And against Him slander bring;
    Do they curse him? we will bless!
      Louder, louder, children, sing
                              Hosanna, &c.

    When His glorious work was done,
      High he soared on angel’s wing;
    Great the victory He hath won,
      Joyful anthems let us sing!
                              Hosanna, &c.




                                 70.


  From all that dwell below the skies,
  Let the Redeemer’s praise arise;
  Let the Creator’s name be sung
  Through every land, by every tongue.

  Eternal are thy mercies, Lord,
  Eternal truth attends thy word;
  Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,
  Till suns shall rise and set no more.




                                 71.


  Saviour and Lord of all, we lift our souls to Thee;
  Guide us and guard us, whate’er our lot may be.
  When we are full of grief, victims of anxious fear,
  Save us—oh, save us! Jesus, be near.

  Brighten our darkest hour, till the last hour shall come:
  Then, in Thy power, oh take us home!
  Gracious Deliverer, how long wilt Thou delay?
  O gracious Saviour, bear us away!




                                 72.


  Jesus, who lived above the sky,
  Came down to be a man and die:
  And in the Bible we may see,
  How very good he used to be.

  He went about, He was so kind,
  To cure poor people who were blind;
  And many who were sick and lame,
  He pitied them, and did the same.

  And, more than that, He told them, too,
  The things that God would have them do;
  And was so gentle and so mild,
  He would have listened to a child.

  But such a cruel death he died!
  He was hung up and crucified!
  And those kind hands that did such good,
  They nailed them to a cross of wood.

  And so He died!—and this is why
  He came to be a man and die:
  The Bible says He came from Heaven,
  That we might have our sins forgiven.

  He knew how wicked man had been,
  And knew that God must punish sin;
  So, out of pity, Jesus said,
  He’d bear the punishment instead.




                                 73.


  Mortals, awake! with angels join,
    And chant the solemn lay;
  Joy, love, and gratitude combine
    To hail th’ auspicious day.

  In heaven the rapturous song began,
    And sweet seraphic fire
  Through all the shining legions ran,
    And strung and tuned the lyre.

  Swift through the vast expanse it flew,
    And loud the echo rolled;
  The theme, the song, the joy was new—
    ’Twas more than heaven could hold!

  Down through the portals of the sky
    The impetuous torrent ran;
  And angels flew with eager joy
    To bear the news to man.

  Wrapt in the silence of the night
    Lay all the eastern world,
  When bursting glorious heavenly light
    The wondrous scene unfurled.

  Hark! the cherubic armies shout,
    And glory leads the song!
  Good-will and peace are heard throughout
    The harmonious heavenly throng.




                                 74.


  Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
  Look upon a little child:
  Pity my simplicity,
  Teach me, Lord, to come to Thee.

  Fain I would to Thee be brought,
  Lamb of God, forbid it not!
  In the kingdom of Thy grace,
  Give a little child a place.




                                 75.


  Lord, how delightful ’tis to see
  A whole assembly worship Thee!
  At once they sing, at once they pray;
  They hear of heaven, and learn the way.

  I have been there, and still would go;
  ’Tis like a little heaven below:
  Not all my pleasures, nor my play,
  Shall tempt me to forget this day.

  O write upon my memory, Lord,
  The texts and doctrines of thy Word,
  That I may break thy laws no more,
  But love thee better than before.

  With thoughts of Christ and things divine,
  Fill up this foolish heart of mine;
  That, hoping pardon through his blood,
  I may lie down and wake with God.




                                 76.


  There is a happy land,
    Far, far away!
  Where saints in glory stand,
    Bright, bright as day.
  O how they sweetly sing,
  Worthy is our Saviour King!
  Loud let his praises ring,—
      Praise, praise for aye!

  Come to this happy land,
    Come, come away;
  Why will ye doubting stand,
    Why still delay?
  Oh! we shall happy be,
  When from sin and sorrow free;
  Lord, we shall live with thee,
      Blest, blest for aye!




                                 77.


  Lovelier far than Sharon’s Rose,
  Music no such sweetness knows;
  E’en the Lily’s modest white
  Ceases to afford delight;
  When my Lord and Saviour’s here,
  All but vanity appear!

  Ophir’s gold, how poor and dim!
  What are pearls compared with him?
  Pleasure is a specious name,
  Diadems no glory claim!
  Give me but a sight of him,
  All beside’s a baseless dream.

  Blessed Jesus! let my tongue
  Evermore thy love prolong;
  Can I cease to think of Thee,
  Life’s immortal, fragrant tree?
  Rather let the crimson tide
  Instant from its channels glide!

  No! my heart to Thee is given,
  All my bliss is fixed in heaven:
  All my wish to feel thy grace,
  Taste thy love and see thy grace,
  Where each ardent spirit vies,
  Thee to praise in highest skies.




                                 78.


  Our souls shall magnify the Lord;
    In God the Saviour we rejoice:
  While we repeat the Virgin’s song,
    May the same spirit tune our voice.

  To those who fear and trust the Lord,
    His mercy stands for ever sure:
  From age to age the promise lives,
    And the performance is secure.

  But now no more shall Israel wait,
    No more the Gentiles lie forlorn:
  Lo! the Desire of Nations comes;
    Behold, the promised seed is born!




                                 79.


  Great God! what do I see and hear?
    The end of things created!
  The Judge of mankind doth appear,
    On clouds of glory seated.
  The trumpet sounds; the graves restore
  The dead which they contained before;
    Prepare, my soul, to meet him.

  The dead in Christ shall first arise,
    At the last trumpet’s sounding,
  Caught up to meet Him in the skies,
    With joy their Lord surrounding!
  No gloomy fears their souls dismay;
  His presence sheds eternal day
    On those prepared to meet Him.

  Great God! what do I see and hear?
    The end of things created!
  The Judge of mankind doth appear,
    On clouds of glory seated.
  Beneath His cross I view the day
  When heaven and earth shall melt away,
    And thus prepare to meet Him.




                                 80.


  O for a glance of heavenly love,
    Our hearts and songs to raise;
  Sweetly to bear our souls above,
    And mingle with their lays.

  With joy the chorus we’ll repeat,—
    “Glory to God on high!
  Good-will and peace are now complete,—
    Jesus was born to die.”

  Hail, Prince of Peace, for ever hail!
    Redeemer, Brother, Friend;
  Though earth and time, and life, should fail,
    Thy praise shall never end.




                                 81.


  How shall I meet my Saviour?
    How shall I welcome Thee?
  What manner of behaviour
    Is now required of me?
  Let thine illumination
    Guide heart and hand aright,
  That this my preparation
    Be pleasing in thy sight.

  While with her sweetest flowers
    Thy Zion strews the way,
  I’ll raise with all my powers
    To Thee a grateful lay:
  To Thee, the King of Glory,
    I’ll raise a song divine;
  And make thy love’s bright story
    In graceful numbers shine.

  I lay in fetters groaning,
    Thou cam’st to set me free;
  My shame I was bemoaning,
    With grace thou clothedst me;
  Thou raisedst me to glory,
    Endowed me with thy bliss,
  Which is not transitory,
    As worldly pleasure is.

  This caused thy incarnation,
    This brought thee down to me:
  Thy thirst for my salvation
    Contrived my liberty!
  May I still enjoy this feeling,
    In all need to Jesus go!
  Prove his wounds each day more healing,
    And himself more fully know.




                                 82.


  Before Jehovah’s awful throne,
    Ye nations, bow with sacred joy;
  Know that the Lord is God alone:
    He can create and He destroy.

  His sovereign power, without our aid,
    Made us of clay, and formed us men;
  And when like wand’ring sheep we strayed,
    He brought us to his fold again.

  We’ll crowd thy gates with thankful songs,
    High as the heavens our voices raise;
  And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
    Shall fill thy courts with sounding praise.

  Wide as the world is thy command,
    Vast as eternity thy love;
  Firm as a rock thy truth must stand,
    When rolling years shall cease to move.




                                 83.


  If Jesus Christ was sent
    To save us from our sin,
  And kindly teach us to repent,
    We should at once begin.

  ’Tis not enough to say,
    We’re sorry, and repent,
  Yet still go on from day to day,
    Just as we always went.

  Repentance is to leave
    The sins we loved before;
  And show that we in earnest grieve,
    By doing so no more.

  Lord, make us thus sincere,
    To watch as well as pray;
  However small, however dear,
    Take all our sins away.




                                 84.


  O come, let us sing to the God of salvation!
  To Jesus our King who hath brought consolation,
  Who in His own body hath opened a fountain
  To cleanse our transgressions, tho’ high as a mountain!

  Hallelujah to the Lamb who hath bought us a pardon;
  We’ll praise Him again when we’ve passed over Jordan!

  Though we are deprav’d, though with sin we are burdened,
  Our souls may be saved, and our sins may be pardoned;
  For Jesus, our Saviour, hath promised to bless us,
  And free us for ever from those that oppress us.
                                Hallelujah, &c.

  The hour may be nigh when our bosoms, faint heaving,
  Shall breathe their last sigh in the peace of believing;
  And Thou from our pillow all darkness dispelling,
  Wilt calm the rude billow of Jordan’s proud swelling.
                                Hallelujah, &c.




                                 85.


  How kind is the Saviour, how great is his love!
  To bless little children, he came from above;
  He left holy angels, and their bright abode,
  To dwell here with children, and teach them the road.

  He wept in the garden, and died on the tree,
  To open a fountain for sinners like me:
  His blood is that fountain which pardon bestows,
  And cleanses the foulest wherever it flows.

  He went back to glory; but left us His Word,
  Which oft from our teachers and pastors we’ve heard;
  He sends forth His Spirit our hearts to inflame,
  With joy to His service, and love to His name.

  O help us, blest Jesus, more sweetly to praise,
  And walk in Thy footsteps the rest of our days;
  Then raise us, dear Saviour, to taste of Thy love,
  And praise Thee for ever with angels above!




                                 86.


  I sing the almighty power of God,
    That made the mountains rise;
  That spread the flowing seas abroad,
    And built the lofty skies.

  I sing the wisdom that ordained
    The sun to rule the day;
  The moon shines full at his command,
    And all the stars obey.

  I sing the goodness of the Lord,
    That filled the earth with food;
  He formed the creatures with His Word,
    And then pronounced them good.

  Lord! how thy wonders are displayed
    Where’er I turn mine eye!
  If I survey the ground I tread,
    Or gaze upon the sky.

  There’s not a plant or flower below
    But makes thy glories known;
  And clouds arise, and tempests blow,
    By order from Thy throne.

  Creatures, as numerous as they be,
    Are subject to Thy care;
  There’s not a place where we can flee
    But God is present there.

  In heaven He shines with beams of love,
    With wrath in hell beneath;
  ’Tis on His earth I stand or move,
    And ’tis His air I breathe.

  His hand is my perpetual guard;
    He keeps me with His eye:
  Why should I then forget the Lord,
    Who is for ever nigh?




                                 87.


  Hail, Bethlehem! favour’d city, hail!
    And hail thou star, with lustre mild,
  Whose light, unerring, points the way
    Of sages, to the holy Child!

  Yes, ye were wise—and heaven-taught knew
    The language of that mystic ray,
  Which led you far from Persia’s plains,
    From twilight dim, to noontide day.

  True to the light that star arose
    On you, though far from Salem’s towers;
  That star to Bethlehem leads you where
    The righteous Sun his radiance pours.

  And thus may we our way pursue,
    Improve our rising dawn of grace,
  Which, followed, will to Jesus lead,
    Jesus, our “Sun of Righteousness.”




                                 88.


  Once thou didst on earth appear
    For all mankind to atone;
  Now be manifested here,
    And bid our sins begone.

  Come, and by thy presence chase
    Its nature with its guilt and power;
  Jesus, shew thy open face,
    And sin shall be no more.

  Thou, who didst so greatly stoop
    To a poor virgin’s womb,
  Here thy mean abode take up,
    To me, my Saviour, come.

  Come, and Satan’s works destroy,
    And let me all thy Godhead prove;
  Fill’d with peace and heavenly joy,
    And pure, eternal love!




                         W. WALKER AND SONS,
                                OF THE
                   Wharfedale Steam-Printing Works,
                          OTLEY, YORKSHIRE,
            ARE PUBLISHERS OF A VERY INTERESTING SERIES OF
                     Reward Books and Recitations
                    For Sabbath and other Schools;
                    RURAL DIALOGUES, FOR CHILDREN;
                      DIALOGUES ON THE MESSIAH;
                _Temperance Dialogues & Recitations;_
                         HUMOROUS DIALOGUES,
                 For Festivals and Anniversaries; and
                        GEMS OF SACRED MELODY,
                 In Penny Sheets of Excellent Music.


     Catalogues sent to any Address on receipt of a Penny Stamp.




                         Transcriber’s Notes


--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this
  eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 88 FAVOURITE CAROLS AND HYMNS FOR CHRISTMAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.