Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                 LEVER
                            _Golden Jubilee
                             USA 1895-1945_




                                   10
                           LUSCIOUS NEW CAKES


               MADE BY SPRY'S AMAZING NEW ONE-BOWL METHOD

                         --_NO BUTTER NEEDED!_

   IT'S EASY NOW TO GET LIGHTER, MORE DELICIOUS CAKES--EVEN IF YOU'RE
                            SHORT ON SUGAR!

                                                       _says Aunt Jenny_


                 Better cakes than ever, Spry's new way
                  No butter needed for a single cake!

    [Illustration: NO CREAMING NOW--YOU SAVE 2/3 MIXING TIME]

    [Illustration: Sift dry ingredients into mixing bowl--drop in Spry.
    No creaming of shortening and sugar, no mixing at all at this stage,
    thanks to New Spry's special blendability!]

    [Illustration: SMOOTHER BATTER--ONLY ONE MIXING BOWL TO WASH]

    [Illustration: Add liquids as directed. Beat with round-the-bowl
    strokes--about 100 strokes a minute. Easy-Mix Spry blends like
    magic--gives easier-pouring batter.]

    [Illustration: TRY MY GLORIA CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE--EVEN BEGINNERS
    CAN MAKE THIS OR ANY OF THESE LIGHTER BETTER-TASTING CAKES NOW]


                      GLORIA CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE
                         _(2-Egg Yellow Cake)_

    [Illustration: 1. Gloria Chocolate Layer Cake]

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[1]
     1-1/3 cups sugar
     2-1/2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use 4
           teaspoons)
         1 teaspoon salt
       1/2 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

         1 cup less 2 tablespoons milk
     1-1/2 teaspoons vanilla
         2 eggs, unbeaten

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD about 2/3 of milk, then vanilla, and beat 150 strokes....
SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD eggs and
beat 250 strokes.... ADD remaining milk and beat 50 strokes.... BAKE in
two 9-inch or deep 8-inch Spry-coated layer pans in moderately hot oven
(375° F.) 25-35 minutes.... SPREAD Gloria Chocolate Frosting between
layers and on top of cake. PRESS pecan halves into frosting around edge
of cake. Increase frosting recipe one-half to make enough frosting to
cover sides, too.

_Maple Fondant Cake._ Add 1/2 teaspoon maple extract to batter and bake
in layers as directed. Spread Maple Fondant Icing between layers and on
top of cake. Decorate with nuts, if desired.


                          GOLDEN JUBILEE CAKE

    [Illustration: 2. Golden Jubilee Cake]

The makers of Spry are celebrating their Golden Jubilee.... _You_ will
find cause for celebration, too, in the more delicious cakes you can
make now by Spry's new method.

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[2]
     1-1/3 cups sugar
         2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use
           3-1/2 teaspoons)
       1/4 teaspoon soda
         1 teaspoon salt
         1 teaspoon grated orange rind
       1/4 teaspoon grated lemon rind
       2/3 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

           Juice of 1 medium orange plus water to make 2/3 cup
         2 eggs, unbeaten
         2 tablespoons lemon juice (Don't add till end of mixing)

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, soda, and salt into mixing bowl....
ADD grated fruit rinds.... DROP in Spry.... ADD combined orange juice
and water and beat 150 strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and spoon often
throughout entire mixing.... ADD eggs and beat 250 strokes.... ADD lemon
juice and beat 50 strokes.... BAKE in two deep 8-inch Spry-coated layer
pans in moderately hot oven (375° F.) 30-40 minutes. SPREAD Golden
Jubilee Frosting between layers and on top and sides.


                        ORANGE UPSIDE-DOWN CAKE

    [Illustration: 3. Orange Upside-Down Cake]

_Saves sugar--needs no frosting._ Easy one-egg cake with company
glamour. Grand for cottage pudding. Stays fresh and moist for
days--thanks to New Spry.

       1/2 cup brown sugar, firmly packed
         8 or 9 orange slices, 3/8 inch thick (cut in fourths)

Sprinkle brown sugar in Spry-coated 8 x 8-inch pan. Arrange oranges on
sugar. Then make batter.

                          Dry Ingredients

     1-1/4 cups sifted cake flour[3]
       3/4 cup sugar
         2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use
           2-1/2 teaspoons)
       1/2 teaspoon salt
       1/3 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

       1/2 cup milk
         1 teaspoon vanilla
         1 egg

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD milk and vanilla and beat 150 strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and
spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD egg and beat 150
strokes.... POUR batter over oranges and sugar in pan.... BAKE in
moderately hot oven (375° F.) 30-40 minutes.... SERVE warm upside down.
Maraschino cherries can be used for decoration.


                      MAKE THE MOST OF YOUR SUGAR!

If low on sugar, you can still make these cakes. Follow these
sugar-thrifty tips.

_Gloria Chocolate Layer Cake._ Use only 3/4 cup sugar, add 3/4 cup light
corn sirup, reduce milk to 1/2 cup. Add all of corn sirup (after
dropping in Spry), then 1/2 of milk, and beat 150 strokes. Continue as
in recipe.

_Marbled Spice Cake._ Follow same directions as for Gloria Chocolate
Layer Cake.

_Filigree Devil's Food Cake._ Use only 3/4 cup sugar, add 1/2 cup dark
corn sirup, reduce milk to 3/4 cup. Add all of corn sirup (after
dropping in Spry), then about 2/3 of milk, and beat 150 strokes.
Continue as in recipe.

_Sugar-Saving Seven Minute Frosting._ Mix in double boiler: 1 egg white,
1/2 cup corn sirup, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1/4 teaspoon cream of tartar.
Place over boiling water and beat 7 minutes. Remove from fire and add
desired flavoring. Use this recipe for Golden Jubilee Frosting, Peerless
Frosting, Cherry Fluff Frosting.

_Make cakes that need no frostings_, like the fruity Victorian
Applesauce Cake, nut-laden Party Cake, Orange Upside-Down Cake.

_Make small cakes_, like Fudge Bar Cake.

_Forget side frostings_--frost layer cakes between and on top only ...
frost loaves on top.

_Make Orange Upside-Down Cake_ without topping and serve as Cottage
Pudding.

Light, luscious cakes are one of the best ways in which to "spend" some
of your sugar. Now, more than ever, when you make a cake, you want it to
be the _best_ cake. Sugar--and other ingredients, too--are precious,
sometimes scarce. Get the most out of them by using these tested, sure
recipes. Make the finest cakes you ever made--cakes that are well worth
the cup or two of sugar "saved up for their making."

    [Illustration: EVERY CAKE A WINNER--_AND SO EASY NOW!_]

    [Illustration: Cakes]

  1. Gloria Chocolate Layer Cake
  2. Golden Jubilee Cake
  3. Orange Upside-Down Cake
  Make the Most of your Sugar
  4. Gala Party Cake
  5. Marbled Spice Cake
  6. Peerless Coconut White Cake
  7. Filigree Devil's Food Cake
  8. Victorian Applesauce Cake
  Superb Frostings to Flatter your Spry Cakes
  9. Fudge Bar Cake
  10. Cherry Dream Cake


                            GALA PARTY CAKE

    [Illustration: 4. Gala Party Cake]

Win loads of praise! Serve this beautiful nut cake on festive occasions.
Made with New Spry, this cake will stay moist for days. Rich and
delicious even _without_ frosting. Try it this way if short of sugar.

                          Dry Ingredients

     2-3/4 cups sifted cake flour[4]
     1-3/4 cups sugar
         2 teaspoons baking powder
     1-1/2 teaspoons salt
         1 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

       3/4 cup milk
         1 teaspoon almond extract
         1 teaspoon orange extract
         3 eggs and 1 egg yolk, unbeaten
         1 cup walnuts, cut fine

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD milk, flavoring extracts, and 1 whole egg and beat 200
strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD
the remaining 2 eggs and egg yolk and beat 250 strokes.... ADD nuts and
mix 25 strokes.... BAKE in Spry-coated 9-inch tube pan in moderately hot
oven (375° F.) 60-70 minutes.... FROST with Seven Minute Frosting
flavored with 1/4 teaspoon each almond and orange extracts.


                           MARBLED SPICE CAKE

    [Illustration: 5. Marbled Spice Cake]

Attractive, delicious cake. Made so quick and easy--without creaming or
long, hard beating--thanks to Spry's new blendability.

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[5]
     1-1/3 cups sugar
     2-1/2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use 4
           teaspoons)
         1 teaspoon salt
       1/2 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

       3/4 cup milk
     1-1/2 teaspoons vanilla
         2 eggs, unbeaten

                      Spices for 1/2 of Batter

         1 teaspoon cinnamon
       1/4 teaspoon cloves
       1/2 teaspoon allspice
       1/2 teaspoon nutmeg

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD about 2/3 of milk, then vanilla, and beat 150 strokes....
SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD eggs and
beat 250 strokes.... ADD remaining milk and beat 50 strokes.... DIVIDE
batter in half.... ADD spices to 1/2 of batter and blend.... DROP batter
alternately by tablespoonfuls into 10 x 10 x 2-inch Spry-coated pan. RUN
spatula through batter several times to marble.... BAKE in moderately
hot oven (375° F.) 35-45 minutes.... FROST top of cake with Minute
Penuche Frosting.


                      PEERLESS COCONUT WHITE CAKE

    [Illustration: 6. Peerless Coconut White Cake]

Feather-light, snowy white! So easy to make with New Easy-Mix Spry and
its new method. No creaming--no long, hard beating!

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[6]
     1-1/4 cups sugar
     3-1/2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use 5
           teaspoons)
         1 teaspoon salt
       1/2 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

         1 cup milk
         1 teaspoon vanilla
       3/4 teaspoon almond extract
       1/4 teaspoon orange extract
         3 egg whites, unbeaten

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD about 2/3 of milk, then flavorings, and beat 150
strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD
egg whites and beat 250 strokes.... ADD remaining milk and beat 50
strokes.... BAKE in two deep 8-inch Spry-coated layer pans in moderate
oven (350° F.) 30-40 minutes.... SPREAD Peerless Frosting between layers
and on top and sides. Sprinkle 2 cups coconut all over frosted cake.


                       FILIGREE DEVIL'S FOOD CAKE

    [Illustration: 7. Filigree Devil's Food Cake]

Richer flavor, moist, velvety texture. Economical. Uses cocoa. Mixed in
less than 5 minutes--with quick-blending Spry. Decorate it with web
design for company.

                          Dry Ingredients

     1-1/2 cups sifted cake flour[7]
     1-1/4 cups sugar
       1/2 cup cocoa
     1-1/4 teaspoons soda
       1/4 teaspoon cream of tartar
         1 teaspoon salt
       2/3 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

         1 cup sweet milk
         1 teaspoon vanilla
         2 eggs, unbeaten
           (If sour milk is used, omit cream of tartar.)

SIFT flour, sugar, cocoa, soda, cream of tartar, and salt into mixing
bowl.... DROP in Spry.... ADD about 2/3 of milk, then vanilla, and beat
150 strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing....
ADD eggs and beat 250 strokes.... ADD remaining milk and beat 50
strokes.... BAKE in two 9-inch or deep 8-inch Spry-coated layer pans in
moderate oven (350° F.) 30-40 minutes.... SPREAD Seven Minute Frosting
between layers and on top.... LET frosting set so it will "pull"....
MAKE filigree effect as illustrated.... MELT 1/2 ounce chocolate with
1/2 teaspoon Spry.... MARK 5 circles around top of cake and pour in
chocolate.... MAKE 8 evenly spaced strokes toward edge, then make 8
upward strokes to give web effect.


                       VICTORIAN APPLESAUCE CAKE

    [Illustration: 8. Victorian Applesauce Cake]

Spicy, fruity! Favorite with young and old! So easy with Spry! Keeps
fresh a long time. Grand for lunch boxes. _Saves sugar--needs no
frosting!_

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[8]
     1-1/2 cups sugar
     1-1/2 teaspoons soda
     1-1/2 teaspoons salt
         2 tablespoons cocoa
       1/2 teaspoon each cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, allspice
       1/2 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

     1-1/2 cups unsweetened applesauce
         2 eggs, unbeaten

                          Fruits and Nuts

       3/4 cup dates, chopped
       3/4 cup raisins, chopped
       3/4 cup nuts, chopped

                              Topping

       1/4 cup nuts, chopped
         2 tablespoons sugar

SIFT flour, sugar, soda, salt, cocoa, and spices into mixing bowl....
DROP in Spry.... ADD about 2/3 of applesauce and beat 150 strokes....
SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout entire mixing.... ADD eggs and
beat 250 strokes.... ADD remaining applesauce and beat 50 strokes....
ADD dates, raisins, and nuts and mix thoroughly.... POUR batter into
Spry-coated tube pan. SPRINKLE nut-sugar topping mixture over batter....
BAKE in moderate oven (350° F.) 1 hour and 25-35 minutes. Or bake in
Spry-coated 10 x 10 x 2-inch pan in moderate oven (350° F.) 55-65
minutes. If preferred, omit topping.


              SUPERB FROSTINGS TO FLATTER YOUR SPRY CAKES

GLORIA CHOCOLATE FROSTING--Combine 2 tablespoons Spry, 1 cup sifted
confectioner's sugar, 1/4 teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon vanilla. Add 2 egg
yolks and beat until smooth. Add 1/4 cup scalded milk and 3 ounces
melted chocolate; beat thoroughly until frosting is thick and smooth.

MINUTE FUDGE FROSTING--Place in saucepan 1 ounce chocolate, finely cut,
1 cup sugar, 1/3 cup milk, 1/4 cup Spry, 1/4 teaspoon salt. Bring slowly
to full rolling boil, stirring constantly and boil 1 minute. Add 1
teaspoon vanilla and beat until thick enough to spread. If frosting
becomes too thick, add about 1 tablespoon cream.

MAPLE FONDANT ICING--Use recipe for Minute Fudge Frosting. Omit
chocolate and add 1/4 teaspoon maple extract along with vanilla.

MINUTE PENUCHE FROSTING--Use recipe for Minute Fudge Frosting. Omit
chocolate and use 1 cup firmly packed brown sugar instead of white
sugar; use 1/4 cup milk and 1/2 teaspoon vanilla.

SEVEN MINUTE FROSTING--Put 1 unbeaten egg white, 3/4 cup sugar, 2-1/2
tablespoons water, 1/2 teaspoon light corn sirup in top of double boiler
and mix thoroughly. Place over rapidly boiling water and beat constantly
with rotary egg beater until mixture will hold a peak (about 7 minutes).
Remove from fire, add 1/2 teaspoon vanilla, and beat until cool and
thick enough to spread.

GOLDEN JUBILEE FROSTING--Omit vanilla, add 1/2 teaspoon grated orange
rind, 1/4 teaspoon lemon extract, and a few drops of orange coloring
after frosting is cooked. Sprinkle sides of frosted cake with 1/2 cup
slivered blanched almonds or coconut.

PEERLESS FROSTING--Double recipe for Seven Minute Frosting. Use these
flavorings: 1-1/2 teaspoons vanilla, 1 teaspoon almond extract, 1/2
teaspoon orange extract.

CHERRY FLUFF FROSTING--Use recipe for Seven Minute Frosting. Substitute
maraschino juice for water and add 1/2 teaspoon almond extract with the
vanilla. Double recipe to make enough frosting for sides, too.


                             FUDGE BAR CAKE

    [Illustration: 9. Fudge Bar Cake]

It's a favorite with every man--this rich, chocolate-y cake so easy to
make by Spry's new method.

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 ounces chocolate, cut in pieces
         1 cup sifted cake flour[9]
         1 cup sugar
         1 teaspoon salt
       1/2 teaspoon soda
       1/4 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

       1/2 cup boiling water
       1/4 cup sweet milk plus
       1/2 tablespoon vinegar or 1/4 cup sour milk
       1/2 teaspoon vanilla
         1 egg, unbeaten

PUT cut-up chocolate in mixing bowl. POUR boiling water gradually over
chocolate and stir until melted.... Cool.... SIFT flour, sugar, salt,
and soda into mixing bowl containing chocolate mixture.... DROP in
Spry.... BEAT 200 strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and spoon often throughout
entire mixing.... ADD milk, vanilla, and egg.... BEAT 100 strokes....
BAKE in Spry-coated 8 x 8 x 2-inch pan in moderate oven (350° F.) 35-45
minutes. SPREAD top of cake with Minute Fudge Frosting into which 1/4
cup nuts have been stirred just before spreading. For a larger cake like
the one pictured, double the recipe, but use 2-1/2 cups cake flour. If
all-purpose flour is used, use 2-1/4 cups, add milk and vanilla after
dropping in Spry, and beat 200 strokes. Add eggs and beat 200 strokes.


                           CHERRY DREAM CAKE

    [Illustration: 10. Cherry Dream Cake]

How your guests' eyes will shine! Hear them exclaim--"Exquisite!"
"Divine!" And this party cake is so easy to make Spry's new way.

                          Dry Ingredients

         2 cups sifted cake flour[10]
     1-1/4 cups sugar
     2-1/2 teaspoons baking powder (with a tartrate powder, use 3
           teaspoons)
         1 teaspoon salt
       1/2 cup Spry

                         Liquid Ingredients

       3/4 cup milk
       1/2 teaspoon lemon extract
     1-1/2 teaspoons almond extract
         3 egg whites, unbeaten
        18 maraschino cherries, well drained and cut very fine.

SIFT flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt into mixing bowl.... DROP in
Spry.... ADD milk and extracts and beat 200 strokes.... SCRAPE bowl and
spoon often while mixing.... ADD egg whites and beat 250 strokes.... ADD
cherries and blend.... BAKE in two deep 8-inch Spry-coated layer pans in
moderate oven (350° F.) 25-35 minutes. FROST with Cherry Fluff Frosting.




                       Electric Mixer Directions

_All the cakes in this folder can be made on the electric mixer._ In
general, follow the hand-mixing directions, adding the liquid
ingredients in 2 stages and beating on low speed for 2 minutes in each
stage. Scrape bowl and beater after each mixing stage.

    [Illustration: REMEMBER, FOLKS--NEW EASY-MIX SPRY IS GRAND FOR _ALL_
    BAKING AN' FRYIN']

REVOLUTIONIZES COOKING--New Spry can give you the most amazing help with
your cooking.... See how its new blendability cuts down mixing time,
makes possible new short-cut methods--better results!

See how easy it is to make flaky, tender pastry with Spry.... Fry the
pleasant Spry way ... no unpleasant smoke or smell! Get
delicate-tasting, golden-brown fried foods so digestible even the
children can eat them. Yes, you can be a _better_ cook with Spry!

Spry is pure, all-vegetable shortening ... needs no refrigeration ...
keeps fresh and sweet on pantry shelf. Spry is grand for every
shortening purpose--in cakes, pies, cookies, breads--also for making
white sauce, dessert sauces, cooking vegetables, etc. Do _all_ your
cooking with Spry and save your butter for table use.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 2 tablespoons, add all
    milk and vanilla, and beat 200 strokes. Add eggs and beat 250
    strokes.

[2]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 2 tablespoons, add
    combined orange juice and water, and beat 200 strokes; then proceed
    as directed in recipe.

[3]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 1 tablespoon and follow
    directions in recipe.

[4]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, use only 2-1/2 cups. Add milk,
    flavorings, and eggs all at one time and beat 260 strokes. Add nuts
    and beat 50 strokes.

[5]_See note for Gloria Chocolate Layer Cake._

[6]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 2 tablespoons, add all
    milk and flavorings, and beat 200 strokes. Add egg whites and beat
    250 strokes.

[7]_See note for Gloria Chocolate Layer Cake._

[8]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 2 tablespoons, add all
    applesauce at one time, and beat 200 strokes. Add eggs and beat 250
    strokes. Add fruits and nuts and mix well.

[9]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But if
    _all-purpose flour_ is used, add milk and vanilla after dropping in
    Spry, and beat 200 strokes. Add egg and beat 100 strokes.

[10]_Cake flour_ is recommended because it makes the finest cakes. But
    if _all-purpose flour_ is used, reduce flour 2 tablespoons, and
    follow directions in recipe.




                          Transcriber's Notes


--"Spry's" is a mostly-defunct brand of vegetable shortening that
  competed with the now-better-known Crisco.

--Silently corrected a few typos.

--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

--Transcribed the text in some illustrations.

--Moved cake photographs on pages 3-4 to the recipes; and linked the
  captions to the recipes.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 10 LUSCIOUS NEW CAKES, MADE BY SPRY'S AMAZING NEW ONE-BOWL METHOD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.