[Illustration: JANUARY, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 1.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.
  EDITORIAL.

    ANOTHER YEAR                                            1
    PARAGRAPHS                                              2
    RETIREMENT OF REV. DR. LADD—MENDI MISSION, JOHN
      BROWN STEAMER                                         3
    PARAGRAPHS—HOW LONG IS THIS THING GOING ON?             4
    BENEFACTIONS—GENERAL NOTES                              5
    GROUP OF MONGOLIANS (CUT)                               7
    TRAINING COLORED GIRLS. MISS ANNA M. CAHILL             8
    INDUSTRIAL WORK AT MEMPHIS. MISS ELLA HAMILTON         12


  THE SOUTH.

    AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.               13
    NEW BUILDING AT ATHENS, ALA.                           14
    TRINITY SCHOOL BUILDING (CUT)                          15
    THE GEORGIA ASSOCIATION                                16
    THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION                          17
    WYTHEVILLE, VA.—DEATH OF REV. W. H. ASH                18


  THE INDIANS.

  STATEMENTS RESPECTING INDIANS AND THEIR NECESSITIES:
    BY GEN. S. C. ARMSTRONG                                19


  THE CHINESE.

    HUMBLINGS: BY REV. W. C. POND                          22
    WASHEE WASHEE                                          24


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    THE LITTLE DINING-ROOM                                 24


  RECEIPTS                                                 25


  FORM OF BEQUEST—AIM AND WORK—STATISTICS—WANTS            28

                 *       *       *       *       *

                             NEW YORK.
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




PUBLICATIONS OF EUGENE R. SMITH, NEW YORK.


GOSPEL IN ALL LANDS.

THE GOSPEL IN ALL LANDS was commenced in February, 1880, and was
continued during 1880 and 1881 as a 48 page monthly. The only
numbers of these years that can now be furnished are as follows:


1880.

  _August_—Palestine, Syria, and Jewish Missions.
  _Nov._—Australasia and Malaysia.
  _Dec._—Siam and Burmah.


1881.

  _January_—American Indians.
  _February_—Papal Europe.
  _March_—Africa and Africans.
  _April_—Papal America.
  _May_—China and the Chinese.
  _June_—The Oriental Churches.
  _July_—Japan and the Japanese.
  _August_—The Jews.
  _September_—India.
  _October_—The Mohammedans.
  _November_—The Malays.
  _December_—Unoccupied Mission Fields.

Single numbers, 25 cents. Twelve numbers, $2.00. There are two
volumes a year. The twelve numbers of 1881 bound in cloth, $3.00.
By mail, $3.50.

       *       *       *       *       *


1882.

_Sixteen pages a week._

  Jan.   5—Christian Work in Cities.
  Jan.  12—Home Missions.
  Jan.  19—Missions among Freedmen.
  Jan.  26—China.
  Feb.   2—Woman’s Missionary Societies.
  Feb.   9—The West Indies.
  Feb.  16—Mexico.
  Feb.  23—Central America.
  Mar.   2—American Missionary Societies.
  Mar.   9—Missionary Concerts.
  Mar.  16—The Progress of Missions.
  Mar.  23—People and Religions of India.
  Mar.  30—Christian Work in India.
  April  6—English Missionary Societies.
  April 13—Medical Missions.
  April 20—Siam and Laos.
  April 27—Burmah.
  May    4—Northern Africa.
  May   11—Eastern & Central Africa.
  May   18—Southern Africa.
  May   25—Western Africa.
  June   1—Bible Work.
  June   8—Greenland.
  June  15—Canada.
  June  22—Indians of the Northwest.
  June  29—Indians of the U.S.
  July   6—Continental Missionary Societies.
  July  13—Roman Catholic Missions.
  July  20—Brazil.
  July  27—South America.
  Aug.   3—Missions and the Sunday School.
  Aug.  10—Independent Mission Work.
  Aug.  17—Missionary Methods.
  Aug.  24—Japan.
  Aug.  31—False Religions.
  Sept.  7—Money in relation to Missions.
  Sept. 14—Russia, Greece, and Bulgaria.
  Sept. 21—Persia & adjacent regions.
  Sept. 28—Turkey.
  Oct.   5—Missionary Literature.
  Oct.  12—Protestant Europe.
  Oct.  19—Roman Catholic Europe.
  Oct.  26—General Missions.
  Nov.   2—Polynesia.
  Nov.   9—Liberty.
  Nov.  14—Resources of Missions.
  Nov.  23—Syria and Palestine.
  Nov.  30—The Jews.
  Dec.   7—Educational Mission Work.
  Dec.  16—Malaysia and Australasia.
  Dec.  21—The Sandwich Islands.
  Dec.  28—The Missionary World.

Single numbers, six cents. The 52 numbers of the year, $2.00. The
52 numbers bound in cloth, $3.00. By mail. $3.50.

       *       *       *       *       *


1883 Gospel in All Lands.

_Sixteen pages a week._

  Jan.   4. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Jan.  11. Missionaries.
  Jan.  18. China.
  Jan.  25. American Episcopal Missions.
  Feb.   1. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Feb.   8. Children and Missions.
  Feb.  15. Mexico & Central America.
  Feb.  22. American Lutheran Missions.
  Mar.   1. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Mar.   8. Woman and Missions.
  Mar.  15. Incident and Narrative.
  Mar.  22. India.
  Mar.  29. Ceylon.
  Apr.   5. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Apr.  12. Missionary Concert Exercises.
  Apr.  19. Siam and Laos.
  Apr.  26. Christianity in Relation to Other Religions.
  May    3. Monthly Review of Missions.
  May   10. Giving and Missions.
  May   17. People of Africa.
  May   24. Missions in Africa.
  May   31. American Methodist Missions.
  Jun.   7. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Jun.  14. Missions in North America.
  Jun.  21. The American Indians.
  Jun.  28. Missions in the United States.
  July   5. Monthly Review of Missions.
  July  12. The Bible and Missions.
  July  19. Missions in South America.
  July  26. American Presbyterian Missions.
  Aug    2. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Aug    9. Missionary Obligation.
  Aug   16. Burmah.
  Aug   23. Japan.
  Aug   30. American Baptist Missions.
  Sept.  6. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Sept. 13. Mohammedanism.
  Sept. 20. Persia.
  Sept. 27. Missions in Asia.
  Oct.   4. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Oct.  11. Missions in Europe.
  Oct.  18. Catholicism.
  Oct.  25. The American Board.
  Nov.   1. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Nov.   8. Armenians and Nestorians.
  Nov.  15. Turkey.
  Nov.  22. Syria and Palestine.
  Nov.  29. Missionary Literature.
  Dec.   6. Monthly Review of Missions.
  Dec.  13. Missions in Oceanica.
  Dec.  20. Missionary Societies.
  Dec.  27. Progress of Missions.

Single numbers, six cents. One year, two dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *


=THE LITTLE MISSIONARY= is the Children’s Missionary Paper. Four
pages a month, filled with pictures, stories about heathen lands
and people, and stories that will increase the interest of the
children in missions.

The principal part of each number is devoted to pictures and
stories on the following:

  _January_: General Missions.
  _February_: The People of China.
  _March_: The People of Mexico.
  _April_: The People of India.
  _May_: Siam and Burmah.
  _June_: The People of Africa.
  _July_: The American Indians.
  _August_: South America.
  _September_: The People of Japan.
  _October_: Persia and Turkey.
  _November_: Syria and Palestine.
  _December_: Oceanica.

One copy, 25 cents. Six copies to one address, 50 cents. Twenty
copies and over to one address, each six cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *


=MAP OF CHINA.= It is on paper, 17 by 18 inches, showing each
of the 18 provinces colored, and giving the names of mountains,
rivers, and more than 5,000 cities and towns. The most complete map
of China published. Price, twenty cents, postage paid.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MISSIONARY WORLD,

a missionary monthly for young people. Sixteen pages a month,
profusely illustrated, containing interesting and instructive
reading concerning all lands and all people, and stories that will
awaken and develop the missionary spirit. It can be made a local
paper by removing the four outside pages, and putting on it a cover
containing local name, news, etc. One copy, 50 cents a year. Twenty
copies and over, each 30 cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *


1883 MISSIONARY ALMANAC.

It contains a list of missionary books, missionary periodicals,
missionary societies, with names and address of their secretaries,
names and stations of all the foreign missionaries from the United
States, maps, and other valuable information relating to missions.

Price, 25 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *


=SUNSHINE= is a beautiful little eight page monthly paper,
containing little pictures, little lessons, and little stories for
little children. “A little treasure.” One copy, 25 cents a year.
Six copies to one address, 50 cents. Twenty copies and over to one
address, each six cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Inter-Seminary Missionary Alliance.= A pamphlet of 64 pages,
containing the proceedings and the addresses made before the first
Inter-Seminary Missionary Convention (1880). Price, 25 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *


INTERNATIONAL LESSONS.

=My Picture Lesson=, a beautiful four page weekly, (mailed
monthly), containing pictures, lessons, and stories about the
International Lessons for the children. “The Best for Primary
Classes.” One copy, 25 cents a year. Ten copies, $1.50 a year.
Twenty copies $2.60. One hundred copies, $13.00 a year.

=International Lesson Quarterly=, 16 pages a quarter, containing
Scripture Text, Questions, Reviews, Hymns, Brief Notes, Opening
Exercises, etc. Three cents a quarter; twelve cents a year. Twenty
copies and over, each seven cents a year.

=Light on the Lesson Quarterly=, 33 pages a quarter, containing
Scripture Text, Revised Text, Questions, Reviews, Hymns,
Explanatory and Devotional Notes, Opening Exercises, Illustrations,
etc. Five cents a quarter; 20 cents a year. Twenty copies and over,
each fourteen cents a year.

=Lesson Helper Quarterly=, 48 pages a quarter, containing
Scripture Text, Revised Version, Questions, Reviews, Hymns, Maps,
Illustrations, Opening Exercises, Explanatory, Illustrative, and
Devotional Notes, Opinions of the Best Commentators on the Lesson,
etc. Eight cents a quarter; 30 cents a year. Twenty copies and
over, each twenty cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

All Lesson Helps are stopped at close of time paid for.
Subscriptions amounting to fractions of a dollar can be paid in one
cent U.S. postage stamps. Canadian stamps cannot be used. Address
orders to Eugene R. Smith, Publisher,

                                     74 Bible House, New York.




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

           VOL. XXXVII.      JANUARY, 1883.      NO. 1.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANOTHER YEAR.

With this issue THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY greets its readers the
thirty-seventh time on the threshold of a new year. For more than a
generation it has participated in mighty struggles for the welfare
of the church and the nation.

There is no more lofty tower of observation than that builded
on the foundations of righteousness. From this eminence, the
MISSIONARY has cast its eye to the end of the earth and recorded
the progress and change in events that have brought about this glad
day.

The horrors of the slave trade, now happily passing away, have
been unceasingly exposed and deplored. American slavery, so
recently abolished, has been opposed with righteous and relentless
warfare, and the elevation of the Freedman has been urged by every
patriotic and Christian consideration. The rights of the Indians,
now so generally recognized, have always been advocated; and the
Heaven-given opportunity to evangelize the persecuted Chinaman on
the Pacific coast, has been set forth without stint or abatement,
while all along the line of the work which this periodical
represents, the yoke of prejudice has been lifted from the necks of
millions, and the curse threatened by national injustice, beaten
back that it blast not the life of our free institutions.

The furrow of time is rapidly burying beneath the sod what is left
of “unconquerable will, the study of revenge, immortal hate, and
what is else not to be overcome.” The new generation, forgetful of
the past, is concerned for its future. The flood of misjudgment and
distrust that ingulfed the Southland is rapidly subsiding, and the
peaks and hill tops are tipped with the effulgence of the Sun of
Righteousness.

Surely those who wait on the Lord have reason to renew their
strength and double their diligence for the toil, the sacrifices,
and the rewards of another year.

We would respectfully call the special attention of our readers to
the statement on the fourth page of cover, relating to our monthly
magazine. Subscription price, 50 cents a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN common with other benevolent societies, we find many people
quite ready to vote and to give sentiment for missions who are not
willing to pay a cent for their support.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE are happy to make room in this number of the MISSIONARY for
copious extracts from two valuable papers read before the Woman’s
Meeting in connection with our annual meeting at Cleveland. The
gathering of ladies was so large as to fill the chapel where they
assembled to overflowing, and the interest manifested such that the
time allotted for the service was extended to occupy nearly all
the forenoon. We commend the papers as worthy of the most careful
consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *

In an appeal sent to the churches from our office in Boston,
Secretary Woodworth calls attention to the following facts, which
are timely and suggestive:

“An average of one dollar each by the members of our churches would
amount to more than $350,000. But when it is remembered that a
large percentage of our churches are not annual contributors to our
treasury, it will be seen that the ratio of giving, on the part of
those which _do_ contribute, must be considerably increased.

“That this matter be brought under the eye at a single glance, we
tabulate below the number of _giving_ and _non-giving_ churches for
the year closing September 30, 1882, for the New England Department:

      GIVING CHURCHES.               NON-GIVING CHURCHES.
  Maine                  62      Maine                 176
  New Hampshire          87      New Hampshire         101
  Vermont               113      Vermont                84
  Massachusetts         310      Massachusetts         218
  Rhode Island           12      Rhode Island           15
                        ---                            ---
                        584                            594

“It will be seen, therefore, that less than one-half of these
churches are on the giving list for the year. If this shall prove
a surprise to the pastors, we are sure they will bear with us
if we earnestly ask them to see that their people do not fail
to contribute through lack of opportunity to do so. May we not
reasonably ask two things? 1. A regular _place_ and _time_ for the
American Missionary Association on the benevolent programme. 2. One
annual contribution to its treasury. Grant us these _two_ things,
and we will have a reliable basis for our income, and an amount
sufficient to meet the present and prospective needs of our work.”

OUR annual report for 1882 will soon be ready for distribution. We
shall be happy to forward it to any of our friends who will send us
their name and address, signifying their wish to have it.

       *       *       *       *       *


RETIREMENT OF REV. DR. LADD.

EXTRACT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

The Executive Committee of the American Missionary Association, in
accepting the resignation of the Rev. Henry M. Ladd, D.D., wish
to express and place on record their high sense of his worth as a
man, his intrepid courage and perseverance as an explorer, and his
skill and accuracy in reporting the details of his observations.
His success as an explorer gave the strongest assurance that he
would have been eminently fitted as Superintendent of Missions,
had Providence permitted the Association to enter upon the work in
Eastern Africa, and to continue that on the Western coast. But, as
it now seems the call of God to the Committee to retire from the
foreign field, it commends Dr. Ladd most warmly to the churches for
any work in their service to which the Master may call him.

       *       *       *       *       *


MENDI MISSION.—JOHN BROWN STEAMER.

Pursuant to the instructions given at the Annual Meeting, this
Association has made arrangements with the United Brethren to
conduct the Mendi Mission, giving them the income of the Avery
fund for a term of five years. Mr. Flickinger, the Secretary, and
Mr. Billheimer, the Treasurer of the Society, were at one time
missionaries of the American Missionary Association in the Mendi
country, and thoroughly understand the necessities of the mission.

Mr. Flickinger sailed Dec. 9th for Glasgow, to provide for the
construction of the John Brown Steamer. After the contract for
the steamer is given out, it is the purpose of Mr. Flickinger to
proceed to Shengay, on the West coast of Africa, where the United
Brethren have a mission. When the steamer is ready, this point
will be within easy distance of the principal stations of the
Mendi Mission. During Mr. Flickinger’s visit to the Coast, he will
complete arrangements for the continuance of our work under the
auspices of his society.

We shall place at the disposal of the United Brethren the money
contributed for the steamer. We hope the funds we have on hand,
with what has been pledged, will be sufficient to pay for the
boat. We request, therefore, that those who have made pledges or
collected money through Sabbath-schools or otherwise for this
purpose, will forward their gifts to us as early as possible, in
order that there may be no uncertainty as to the amount that can be
relied upon.

THE GOSPEL IN ALL LANDS has completed its first year as an
illustrated missionary weekly. As a power for good we believe it
has been of great value. Its editorial department, which not only
canvasses the missionary fields at home and abroad, but gives
attention to principles underlying the work, and current events
and questions of interest, has been much improved. Persons seeking
information concerning the work of Protestant missions throughout
the world can readily find what is wanted in its files. May it have
the encouragement it so richly deserves.

       *       *       *       *       *

“HOME LIFE IN THE BIBLE,” by Henrietta Lee Palmer, is the title of
a large and attractive book of 401 octavo pages, illustrated with
two hundred wood cuts, and printed on good paper, with handsome
type.

The book is full of the family.

What is known of the habitations of the ancient Hebrews is brought
out by the author—their mode of life, their food, their cookery,
their dress, their amusements, their customs in marriage and in
mourning, their education and their religious worship. We believe
the book is worthy of study in every American household, and
especially among the colored people of the South.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW LONG IS THIS THING GOING ON?

In a New England village, not many years ago, the custom prevailed
of making personal solicitation from the members of the church
there located, for contributions to the several benevolent
societies in regular order and at stated times. To this end certain
persons were designated in each of several districts to visit all
the resident members. A visitor in one of these districts relates
that, after a strong presentation of the claims of the heathen
world had been made from the pulpit, he was encouraged to visit a
member of the church who had not been noted for his liberality,
and to solicit funds in behalf of the work of evangelizing the
dark parts of the earth. In response he received a donation of
twenty-five cents. No other call was made on the individual
referred to during the remainder of the year; but when the usual
season for soliciting aid for foreign missions recurred, the
visitor called again upon him asking for a contribution. He was
met by the inquiry: “Didn’t I give you twenty-five cents for this
last year!” Answer was made in the affirmative, when the rejoinder
came, “Well, how long is this thing going on?” Of course, there was
but one answer to make, and that to the effect that so long as men
are born with depraved hearts, this process of the more favored
children of the Highest contributing funds and efforts for the
elevation and conversion of less privileged ones should not cease
“going on.” Deut. xv., 11: “For the poor shal never cease out of
the land. Therefore I command thee, saying, thou shalt open thine
hand wide unto thy brother; to thy poor and to thy needy in the
land.” * * *

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

The late Hannah G. Russell, of Boston, willed $2,000 to the Boston
University, to be used in clothing poor students of theology.

Mrs. Sarah B. Jacobs, of Boston, has given $5,000 to the University
of Vermont, for the endowment of five scholarships.

Columbia College gets $500,000 from the estate of Stephen Whitney
Phenix, making its aggregate endowment $5,300,000.

Roanoke College, Va., is to receive $1,000 from the estate of Rev.
Andrew Bigelow, D.D., of Southboro, Mass.

The University of Vermont is to receive the valuable library of the
late Hon. George P. Marsh, of Italy, a gift purchased by the Hon.
Frederick Billings, of Woodstock, an alumnus of the University.

The late Edward Clark, of Cooperstown, N.Y., left $50,000 to
Williams College, his alma mater.

Howard University has received $5,000 from the estate of the late
F. P. Schoals, Esq., of New York.

Mr. Thomas Beaver, of Danville, Pa., has given $30,000 to the
endowment fund of Dickinson College, as a memorial of his father.

The Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn., will receive $125,000
from the estate of the late Mrs. Sarah E. Atkinson, of Memphis,
Tenn., of which it is the residuary legatee.

McGill University is to receive $40,000 from the estate of Miss
Barbara Scott.

Mrs. William E. Dodge has given $2,000 to found scholarships for
the daughters of clergymen in the Mills Seminary of California.

_The emancipation proclamation was issued January, 1863—twenty
years ago. Since then 800,000 colored children have been enrolled
during a single year in the schools of the South. The demand for
a higher education for some of these, in order that they may be
competent teachers and leaders in society, is not only urgent but
imperative. The institutions founded by the A. M. A. to promote
Higher Education, however, are almost entirely without endowment._

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—An official journal of Tripoli reports, from a letter received
from Fezzan, a large repository of minerals of different sorts.
Lead, tin, zinc, iron, copper, silver and gold have been discovered
between Tripoli and Fezzan, and even diamonds.

—The new steamer, Henry Wright, destined to the mission at Mombas,
has been finished and will soon commence its trips between Mombas
and Zanzibar.

—Late letters from Freretown say that fear reigns in that station
on account of the near approach of a rebel named Mbaruk, who has
established his camp near Rabai. He declares that he is not hostile
to the mission, but his friendship would be much more dangerous for
it than his hostility, in exciting the suspicion of the people of
Mombas.

—The British Association has made a grant of 500 livres sterling
to a naturalist, Mr. Atchinson, to take part in the expedition of
Mr. J. Thomson, to the Victoria Nyanza by the country of the Masai.
Mr. Atchinson will remain at Kilimandjaro to make botanical and
zoological collections, while Mr. Thomson will proceed to Victoria
Nyanza.

—Mr. Farler, missionary at Magila, has sent to the London
Geographical Society an original map made by him from data
furnished by the natives, and indicating the routes as far as known
from the Pangani to the southeast side of Victoria Nyanza, across
the country of the Masai.

—Dr. James Petrie, a graduate of the University of Aberdeen, has
been sent to Magila, as medical missionary for Eastern Equatorial
Africa.

—The missionaries sent out to reinforce the stations at Victoria
Nyanza and Tanganyika have arrived safely at Zanzibar. Mr. Stecker
had everything prepared for them to continue their journey without
delay. The Sultan, Said Bargasch, has given safe conduct and
letters of recommendation to Mtesa to those who go to Roubaga.
They will go as far as Mamboya, the first station of the Church
of England missions, with the missionaries of the London Society
destined to Tanganyika under the conduct of Mr. Hore, accompanied
by his wife and young child, who will probably remain in this
healthy station while Mr. Hore will return with Mr. Swann to
Zanzibar, to receive the steel steamer sent from England.


THE CHINESE.

—The steamship Coptic sailed for Hong Kong in November with nearly
five hundred Chinese passengers, three hundred and seventy-five of
whom had secured return certificates.

—The Japanese government has determined to establish 53,760 primary
schools. The empire is divided into eight departments, with one
college to each. Children are to be compelled to attend the primary
school.

—Although Mongolian is the term usually applied to all people
living in the Chinese Empire, yet the Mongolians proper live in a
territory bounded on the north by Siberia and number only about
2,000,000. But few, if any of these, it is said, have emigrated to
America.

[Illustration: GROUP OF NATIVES IN MONGOLIA.]


THE INDIANS.

—Thirty-one Indians, five of them girls, were returned to their
homes in Dakota from the Hampton Institute last year. They are
employed at different agencies at salaries of fifteen or twenty
dollars per month. Of these, seven are farmers and herders, nine
carpenters, three teachers, two office boys.

—The number of acres cultivated (not including the civilized
tribes) by Indians in 1879 was 157,056; in 1881 it was 205,367.
In 1879 they cut 48,333 tons of hay; in 1881, 76,763 tons. There
has been from year to year a steady gain of products of all kinds
among this class. Indians who are so inclined can earn money by
freighting and as drovers.

—Private charity has already given $55,529.14 to buildings for, and
expenses of, Indian education at Hampton. Meanwhile, the Government
has furnished $33,128.04.

—The Indian Office cannot give a decided opinion as to whether
Indians are increasing or decreasing, but think that they are about
holding their own.

—The number of Indians at boarding schools, not including those in
the Indian Territory, who attended one month or more in 1881, was
3,888. The number who attended day school one month or more, was
4,221.

—Rev. John P. Williamson, of Yankton, Dak., writes: “Give Indians
protection of law. There is no earthly court having any authority
to punish our Yankton Indians for murder, rape, arson or any
other crime committed against the person or property of another
Yankton Indian. And with a few exceptions this is the case with all
these nations. This is a matter of immense importance, demanding
immediate action, even more than education.”

       *       *       *       *       *


TRAINING COLORED GIRLS.

MISS ANNA M. CAHILL, FISK UNIVERSITY.

If an astronomer wishes to show to any one through his glass the
celestial visitor whose presence brightens our morning sky, he must
arrange the instrument from his point of vision. Then, stepping
aside, his friend will see the object nearly as he sees it. If now
I am to bring nearer to you the work for the women of the South,
whose interests are uppermost in our hearts to-day, I must adjust
the glass from my own standpoint, at the risk of touching upon
points that have been presented at other meetings, and without
showing you some of the features which you are, perhaps, anxious to
see.

Were I a physician among the people for whom I speak, I should urge
upon you the physical wants, many and terrible, of that people, for
which the ignorance of the women is so largely responsible, and
from which they especially suffer.

Were it my mission to carry help and counsel to the lowly homes
of our city, I might tell you such tales of the wretchedness and
discomfort of many of these homes as would fill your hearts with
pity—a wretchedness growing out of an utter lack of comprehension
of the meaning of home, and showing the need of instruction in the
simplest facts of household economy.

To carry so much of light and knowledge into these homes as would
make them abodes of health and thrift is a work worthy the noblest
effort of any Christian woman.

But I come from no such special work among the women of our people.
Only a few hours ago I stepped from the platform of my school-room,
where were gathered before me a room full of upturned faces, some
of them familiar from years of acquaintance, some just stamping
themselves upon my memory by the interest they are awakening as I
meet them in these first days of their stay among us. To an unusual
extent this year the numbers on the boys’ side and on the girls’
side are the same, the one side gaining, then the other, as new
pupils are added to the school. September’s report showed exactly
the same total for each. I like this; it looks as if our girls are
to stand side by side with their brothers in life’s battle; as if
both were stretching out their hands for the same weapons to help
them in the strife.

My interest and work are thus divided; justice to the school
demands that I consider the good of the whole; that I assign
lessons not for one side nor for the other; that I chide or commend
without special reference to sex—in short, that I consider all as
members of a common society, and plan for them as having common
rights and responsibilities.

When, therefore, I bring this subject to you, it is that you may
look at it from the teacher’s standpoint, that you may consider
the colored woman of the future—the colored girl of to-day—in her
relations as a part of the social organization of the new South.

That the South is new no one who even passes through her great
centres can doubt. New railroads are opening up her resources and
carrying her trade; the flames of her furnace light up the darkness
of many a mountain valley; even her fields are blooming with new
abundance under the improved husbandry and greater diligence of her
sons. As the morning sunlight strikes the brick walls of factories
in view from my window, and nearly all of which have grown up
within a few months, I can almost imagine myself in a New England
town.

Woman’s place in Southern society (I use the term _society_ in
its wider sense) has always been quite different from that which
she holds in the North. Accustomed to be protected, and taught to
consider a limited social life as her only sphere of activity, she
was often beautifully womanly, but lacking in self-reliance; having
no confidence in her own mental powers, and not considered as being
able to plan or execute any important measures. This feeling is, I
think, gradually giving way before a more just appreciation of her
own power, and as that power is developed, to a change in public
sentiment as to her capacity and her duty.

It was my privilege to count among my friends a young Southern
girl, who not content with the average boarding-school of the
South, has already partly finished a thorough course of study in a
Northern school with the expressed intention of becoming a teacher
at her own home.

In an Eastern city during the past summer I found several young
ladies who were spending the three hot months at the North, and
while there were hard at work on music and other branches of study.
They were taking care of themselves, and with eyes aglow with
enthusiasm were apparently enjoying their new experience.

Such cases, multiplied as they will be, show that a new leaven is
working out an ambition on the part of the Southern lady to win her
way by an intelligent and self-reliant womanhood, not simply to
charm by her helplessness and amiability.

But all this has reference to white society; you are ready to ask
what is its bearing on the colored girls? The humbler life in
the old days reflected the ideas of the superior, as the second
rainbow reflects the coloring of the first. It will tend to do so
now. When, by a sudden revolution the cords of the colored woman’s
bondage were broken, and a new society of her own people sprang up
around her, especially in the cities, the impress of old ideas was
plainly seen. How quickly she copied the more artificial part of
her white mistress’ life, exaggerating her elegance into display
and her intellectual languor into utter indifference.

In the colored society of to-day, so largely an image of the old
order of things, the colored woman does not realize what she has
a right to expect or what she ought to require from the other
sex among her own people. She has no knowledge of her womanly
power or worth; why should she object to the outside gallantry
which addresses her with flattering nonsense while it covers an
underlying lack of genuine respect, and a sense of superiority that
practically leaves her to do all the hard work and regards her as
of lower intellectual grade?

Thus, from the impulse to imitate, the colored girl has a source of
hope in the advanced position held by her white sister. But her new
power of independent self-direction, unshielded by the safeguards
that the white girl has, unguided by the intellectual culture that
the other can obtain, may work incalculable harm.

What the colored woman’s place was under the old dispensation
you know too well. Body and soul the slave of her owners; while
her delicate mistress was shielded by all possible safeguards
from evil, she was left exposed to all the storms of passion and
sin, daring not to have any sense of her own value, her will for
resistance growing weaker with each generation. What an element of
moral weakness to both races this state of things was, neither race
had any conception.

With the changing character and views of the South the colored
woman’s position must change also, and she is an important agent in
the change. She is no longer a captive, bound to the wheel, obliged
to advance or retrograde with the chariot of her master. The place
which she will take in the new civilization; the light in which she
will be regarded by the white man, and her position among her own
people, will be the result of her own choice—a choice which she, in
the person of her best and most intelligent representatives, shall
make within the next fifty years.

What choice she will make is a question of breathless interest. How
to help her make the choice wisely and in time is the problem upon
which we are at work. That she labors under great disadvantages in
this decision of her destiny is plain. The vain and foolish life
of a shallow society has all the ignorance of her nature to work
on, to lead her to a life of the most empty frivolity. The door to
greater evil is wide open at her feet. The tempter can no longer
command, but he may allure—allure with deadly certainty, because
inherited tendencies and customs of the past aid him to gain an
easy victory. Over many a poor girl who comes to my thought now I
could raise the prophet’s lament: “Oh, that my head were waters and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the daughters of my people!”

Sometimes it seems that the colored woman is willingly—or under
the irresistible pressure of circumstances—making her choice so
rapidly and so fatally that the slow processes which are her only
safety cannot reach the surface in time to save her. But the final
decision in this matter does not rest with the present generation;
the young girls who are now in our schools, and the children whose
ideas they will mold, shall make the choice of her moral standing
in the South in relation to both races, and of her intellectual and
social standing among her own people.

Our question is how to help her most toward the end we wish.

Realizing that the foundation of a strong moral nature must be laid
first of all, as the basis of true womanhood, shall we concentrate
our work upon giving her religious instruction, and seek to bind
her by bonds of Christian duty? Let me not seem for a moment to
question the power of God’s grace to illuminate the heart and
change the will; but until she better understands the force of
Bible truth and has a nature more sensitive to receive it than is
the case with many who come to us, religion, as she comprehends it,
will do her no good. So divorced is it from morality, so satisfied
as to the future, and so reckless as to the present are many who
suppose they possess it, that I dare not present this last great
motive of Christian principle until I see the moral sense working
under direct and pointed Bible teaching, so that the Christian
life may be grasped in its true meaning. Even then it will not do
simply to see her converted and then to send her out to battle with
evil, any more than Christian could have met Apollyon without the
armor that was added to him after he had entered the wicket gate.
The conscience, now in shattered ruins, must be built up that it
may again perform its office in distinguishing right from wrong.
A sense of her own worth—a genuine self-respect which recognizes
degradation and flees from it; that will not even listen to evil,
must arise as she comes gradually to know the duty and dignity
to which God created her. But if we bring our girls to the point
where they are inclined to choose honor and uprightness, we must
make this choice possible by putting into their hands the means of
supporting themselves; we must train them to habits of industry and
to right ideas of labor.

The practical question is, “How shall we produce the results we
seek?” Whatever of experience and knowledge I have of any one of
our girls bids me answer, “Do with her just what you would do for
some young girl in the North whom you wanted to save from the most
corrupting influences. Take her early away from the home that
oftentimes is no protection to her, and as there are no proper
homes open to her, transplant her to as good a Christian home as
our schools will afford; furnish her work to do when she has not
money to meet the expense, and supplement this work by aid in money
when necessary. Make her life in these homes as simple and true and
elevating as genuine Christian culture will make it; throw around
her the refinements of taste, that her own tastes may be improved;
give her reading-rooms with wisely-chosen reading matter, music
to refine and inspire; treat her with the courtesy and deference
which she must learn to consider her due; give her training under
suitable instructors in the industrial arts; and keep her through
it all to a strict adherence to duty and a close and accurate
course of study. Patiently and perseveringly hold her to this life
until there begins to dawn upon her a vision of the noble and
beautiful womanhood to which she may attain, and then help her to
strive after it, through years of discouragement on the part of
teacher and pupil, until a strong and true Christian character is
built up to withstand the temptations and resist the tendencies
that beset her.”

If you are tempted to say this is asking too much for our girls,
that we ought to be content with less, at less expenditure of time
and money, remember that the girls for whom I speak are the best
among their people—the few who will ever have a chance to attain
to higher things. Look just behind them and see the throngs, who,
in ignorance and woe and sin, are turning their eyes toward you.
Listen to them mutely pleading, “Do not set your standard too low,
lest we who can only get a small part of our sister’s share of
help, should be left to perish in our degradation.”

The objection is sometimes made that such training unfits our girls
for their homes and surroundings. This is too often true. I used to
think any education which placed them out of sympathy with their
own lowly homes was false and wrong, but more extended knowledge
of some of these homes leads me to the belief that in the struggle
which must go on to save these people, the Scripture shall again
be fulfilled—the mother shall be divided against the daughter, and
the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law against her
daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.

Much misunderstanding and suffering must result, perhaps to
both sides, from this clash of the old and the new. In heathen
countries, we find it unwise to change the customs which are
foreign, unless some principle is involved; in our work, the
differences that arise are wholly matters of knowledge or
principle. The English civilization exists throughout our country,
and what our girl finds as she goes to her home, that is contrary
to her improved ideas of home, is the result of ignorance, or
indolence, or sin. These, in a quiet, modest way, she must change.
God grant her grace to be patient, true and firm through it all.

       *       *       *       *       *


INDUSTRIAL WORK AT MEMPHIS.

BY MISS ELLA HAMILTON.

Two years ago, through the kindness of friends in the North, two
rooms were fitted up in our building, at Memphis, for use in the
industrial work among the girls. Will you visit these rooms with
me this morning and see what is being done there? As we enter,
we find ourselves in the midst of a dozen girls between the ages
of 12 and 16, whose eyes and fingers are busy with their work,
while their tongues are making sweet music as they sing some
simple Sabbath-school hymn. Let us walk about among them, and
see what it is that so engrosses their attention. Here, at our
side, is a bright-eyed, pretty girl, who is patiently working
on the long over-and-over seam, which, it may be, was quite as
great a bug-bear to some of us in our childhood days as it is to
this little one. Near her is another, busy with a child’s apron,
destined, perhaps, for her own little sister. Another still is
darning a stocking, while here, at the long table, stands a girl
who is taking her first lessons in cutting. There is very little
rest for the pleasant-faced teacher during this hour. She must
straighten the gathered seams, show the awkward fingers how to
take the tiny stitches, give the word of advice or encouragement
where it is needed, and see that each one of these active girls is
busy upon the task assigned her, and doing that task just as it
ought to be done. This work has its place in the course and upon
the programme of the school, just as any other school work. The
class receives instruction forty minutes each day, for at least one
school term. They are taught how to do plain cutting and sewing,
and usually become quite expert with the needle. The materials for
work have been obtained for the most part from the boxes sent our
lady missionary. I had word, however, just before I left home, that
these supplies were exhausted, and that they were very much in need
of calicoes, needles and threads. Perhaps there are those who can
help them in this need.

Adjoining the sewing-room is a kitchen, furnished with a range, a
sink, a table and such other articles as are needed by the young
ladies who are being initiated into the mysteries of cooking.
This class meets four days of the week, two of which are used by
the teachers in familiar talks on various subjects, such as the
nature of the different foods, their adaptation to the wants of
the body, the choice of meats, vegetables, etc. The other two days
are used by the girls in actual experiments in the preparation
of foods, of course under the supervision of the teachers. They
learn how to prepare soups, to cook meats and vegetables, and to
make bread, cakes and pies. Better still, they learn how to do
this work neatly and economically. Whenever any cooking has to be
done, the two girls who have had that in charge are expected to
wash the dishes, sweep, dust and air the rooms, and have everything
in order for the next day. Sometimes the class gives lunches at
noon to their schoolmates or supper in the evening, inviting in
their friends. In this way they have raised money enough to pay
for all materials used. At one of these entertainments they gave
us sandwiches, coffee, chicken salad, cake and strawberries. The
bread made by one of the girls was as light and sweet as any I
ever ate. To make such bread is an accomplishment of which any
one might be proud. Besides the cooking and sewing, we teach our
girls how to care for the sick. They have books, and prepare their
lessons in this subject as in any other. They learn how to care for
the room, and person of their patient, how to prepare such light
foods as may be used without harm, the simple home remedies to be
administered for ordinary diseases, and the preventatives for such
diseases. About all this industrial work the girls themselves are
very enthusiastic, seeming to enjoy it quite as well as any other
school work. The mothers, too, are very glad that their daughters
are having an opportunity to learn how to do these necessary things
which they have not the time, or ability, to teach them. In the
homes of their parents the girls try to put into practice that
which they learn in the school, and as they come to have homes of
their own we are sure that they will be better in many ways than
they could have been, but for the work they are doing now.

No people can be made very much better except as we reach that
center of power and influence, the home. The schools can do
something in this direction, and we believe that out from the
homes, touched by our A. M. A. schools, will go an influence which
will elevate and purify to some extent this whole mass of society.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, FIELD SUPERINTENDENT.

PROF. ALBERT SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.

       *       *       *       *       *


AVERY NORMAL INSTITUTE, CHARLESTON, S.C.

BY A. W. FARNHAM, PRINCIPAL.

With us the second of October dawned warm and bright. Before the
last tardy risers were awakened, our school flag was hoisted over
the building to beckon children and youth Averyward. And how they
responded! Soon after the first stroke of the bell which announced
that the gates were to be opened, more than three hundred children
either walked, ran, or crowded, into the school yards. How they
talked! Four months of vacation had dissipated all regard for
established rules and usages. And who could scold the first day?
It is true that many had been in summer schools during the greater
part of vacation, but in many instances they were sent “just to
keep them off the street, you know, sir.” Then the private houses
in which these schools are “kept” have not school dignity nor
school atmosphere, because they are not school buildings; hence
they lack molding influence.

Another reason why the children _talked_ was that a new principal
(new and yet old) and five new teachers were to be met, measured,
and, if possible, mastered. Every boy wants to know just how strong
his teachers are; and as their strength is, so his respect will be.

Again the bell sounded, this time to announce the hour for
devotions. As the pupils filed into the chapel their eyes fell
upon a new crayon likeness of Prof. M. A. Warren, a former
principal. This work of art, costing about $50, was presented to
the school by the Alumni at their last annual meeting, July 4th. It
is a generous expression of their love for a faithful teacher and a
true man.

With the children came a large number of patrons “to start them,”
of course, but little was done the first day but to exchange
greetings, hold chapel exercises, take names and addresses of
pupils, assign former pupils to the classes which the previous
principal had named for them, and to examine and grade a part of
the new ones. Other examinations and grading, with the selling of
books, and the collection of tuitions for the month, hindered our
programme of work from being fully taken up before the second week.

It is now four weeks since our opening. In the time we have
registered three hundred and thirty-six pupils, collected $332.85
for tuition, sold $462.64 worth of books, organized in addition
to the common-school branches, classes in physics, chemistry,
mineralogy, botany, zoology, physiology, school economy, political
economy, history (U.S. and ancient), algebra, geometry, rhetoric,
Greek, Latin, French, German, music, gymnastics, sewing,
stenography, and Bible study. We have also had our monthly written
reviews. A good number of pupils are fitting for college, some
of whom will be ready to enter next October. Other pupils are
preparing for teaching, and will enter upon their work after
leaving us. Others still are intending to follow trades, and are
studying that they may become intelligent tradesmen.

In response to our circular of information which we have sent out
to friends, we have already received a box of chemical apparatus, a
scroll saw with lathe attachment and a book of patents, a quantity
of basted patch-work, fifty magnifying glasses, and a box of
minerals. In addition to these gifts from abroad, our pupils are
daily contributing to start natural history cabinets. Among our
pupils’ contributions are many fossils, some of which we would like
to exchange with other schools. We need several more scroll saws,
and more work for our sewing class.

In the senior class, one of the incentives to study is the Alumni
Prize of $50, which is to be given to the student who makes the
best record this year, and intends to pursue his studies at some
higher institution of learning.

The morning of the 25th (October), we met to join in the concert
of prayer for the A. M. A. As a part of the exercises twelve
members of the senior class gave brief recitations, in which much
information of the Association was given. The recitations, each of
which was closed with an appropriate Bible text, were in answer to
the following questions: What occasion do we observe this morning?
What is the object of this observance? When was the American
Missionary Association organized? What led to its organization?
What is the character of its work? What is the extent of its work?
Name some of the results of its work. What relation do we bear to
the A. M. A.?

A more quiet, earnest spirit pervades our higher classes than I
have ever seen so early in the term. With the sympathy and prayers
of friends, and honest persistent effort on our part, we hope to be
signally blessed in the work of the year.

       *       *       *       *       *


NEW BUILDING AT ATHENS, ALA.

[Illustration: TRINITY SCHOOL BUILDING, ATHENS, ALA.]

Trinity school building at Athens, Ala., a cut of which is given
herewith, has accommodations for 200 day scholars, and the family
of missionaries who have charge of A. M. A. work at Athens. Its
history is somewhat unique and altogether encouraging. The old
building, where Miss Wells, the principal, had managed the school
since 1866, was insufficient and scarcely tenable. The debt of
the Association and the claims of larger institutions were such
that for a time it seemed almost inevitable that the school must
be given up. Miss Wells, however, and the brave people whom she
had been serving, determined to rally their forces and save the
enterprise at all reasonable hazards.

Preparations were made for furnishing bricks; volunteers offered
themselves for all sorts of needful work; some labored in clay
pits, some in kiln, some went to the woods for the fuel required to
burn the brick, while the women and girls contributed their dimes,
nickels and half-dollars to raise a fund to have the wood hauled.
In this way the colored people made two hundred thousand bricks,
“mixing the clay by the tramp of their one small steer.” Meanwhile,
Miss Wells spared no effort in interesting friends at the north to
come to her relief. As a result the building was completed last
spring at a cost of only $8,000 to the Association, in addition
to what was furnished by the colored people. From the time the
corner-stone was laid till the opening of the building, a good
number of prominent towns’ people manifested their interest in and
approval of the work.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GEORGIA ASSOCIATION.

We drop down from Savannah, thirty-one miles on the Florida
railroad, to McIntosh, in Liberty County. Then it is four miles
east over the old Yankee high-way to Midway and its “Lost Church
Found,” and the brethren are on hand with their buggies to take us
out. Pastor Snelson’s house and the teacher’s home are filled up,
and the two rooms of the Academy furnish space for beds and cots
for the lodging of eight persons.

Quite a village it is that has grown up there; the large church,
the Dorchester Academy, and half a dozen houses and two or three
small stores. Heretofore, the two teachers, Misses Kinney and
Gibson, have been quartered in a cabin. Now, a new house is under
process of construction for them.

All but one of the fifteen churches are represented. Pastor
Kent, of Atlanta, preaches the opening sermon upon the Growth of
Christian Character, a discourse which proved its fitness to the
occasion by the fact that its truths were constantly bubbling up
through the course of the meeting. The body changed its name from
that of “Conference” to that of “Association,” elected Revs. A. J.
Headen and J. E. Roy, with Revs. E. Kent and J. H. H. Sengstacke as
alternates to the next National Council, made deliverance against
putting churches on the color line, and had the full measure of
essays, discussions, sermons, etc. During the Lansing temperance
meeting, Rev. George V. Clark, of Athens, thrilled us all as he
told of his being a saloon tumbler boy, of his going, full of
liquor, to the Storrs School temperance meeting, and of his signing
the temperance pledge at the solicitation of Miss Rose M. Kinney,
who was at that time a teacher there, and who was then before
him. Such a result was a reward of her fifteen years of service.
The talks upon the converting power of the Sunday-school were
stimulating indeed. The Association received the new Church at
Athens, also Revs. George V. Clark and N. B. James.

On the Sabbath the fine large church, 50×60, which had been used
several years as simply inclosed, and which had been brought to
completion, was re-dedicated. The sermon by Superintendent Roy was
upon the Glory of the Sanctuary as the place of Spiritual Nativity:
“This and that man was born there.” The prayer of dedication
was offered by Rev. E. T. Hooker, of Charleston, S.C. In the
afternoon a grand missionary meeting was held in behalf of the
American Board, the A. H. M. S., the Congregational Union, and the
A. M. A., with addresses made by Revs. E. Kent, S. E. Lathrop, E.
T. Hooker, and J. E. Roy, all of them using Mr. Kent’s two big
maps, one of the world, and one of our country. Miss Kinney read
a paper written by Miss Hardy upon that whole missionary scheme.
The ladies appointed the wives of Revs. E. Kent, S. E. Lathrop and
Dana Sherrill as a Provisional Committee to prepare the way for
organizing a State Woman’s Missionary Society at the next meeting
of the Association, to be held at Athens. Meantime the ladies
propose to organize in each of several of the churches an auxiliary
society, and these will unite in the State Society. Between the two
services of Lord’s Day I went out and counted the vehicles and the
animals that had brought the great assembly to church; I counted 68
vehicles, of which 38 were buggies, 95 horses and 30 ox teams, 40
oxen in all, as some of the carts were drawn by a single ox. There
were two other important gatherings in that region on that day, or,
as some of the brethren said, you could not have seen the ground,
for the animals and the carryalls that would have been there. As
it was, we had, by fair estimate, six hundred people present, and
their’s was truly, as they call it, “A Big Meeting.”

                                                      J. E. R.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CENTRAL SOUTH ASSOCIATION.

That is now the name, changed from that of Central South
Conference, at the meeting held in Rev. William H. Ash’s church at
Florence, Ala., Nov. 2 to 5. This change is in order to uniformity
of title in the state ecclesiastical bodies. Georgia, Alabama and
North Carolina yet retain the name “Conference.” The Central South,
which was the original Congregational body at the South, having
sent off two daughters, the Alabama and the Georgia, still holds
good her title to the name, as she yet represents the central
States of Tennessee, Mississippi, Arkansas and a part of Alabama.

The older members said that this last was the best meeting ever
held by the Association. Papers were read by B. F. Foster on
pastoral work; by William A. Sinclair on the need of cultivating
the missionary spirit; by B. A. Imes on Congregationalism; by Mr.
Singleton on school work; and the reading was followed in each case
by full and animated discussion. President Pope led in a discussion
upon the subject of revivals, and also reported the industrial
departments of Tougaloo University. Superintendent Roy reported the
recent annual meeting of the A. M. A., at Cleveland. One evening
was given to a rousing temperance meeting. The preachings were
frequent. Revivals were reported at Fisk and Tougaloo Universities,
at Memphis and Chattanooga. Two churches were received, one at
Meridian, Miss., Rev. J. L. Grice, pastor, and the Welsh church at
Soddy, East Tennessee, Rev. W. H. Thomas, where the Welsh are the
colliers. Rev. H. S. Bennett, B. A. Imes and William A. Sinclair
were elected to the next National Council. Pastor W. H. Ash, who
had made ample provision for the entertainment of the Conference,
was laid aside through all of the sessions by a severe illness; but
the results of his work were manifest to all. A neat gothic church,
a pleasant parsonage, and the whole within a tasteful white fence,
were the other signs of the work, while the growing membership and
Sunday-school, and the day-school of seventy, taught by Mr. Ash
and his estimable wife, were the symbol of the intellectual and
moral process going on. At the dedication, two years ago, more than
fifty of the prominent white citizens were present, among them
Ex-Gov. Patton, three or four pastors and as many lawyers. On the
Sabbath the pulpits of the colored churches were supplied, and
Messrs. Bennett and Roy preached at the Presbyterian church, where
Gov. Patton is the S. S. Superintendent, an office which he has
magnified for many years. The week before, the Memphis Synod had
met in this church, when the appeal of Mr. Long from the Memphis
Presbytery came up. By a technicality the appeal did not stand,
and Mr. Long was permitted to withdraw from the denomination, to
continue his service as pastor of the First Congregational Church
of Memphis. The next meeting of the Association is to be with Rev.
Joseph E. Smith, at Chattanooga.

                                                      J. E. R.


[Illustration: WYTHEVILLE, VA.]

Wytheville, Va., is a representative mountain town, situated amidst
a rich farming and mining region. Already Northern capital and
enterprise have found their way to like portions of the South,
where the climate is salubrious, the winters mild, and the rewards
of labor immediate and sufficient for the wants of an industrious
population. Very much, however, remains to be done for the vast
areas of the mountain districts of the South. The school privileges
of blacks and whites are as yet quite limited. The people, however,
have been distinguished for their loyalty to the Government, and in
some portions of the mountain country for their readiness to accept
missionary endeavors, regardless of the color line. Prof. C. C.
Painter, of Fisk University, and Rev. I. P. Dickerson, one of the
original Jubilee Singers, now a missionary in the south of France,
were born at Wytheville.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rev. W. H. Ash, pastor of our church, and teacher of our school
at Florence, Alabama, died on the 13th of November. A protegé
of Hon. A. C. Barstow, and a graduate of the Boston University,
he began work for us at Mobile, Ala. He was then transferred
to Florence, which was in need of such a man as he. Mr. Ash was
married to Miss Sarah Hale, of Montgomery, an accomplished lady,
who was his helpmeet, not only as a wife, but as a teacher in the
school, which they had developed to the great delight of their
people, and to the approbation of all the citizens. Mr. Ash, on
behalf of the church and of the A. M. A., had built a tasteful
church edifice which was also used for the school, and a parsonage.
He had commanded the high appreciation of all the best people in
the community. During his sickness, the Central South Association
had its annual session in his church. His wife took his remains to
Montgomery for burial. As writes the stricken companion: “It was
only going home to receive the reward of the faithful servant.”

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


STATEMENTS RESPECTING INDIANS AND THEIR NECESSITIES.

BY GEN. S. C. ARMSTRONG.

Besides the 59,000 Indians in the Indian Territory, there are about
200,000, of whom 55,000 are wholly supported by the government;
45,000 are partially maintained, and 100,000 receive little or no
aid. They occupy 250,000 square miles of land, nine-tenths of it
grazing land, the rest suitable for agriculture. The constantly
increasing value of this domain from its mineral wealth and the
building of railroads presses hard upon its thriftless occupants,
who stand right in the line of progress, and must either change
or perish. Meanwhile their source of subsistence, game, is
disappearing, and, more and more, they will depend either on public
charity or on stealing their food unless taught to take care of
themselves.

The Indian question is upon us as never before. Those in the Indian
Territory and the few thousands in Minnesota, Wisconsin, New York,
North Carolina and other States, say 75,000 in all, are remnants
of tribes who formerly lived east of the Mississippi River, are
inclined to agriculture and domestic life, and have been considered
superior to the nomadic tribes of the West. They long since ceased
to trouble us, and are, at some places making commendable progress
in education, stock raising and crops, besides generally holding
their own in numbers. Still, to a large extent, they seem fixed in
a half civilized, half pagan state, lacking their earlier manliness
for the want of hardship and discipline in their lives, keeping
up their heathen rites and dances, living in poverty, without
law, demoralized more or less by annuities and destitute of the
conditions that create character and self reliance.

They need practical education. A few are already at Hampton and
Carlisle; five hundred should have such an opportunity.

More than this, their tribal relations should be broken up,
homesteads inalienable for at least twenty-five years should be
assigned, and they should be left as citizens of the several states
in which they are, to vote and be voted on.

Reservations are merely places for herding Indians; temporary,
necessary experiments, that, after a given time, may become growing
evils. Herding negroes in like manner would have been a curse to
both white and black races. There has been more sentiment than
sense in treating the Indian as a separate people. It was kindly
meant but a cruel plan in its results. This part of the red race
has suffered most from the whites; their comfortable eastern homes
have been broken up, their thrifty farms and fruitful orchards
abandoned for a western wilderness where thousands have died from
exposure. Their record has been the saddest part of the “Century of
Dishonor.”


THE WILD TRIBES.

The destruction of the buffalo has been more trying to the Indian
than sudden emancipation was to the Negro. The latter changed
the relations rather than the realities of life; the former the
realities rather than their relations. The one remained on its
old foundation of land and of labor—any shifting was voluntary.
Game, the support of the other, has gradually failed and they have
been roughly pushed from place to place till pauperism seems the
only fixed fact of their life. The human machine after running
for centuries does not readily reverse itself; the strain on the
Indian is tremendous. Was greater ever put upon men?—force to
control them, charity to weaken them. Justice demanded help, but
wisdom demanded self-help as its condition. Exigency is man’s best
teacher. “Necessity is the mother of invention;” it makes men
creative. The facts of human nature, and of experience, have been
ignored in our treaties with the Indians, probably because we never
really conquered them, but purchased peace on the best terms we
could make.

Carrying the Indian from helplessness to self support is the most
difficult administrative problem of our country. The Negro has
taken care of himself. “The forty acres and a mule” method would
have ruined the race. He was thrown on himself and given a vote;
dangerous as it once seemed, who would now have it otherwise? He
struggled, suffered and succeeded.

The Indian is fed “till he shall become self-supporting,” which
gives him a motive for not becoming so. He alone of all men on the
earth, finds in industry not reward but a penalty. The Shoshone
farmers, when a reduction of rations was suggested, threatened to
stop cultivating their fields. A few may go to work, but the whole
line will not move forward while rations and other gratuities are
issued, as now, to lines of ragged, wretched-looking mendicants who
are helped for the asking.

Treaties must be kept, but the treaties contemplate ultimate
self-support and the necessity of education to that end. It is, I
believe, quite within their spirit to withhold supplies from the
lazy and intractable.

At Yankton, Devil’s Lake, Cheyenne River and at other points,
efficient agents kept the schools full, and the Indians busy by
the argument to the stomach, which is their weak point. It is, I
believe, the starting point of Indian civilization. The plan is as
excellent as it is unusual.

On the Fort Hall reservation, in Idaho, I recently saw fields
of wheat, oats and potatoes; two-thirds of the tribe had become
farmers, besides owning herds of cattle, because a former agent
had issued the coffee and sugar rations, which the red man dearly
loves, only as each one successively staked out, plowed and planted
his allotted little farm. The nation’s gratuities may do the Indian
as much good as they are doing him harm, if wisely administered,
especially the luxuries, which afford the best leverage. He is
managed now by a class of men whose title, in spite of shining
exceptions among them, is a byword and a reproach. Decayed
clergymen, hungry politicians, and the broken of every profession,
are not the ones to make citizens of the red man. Fifteen hundred
or two thousand dollars a year will not secure first-class men, who
must travel far with their families, at their own expense, and be
liable at any day to discharge and disgrace. By refusing adequate
salaries, Congress (and Congress means the people) decides that the
Indian’s greatest need shall be unsupplied, for lack of a trifling
comparative cost. Millions for fuel and dry goods, but not one
or two hundred thousand dollars more that men of repute and of
capacity may go to the Agencies. Good beef and flour and shoes,
but second-rate men, whose average official life is less than two
years, is the present provision for them.

The tender mercies of the Government to the Indian are cruel;
the much-talked-of treatment of the slave owner was tender by
comparison. The self-interest of the Southern barons was humanity
itself, in contrast with the course of men sent in the name of a
high duty, many of whom have been tempted, if not forced, into
corruption. I would throw no slur on the better class among them,
of whom the country is not worthy.

The Indian is a child and needs a Father; physically mature, he
is mentally an infant. He stands proud but helpless on the track
of a locomotive. He will not heed the advice of whites inferior
in natural force to himself, and such, as a rule, he has to deal
with. No wonder the young prefer their own leaders. In the school
of civilization only object lessons are good for anything. What
lessons we have given the Indians!

Recent agitation has chiefly concerned the education, lands and
rights of the race, and progress has been made in the way of
opportunities offered, but the Indian has not moved. He must be
touched; the high and low must come together. Virtue will go out of
the one into the other as it entered into her who touched the hem
of a sacred garment. There is no salvation in acts of Congress; it
is from the springs of action within. To awake these in the bosom
of the Indian and consummate it in Christian character is the work
of individual men by their contact and by their personal influence.

The Indian question is, first, one of organization, second, one
of executive duty; of conditions and of action. In the former, of
late years, there has been much progress. Respecting the latter
there has been little. Crops and herds have somewhat increased and
education has advanced, especially in the East; but the executive
work drags, because there is nobody to do it. Men are the need of
the hour, and money to provide for their wants.

At the northern frontier outposts, this summer, for the first time,
the soldiers remained in their barracks. At the forts in Montana
and Dakota which I visited, there was general respect for Indian
prowess, and belief in his capacity and in his wrongs. “Were I an
Indian I would fight” seemed the feeling of all.

So far as army officers are gentlemen of character, force and
experience, and of humane ideas (for there are opposing views),
I believe they are better fitted than any others to settle the
Indian question. Their destructive work is nearly over: it has
fitted them for the constructive work to be done. As officers they
have peculiar advantages over civilians of the same capacity and
worth, far less temptation and far stronger standing ground for the
control of Indians. One-half of the sixty agencies might well be
put at once under selected officers; not that it is strict military
duty, but it is not an “old woman’s work,” as one of high rank said
of Capt. Pratt’s effort. The latter is doing, indirectly, more than
any two regiments for the pacification of the Indians—the army’s
special business.

Railroads are doing the work of pioneers and of soldiers, peace is
not far off. There will soon be need of the army only as a national
police, and half of the 15,000 troops at the West may be dispensed
with. What better service can a few of its accomplished officers
undertake than building up a civilization at its weakest point?

The Indian can be rescued from a sad fate only by personal
devotion; that has, under God, created the great results of
missionary work throughout the world in recent years. The labors of
the Riggses, Williamsons and of Bishop Whipple and others during
the past half century, in the western wilderness, has been a
seed-sowing of which the results are now appearing. The men they
have touched and taught are those who are now breaking from the
old superstitions and asking for light, while official dealings
have scarcely a moral result to show for armies of agents and vast
annuities. Only the light of Christian truth and example steadily
shining can lift men up. Mission work among the Cherokees and
others, and for the Sioux at Sisseton and Fort Sully and Santee
agencies in Dakota, where wild Indians are settled on so peaceful
prosperous homes that “a stranger traveling through the country
would not believe that he was on an Indian Reservation,” attest
the complete success of the Congregational, Episcopalian, and
Presbyterian societies. Peoria Bottom, which I visited in 1881,
is a charming village of twenty Christian families, on thrifty
homes, the result of the efforts of the Rev. Thos. L. Riggs. “In
proportion to the aid and means employed no missions since the
apostolic age have been more successful than those to the American
Aborigines,” declares one of these bodies. There have been,
however, weak and disappointing missions.

Such work cannot be inspired from Washington, though it may supply
many of the conditions of it. A purified civil service would do
more for the Indian than for any class in the country. Good agents
would create a _morale_, like a favoring tide, for the Christian
teacher.

The “gist” of the Indian question I believe to be honesty and
capacity in dealing with them. Given these and the rest will work
itself out.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

REV. W. C. POND, SUPERINTENDENT.

       *       *       *       *       *


HUMBLINGS.

BY REV. W. C. POND.

I had finished the preparation of the last annual report of our
Mission. I had read it at the annual meeting. It was ready for the
printer, and had even been placed in his hands. It was a report
instinct throughout with good cheer. It could not be otherwise. It
recorded the work of a prosperous year. No previous year of our
whole history had approached this one, as to the numbers gathered
into our schools and brought within reach of the invitations of the
Gospel. Perhaps I was in danger of being “exalted above measure.”
And, so, humblings were prepared for me.

It may be the dictate of expediency, but certainly it is not that
of frankness and honesty, to speak to our benefactors only smooth
things. There _are_ shades as well as lights in missionary work.
The tide is not always rising. The sun is not always at noon. And
if possible, those who sustain the work ought to be made able to
see the shadows and to understand the disappointments; ought to be
admitted to acquaintanceship with even the mistakes which we, the
workers, make. Daylight throughout our operations is essential.
Without this, there are bred “bureau distempers,” petty falsities,
self-seekings and the whole brood of faults into which even renewed
natures get sometimes betrayed. One of the chief beauties and
glories of the statements presented this year, both at Portland
and at Cleveland, was their manifest frankness—the pains evidently
taken to set before the people _all_ the facts so far as the
opportunity allowed.

But I am making a long preface. “What humblings have been prepared
for you?” my readers are asking. One of our Chinese brethren,
converted as we believed, and baptised some years ago—a young man
in some respects specially capable and specially pleasing, who
knows the way of life well, and can explain it clearly to his less
instructed countrymen, is found to have been gambling on (for
them) a large scale, and, at first, with rare success. Rumor has
it that not less than $3,000 had flowed from the depleted purses
of his countrymen into his own; but that blind to the fact that
the tide might turn, he had continued his sin until it left him
stranded and wrecked. Inquiry shows this rumor to be founded on
facts. We are made to blush at the congratulations the heathen
Chinese have been proffering over the good-luck of the gambling
Christian. We get the heart-ache as we see how sin breeds sin, how
falsehood and profanity follow in the train of these dishonest
gains. The heart-ache deepens as we see some others of our brethren
swept away by sympathy or friendship, or possibly by some less
amiable consideration into partial complicity with his wrong. It
transpires that with several others as with this brother, there has
been a forgetfulness of the assembling of themselves together, a
self-assertion and self-trust, a disposition to debate but not to
pray, a cooling of brotherly love and Christian zeal, all of which
fore-shadowed like dishonors to be heaped upon the name of Christ,
unless a breath of God’s dear spirit should soon inspire in them a
freshened life.

Thank God, these humblings have not come alone. If the great body
of our Chinese Christians had been insensible to them, if there
had been no movement, or if only a ripple on the surface of an
otherwise stagnant sentiment, I should have been discouraged
indeed. But there was an immediate movement, a deep sense of shame,
an almost too speedy discipline. And now, taking counsel together,
we have undertaken, with the help of God, to withstand more
faithfully those beginnings of evil; to make the first symptoms of
coldness and inattention and wandering the signal for more earnest
prayer and for kindly and cautious, but effective, watch and care.

In connection with this our schools in San Francisco propose to
undertake something more general and more generous in the way
of giving. Certainly the sum total of expenditures made by our
Chinese brethren, in connection with their Christian work, is
creditable already. When we consider their circumstances it is not
a little thing that in this last year their offerings, one way
and another, should reach a total of $2,000. But a scrutiny of
the sources from which this amount had come showed that in some
quarters the grace of giving had not been as generally cultivated
or as fruitful in results as it might have been. And a recovery of
lost ground in this regard, an advance beyond anything heretofore
attempted is fully resolved upon. Plans are being laid, the mutual
exhortations have begun, and it is believed that by the 1st of
December they will show us definite and practical returns. One of
the helpers writes me as follows: “Last night I have been spoken
to the scholars and brethren about the gifts of the money for
the missionary work and about the gas that you are going to put
up instead of the oil lamps. They were so pleased to help. I can
hardly know how to tell you how glad they feel to pay the gas and
water bills and to help you pay the rent. I was surprised that I
should receive a large sum of gifts last evening so soon as when
I get through my sayings, and I expect another sum this evening,
because great many have not any money with them last evening.” This
same good spirit seems to pervade all the schools and I am greatly
comforted by it.

Other encouragements are not wanting. Even now I am awaiting in
my study the arrival of five Chinese who, with the approval and
recommendation of our brethren, offer themselves as candidates for
baptism and reception to our Bethany Church. Scarcely a month has
passed without tidings of some one turning to the light and avowing
himself a disciple of Christ. But I have been made specially glad
this month by the news from two of our youngest and smallest
schools. Mrs. Willett, of Santa Cruz, reporting for the first time
two of her pupils as giving evidence of conversion, adds: “I am
very hopeful concerning the spiritual interests of four of my boys.
Eight of them already own and study the New Testament. I give them
Bible instruction two whole evenings each week, and they enjoy it.”
And Miss Fulton, of Berkeley says: “In reporting that two of the
pupils give evidence of conversion, I do not say that they have
confessed it by word; but they attend so regularly to school, and
to Sunday school, listen to all religious instruction so earnestly,
and join in the Lord’s Prayer so heartily, that I feel assured they
are earnestly seeking the truth.”

And so God has mingled encouragements with humblings, and not
suffered us to be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

       *       *       *       *       *


WASHEE WASHEE.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY JOAQUIN MILLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Brown John he bends above his tub
    In cellar, alley, anywhere
    Where dirt is found, why John is there;
    And rub and rub and rub and rub.
    The hoodlum hisses in his ear:
    “Git out of here, you yeller scrub!”
    He is at work, he cannot hear;
    He smiles that smile that knows no fear;
    And rub and rub and rub and rub,
    He calmly keeps on washing.

    The politicians bawl and crow
    To every idle chiv. and blood,
    And hurl their two hands full of mud:
    “The dirty Chinaman must go!”
    But John still bends above his tub,
    And rub and rub and rub and rub;
    He wrestles in his snowy suds
    These dirty politicians’ duds;
    He calmly keeps on washing.

    “Git out o’ here! ye haythin, git!
    Me Frinch ancisthors fought an’ blid
    Fur this same freedom, so they did,
    An’ I’ll presarve it, ye can bit!
    Phwat honest man can boss a town?
    Or burn anither Pittsburgh down?
    Or beg? Or sthrike? Or labor shirk
    Phwile yez are here an’ want ter work?
    Git out, I say! ye haythin git!”
    And Silver Jimmy shied a brick
    That should have made that heathen sick;
    But John, he kept on washing.

    Then mighty Congress shook with fear
    At this queer, silent little man,
    And cried as only Congress can:
    “Stop washing and git out of here!”
    The small brown man, he ceased to rub,
    And raised his little shaven head
    Above the steaming, sudsy tub,
    And unto this great Congress said,
    Straightforward, business-like, and true:
    “Two bittee dozen washee _you_!”
    Then calmly went on washing.

    Oh! honest, faithful little John,
    If you will lay aside your duds
    And take a sea of soap and suds
    And wash out dirty Washington;
    If you will be the Hercules
    To cleanse our stables clean of these
    That all such follies fatten on,
    There’s fifty million souls to-day
    To bid you welcome, bid you stay
    And calmly keep on washing.

                                           —_The Independent._

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LITTLE DINING-ROOM.

BY MRS. T. N. CHASE.

Often just before breakfast I hear a tripping step in our hall,
then a light tap at the door, and our little John exclaims, “You’re
’vited, mamma.” As I answer the knock, happy Hennie’s voice rings
out the welcome words, “You and Mr. Chase are invited to breakfast
in the little dining-room.” Now, as the “big dining-room” is filled
with about 150 students and teachers, and as board is eight dollars
per month, the little dining room offers the most quiet, to say
nothing of the superior variety and quality of the food.

Well, now, there has of late been rapidly growing what some of us
staid teachers think is an industrial craze. I suppose any day the
girls at the North may have to give up one of their studies for the
old-fashioned patchwork. Oh! I don’t mean _old_-fashioned. Isn’t
it funny that old-fashioned things are the newest-fashioned things?
I suppose, too, any day our grandmother’s beautiful samplers
may again take their æsthetic places in the schoolroom to teach
“marking stitch” from “sure enough” antique letters, and the boys
may march into a recitation room, where they will learn to drive
nails and shoe pegs. Well, this is a great question, and none but
a parent can be more interested than the faithful teacher that the
best methods should be used in developing their precious charge.

About two years ago the matron of Atlanta University selected two
little dormitory rooms that opened into each other, and turned them
into dining-room and kitchen. An old Stewart cook stove used in
the big kitchen long ago, before the range was a necessity, was a
large part of the little kitchen’s outfit. The clothes press was
easily changed to cupboard, and an old flower stand was made into a
tidy closet for pots and kettles. In the dining-room the floor was
stained in alternate strips of dark and light color; a fly screen
put in the window, a few pictures and a rough shelf covered with
a pretty lambrequin brightened the walls; and, best of all, while
this revolution was going on, an old friend happened to drop in,
on her way to Florida. She was so delighted with the matron’s idea
that she filled the China closet of the little dining-room with
such pretty things that the dainty tea table at once put on airs
in its new home. Well, in these two little rooms the two highest
classes of girls are honored with practice in household arts, with
the matron for their teacher. At first gatherings in the little
dining-room were quite rare. The birthdays of the senior class were
celebrated there, and guests sometimes entertained, but the girls
are so proud of their housekeeping that now they are allowed all
the practice they have time for. Absent graduates must remember the
room with pleasure, as they send beautiful bouquets for the table.
The senior girls take turns in being responsible for the breakfasts
and teas, and in presiding at table. In addition to the two girls
who preside, there is room for about a third of the teachers. So,
as we cannot all go, there can be no general invitations, but
each visit there has all the charm of a special invitation out to
breakfast or tea. But the best of it all is the encouragement it
gives the girls to practice the too often neglected art of good
cooking.

So now you see why we are proud of the little dining-room, and why
Hennie trips through the halls so merrily as she carries from door
to door the coveted invitation.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR NOVEMBER, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $71.05.

    Farmington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                           $26.19
    Foxcroft. Mrs. D. Blanchard                                5.00
    Machias. Mrs. C. F. Stone, two bbls. of C.,
      _for Lady Missionary, Wilmington, N.C._
    North Bridgton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         5.00
    South Paris. W. D. B., _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst. (Building)_                                     1.00
    Waterville. _For Tillotson C. and N. Inst.
      (Building)_                                              0.10
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch., 11.50; “Family Gift,” 2;
      J. P. T., 1; T. M., 1.                                  15.50
    York. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            18.26


  NEW HAMPSHIRE, $260.49.

    Amherst. Mr. and Mrs. Melendy, 25; Ladies’
      Union Miss’y Soc., 25, _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            50.00
    Amherst. Cong. Ch., 10.98; Miss L. W. B., 50c.            11.48
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                12.00
    Boscawen. Mrs. E. G. W., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                 1.00
    Chester. Mrs. Mary E. Hidden                              10.00
    Dover. First Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             40.00
    Dunbarton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             12.00
    East Jaffrey. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          21.05
    Francestown. Joseph Kingsbury                             30.00
    Kensington. “Friend,” _for Wilmington, N.C._               2.50
    Lyme. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   8.00
    Manchester. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      27.46
    New Ipswich. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        25.00
    Short Falls. J. W. C.                                      1.00
    Temple. Mrs. W. K.                                         1.00
    —— “Friends”                                               8.00


  VERMONT, $479.14.

    Barton Landing and Brownington. Cong. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    22.56
    Bellows Falls. Vermont Farm Machine Co.,
      Champion Creamery, Val. 52, Swing Churn,
      Val. 12. _for Atlanta U._ Danville. Sab.
      Sch. Cong. Ch.                                          10.00
    Grand Isle. Mrs. Rev. Chas. Fay                            5.00
    Plainfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             5.75
    Randolph. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         4.00
    Rochester. Cong Ch. and Soc.                              20.00
    Rutland. Mrs. J. B. Paige, _for Freight_                   1.20
    Salisbury. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             17.44
    Saint Johnsbury. “Colored Man”                             2.00
    Wallingford. Miss L. H. A.                                 0.50
    West Randolph. Susan E. Albin and Sarah J.
      Washburn                                                 7.00
    Woodstock. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       39.26
    Worcester. Cong. Ch.                                       4.43
                                                             ------
                                                            $139.14

    LEGACIES.

    Bratleborough. Estate of Mrs. H. M. Linsley,
      by C. F. Thompson                                       70.00
    Cabot. Estate of Fanny Putnam, by Rev. H. A.
      Russell                                                 50.00
    Chelsea. Estate of Dea. Samuel Douglass, by
      Edward Douglass, Ex.                                   220.00
                                                             ------
                                                            $479.14


  MASSACHUSETTS, $2,447.79.

    Alston. H. R.                                              1.00
    Amesbury. Cong. Ch.                                       16.28
    Amesbury and Salisbury. Union Evan. Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    16.60
    Amherst. First Cong. Ch.                                  25.00
    Andover. Ladies’ Union Home M. Soc. (70 of
      which _for Student Aid Talladega C._)                   73.75
    Andover. G. W. W. Dove, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             50.00
    Auburndale. Mrs. Lathrop, Bundle of Papers.
    Boston. Mrs. E. P. Eayrs, 5; Mrs. L. R. H. 50c             5.50
    Bridgewater. Central Sq. Ch. and Soc.                     24.62
    Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      10.63
    Brimfield. Ladies Charitable Union of Second
      Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and 2, _for freight,
      for McIntosh, Ga._                                       2.00
    Brockton. “A Friend”                                      20.00
    Canton. E. R. E.                                           0.50
    Chelsea. Central Ch. and Soc. 21.19; Third
      Cong. Ch. and Soc. 8.35.                                29.54
    Chelsea. ARTHUR C. STONE, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._, and to const. himself L. M.                30.00
    Chelsea. Ladies Union Home M. Band, 20, _for
      Lady Missionary, Chattanooga, Tenn._, also 5
      Boxes Papers, etc., _for General work_                  20.00
    Chicopee. J. T. C.                                         0.51
    Clinton. “A Friend”                                      100.00
    Conway. D. L., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst.
      (Building)_                                              1.00
    Dana. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                   3.00
    Dedham. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         167.00
    Dorchester. Mrs. R. W. Prouty, 5; Sab. Sch. of
      Second Ch. (ad’l), 1.70; Miss E. T., 60c.                7.30
    Fitchburgh. Cal. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      204.98
    Florence. Florence Cong. Ch.                              20.77
    Gilbertville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Greenfield. T. H.                                          0.50
    Hatfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              67.50
    Hawley. H. S., _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst.
      (Building)_                                              1.00
    Haverhill. Mrs. Mary B. Jones                             10.00
    Holden. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                10.00
    Holliston. “E. A.,” _for Student Aid, Fisk U._             1.00
    Ipswich. First Cong. Ch. and Soc., Bbl. of C.,
      Val. 32.
    Jamaica Plain. Central. Cong. Ch., in part               343.29
    Marblehead. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                      90.00
    Marshfield. Ladies’ Benev. Soc. of First Cong.
      Ch., Two Bbls. of C., Val. 88.
    Mattapoisett. A. C.                                        1.00
    Matfield. Mrs. S. D. Shaw (1.50 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                     2.00
    Merrimac. John K. Sargent                                  2.00
    Natick. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                                40.00
    Newburyport. North Cong. Ch. and Soc., 27.33;
      Prospect St. Ch. and Soc., 25.                          52.33
    Newton. Freedmen’s Aid Soc., Books, etc., _for
      Library, Macon, Ga._
    Northampton. “A Friend”                                   98.00
    North Leominster. Cong. Ch. of Christ, 13;
      Mrs. S. F. Houghton, 5.                                 18.00
    Norton. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          17.93
    Oxford. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                              20.00
    Oxford. Woman’s Mission Soc., Bbl of C.
    Pawtucketville. J. M. H.                                   0.50
    Randolph. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (10 of which from
      Sab. Sch.)                                             105.25
    Rockport. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              35.42
    Rockport. “A Lady,” _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst. (Land.)_                                           1.00
    Royalston. Ladies of First Ch., Bbl. of C.,
      Val. 45, _for Talladega C._
    Shelburne. Ladies Sew. Circle of First Cong.
      Ch., Bundle of C., _for Tougaloo U._
    Shirley Village. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.32
    South Abington. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        75.00
    Southampton. Cong. Ch.                                    38.46
    Southbridge, Globe Village. Ev. Free Ch. and
      Soc.                                                    35.00
    Southborough. Sab. Sch. of Pilgrim Evan. Ch.,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                30.00
    South Deerfield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        9.81
    Sutton. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                      5.00
    Templeton. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                         10.00
    Townsend. Ladies Benev. Soc., Bbl of C., Val.
      20.75.
    Waltham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               26.00
    Westborough. Ladies’ Freedmen’s Soc., Bbl. of
      C. and 1, _for Freight_                                  1.00
    West Medford. Henry Newcomb                                2.00
    West Medway. “Friends,” _for Student Aid, Fisk
      U._                                                     10.00
    Worcester. Plymouth Cong. Ch. and Soc., 74.50;
      Salem St. Cong. Ch., 75; Samuel R. Heywood, 32,
      to const. FRANK E. HEYWOOD L. M.; “E. C. C.” 20.       201.50
    ——. “A Friend,” _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst.
      (Building)_                                              1.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $2,247.79

    LEGACIES.

    Athol. Estate of J. Sumner Parmenter, (60 of
      which to const. MRS. J. S. PARMENTER and
      MRS. F. S. PARMENTER, L. Ms.), by F. S.
      Parmenter, Ex.                                         160.00
    Sandwich. Estate of Tryphosa French by
      Fletcher Clark, Ex.                                    100.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $2,447.79


  CONNECTICUT, $3,614.73.

    Bethlehem. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                10.00
    Bridgeport. “Cash,” _for Tillotson C. & N.
      Inst. (Building)_                                        5.00
    Buckingham. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             2.39
    Canterbury. Westminster Cong. Ch.                          9.50
    Durham. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc. of North Cong.
      Ch., _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                    13.00
    East Avon. Cong. Ch.                                      62.30
    East Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                   27.33
    Granby. First Cong. Ch.                                   11.30
    Hartford. Pearl St. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                    95.20
    Hebron. Jasper Porter                                     10.00
    Higganum. Cong. Ch.                                       16.00
    Hockanum. South Cong. Ch. (5 of which from
      Mrs. E. M. Roberts)                                     13.00
    Mansfield. B. F. K.                                        0.51
    Meriden. First Cong. Ch., to const. N. L.
      BRADLEY, J. C. TWICHELL, GEO. ATKINSON, GEO.
      E SAVAGE, EDWARD C. ALLEN, J. P. PARKER,
      MRS. F. A. OTIS, F. J. WHEELER, S. C.
      PIERSON and A. H. GARDNER L. Ms.                       300.00
    Milford. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Tillotson C. & N. Inst._ and to const.
      ALBERT NETTLETON L. M.                                  30.00
    Naugatuck. Cong. Ch., 105.80; Andrew Hills, 25           130.80
    New Canaan. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                            25.00
    New Haven. Amos Townsend                                  10.00
    New Haven. Sab. Sch. of Ch. of the Redeemer,
      _for John Brown Steamer_                                10.00
    New Preston. “Mrs. B. A.,” _for Lady
      Missionary, Raleigh, N.C._                              10.00
    Orange. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst. (Building)_                               10.00
    Plainville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst. (Land)_                          2.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Ch.                                       55.00
    Portland. First Cong. Ch.                                  7.49
    Stamford. Cong. Ch.                                       47.30
    Stratford. Cong. Ch.                                      25.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      56.72
    Torrington. Young Ladies’ Benev. Soc., Bbl. of
      C., val. 50, and 4, _for Freight, for
      Talladega C._                                            4.00
    Washington. “Z.” _for Indian M._                           1.00
    Willimantic. I. E. S.                                      1.00
    Winchester. Cong. Ch.                                      8.89
    Woodbury. North Cong. Ch.                                 23.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $1,032.73
    LEGACIES.

    Ellington. Estate of Maria Pitkin, by Edwin
      Talcott, Ex.                                         2,200.00
    New Haven. Estate of Mrs. Phebe Browning, by
      Henry E. Pardee, Ex.                                   382.00
                                                           --------
                                                          $3,614.73


  NEW YORK, $10,861.41.

    Albany. Clinton Sq. Bible Sch., _for Needmore
      Chapel, Talladega, Ala._                                25.00
    Albany. H. A. Homes                                        3.00
    Brasher Falls. Elijah Wood, 15; Eliza A. Bell,
      2                                                       17.00
    Brooklyn. Tompkins Av. Cong. Ch.                         216.15
    Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. of Central Cong. Ch., _for
      Missionaries at Fernandina, Fla., and
      Ladies’ Island, S.C._                                  175.00
    Champion. Cong. Ch.                                        8.30
    Columbus. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.                     5.00
    Harlem. Cong. Ch. adl.                                     0.75
    Hobart. J. W. Blish and wife                               3.00
    Marcellus. Presb. Ch.                                      4.75
    Newark Valley. Cong. Ch.                                  39.27
    New York. HENRY C. HOUGHTON, M.D., to const.
      himself L. M.                                           30.00
    New York. Sheldon & Co., 56 vols., _for
      Library, Macon, Ga._
    Penn Yan. Chas. C. Sheppard                              150.00
    Poughkeepsie. First Reformed Ch.                          22.83
    Ransomville. John Powley                                   5.00
    Rodman. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Sherburne. First Cong. Ch. (15 of which _for
      Talladega C._)                                          78.33
    Syracuse. Mrs S. J. White, to const. MRS. H.
      J. GOUDY L. M.                                          30.00
    Volney. Ludington Sab. Sch.                                3.03
    West Bloomfield. Miss Vidie Taft, 25.
      “Friends,” 10, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._               35.00
                                                             ------
                                                            $861.41
    LEGACY.

    New York. Estate of Francis P. Schoals                10,000.00
                                                          ---------
                                                         $10,861.41


  NEW JERSEY, $10.50.

    Newfield. Rev. Chas. Willey                                5.00
    Stanley. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Woodbridge. Rev. C. N.                                     0.50


  PENNSYLVANIA, $10.00.

    Washington. Mrs. M. H. McFarland                          10.00


  OHIO, $448.19.

    Brooklyn. Cong. Ch.                                       12.00
    Brownhelm. “R. A. B.”                                      2.50
    Chardon. Rev. A. T. Reed                                   3.00
    Cleveland. Plymouth Ch.                                  107.79
    Elyria. “M. L. W.,” 1.50; W. J. N., 50c.                   2.00
    Geneva. W. M. A.                                           1.00
    Grafton. Mrs. Sally Tuttle                                 5.00
    Guilford. Trustees of First Cong. Ch., to
      const. MRS. MARY GRAY, MRS. AMANDA BIGHAM
      and MRS. A. C. DOWD, L. M.’s                           100.00
    Hudson. Cong. Ch.                                         40.00
    Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                 30.80
    Oberlin. Sab. Sch. of Second Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                30.00
    Pittsfield. Rev. W. W. F.                                  1.00
    Ruggles. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                   7.60
    Strongsville. First Cong. Ch.                             10.00
    Wellington. First Cong. Ch.                               50.00
    Willoughby. Florence Page, _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 5.00
    Wilseyville. E. M. Ensign                                 10.00
    Zanesville. Mrs. M. T.                                     0.50
                                                             ------
                                                            $418.19
    LEGACY.

    Pittsfield. Estate of Mrs. A. C. Morley, to
      const., Prof. EDWARD W. MORLEY, L. M.                   30.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $448.19


  ILLINOIS, $595.82.

    Altona. Rev. E. H. B.                                      0.50
    Aurora. New England Cong. Ch.                             35.70
    Bone Gap. Cyrus Rice, deceased, by Mrs. Martha
      Rice                                                     5.00
    Champaign. Mrs. A. O. H.                                   1.00
    Chicago. Plymouth Cong. Ch., 100; First Cong.
      Ch., 87.02                                             187.02
    Chicago. A. H. Andrews & Co., Folding
      bedstead, val. 27, _for Atlanta U._
    Evanston. Cong. Ch.                                        5.00
    Galesburgh. “A Friend”                                    20.00
    Geneseo. First Cong. Ch., H. Nourse                       50.00
    Hampton. Cong. Ch.                                         6.22
    Jacksonville. H. L. &. M. C. Melendy                      10.00
    Mendon. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           5.00
    Oak Park. Girl’s Mission Circle, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Ottawa. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   50.00
    Rockford. Mrs. C. L. Robinson, _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           25.00
    Rochelle. W. H. Holcomb, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Sheffield. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Lady
      Missionary, Savannah, Ga._                               6.71
    South Chicago. Cong. Ch.                                  12.04
    Stillman Valley. Cong. Ch.                                51.91
    Waverly. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.                           12.22
    Wilmette. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           12.50


  MICHIGAN, $1,444.63.

    Alpena. Mrs. T. E. H.                                      0.50
    Armanda. Sab. Sch. of Cong Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           15.00
    Detroit. First Cong. Ch., 213; Rev. Jeremiah
      Porter, 25                                             238.00
    Four Towns. Rev. E. C. Herrington                          5.00
    Galesburgh. Cong. Ch.                                     12.00
    Grand Rapids. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Rev. J. H. H. Sengstacke_                          20.00
    Kalamazoo. Sab. Sch. of Plymouth Cong. Ch.,
      _for Tougaloo U._                                       10.00
    Litchfield. First Cong. Ch. to const. MRS.
      MARY J. MEADE L. M.                                     30.00
    Ludington. Cong. Ch.                                      30.00
    Northport. Cong. Ch.                                       9.13
    Quincy. Samuel F. Porter and Wife                         50.00
    Saint Johns. G. B.                                         1.00
    Salem. Rev. James Vincent                                 10.00
    South Haven. Clark Pierce                                 10.00
    Union City. “A Friend”                                 1,000.00
    Warren. “C. S. B.”                                         1.00
    Ypsilanti. Gertrude F. Milton                              3.00


  IOWA, $217.79.

    Alden. Cong. Ch., 8; Mrs. E. Rogers, 2                    10.00
    Bellevue. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                              3.60
    Council Bluffs. Cong. Ch.                                 50.00
    Chester Center. Cong. Ch.                                 32.00
    Des Moines. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                           25.00
    Eldora. Cong. Ch., 10.10; Mrs. G. S., 50c.                10.60
    Glenwood. Cong. Ch.                                       11.59
    Holland. “A Friend”                                        4.00
    Iowa Falls. Cong. Ch.                                      8.55
    Long Creek. Mrs. Sarah E. Evans                            5.00
    Marion. “Willing Workers,” _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            30.00
    McGregor. Daisy Club, _for little girls in New
      Orleans, La._                                            5.00
    Montour. Cong. Ch.                                        22.45


  WISCONSIN, $109.81.

    Beloit. Y. M. C. A. of Beloit College                      1.25
    Bloomington. Cong. Ch.                                     3.30
    Cumberland. W. B. Hopkins, M.D.                           10.00
    Eau Claire. D. Bresee, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._         50.00
    Emerald Grove. Cong. Ch.                                  13.70
    Madison. Hon. W. H. Chandler                               3.06
    Menominee. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   12.50
    Milwaukee. Hanover St. Cong. Ch.                          15.00
    Racine. Rev. C. N.                                         1.00


  MINNESOTA, $124.42.

    Alexandria. “A Friend,” _for Mendi M._                    11.00
    Glyndon. The Church at Glyndon                             9.00
    Hastings. D. B. Truax                                      5.00
    Lake City. Cong. Ch.                                      10.25
    Mantorville. Rev. Henry Willard                           25.00
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 50.17; Second Cong.
      Ch., 4                                                  54.17
    Northfield. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00


  NEBRASKA, $52.85.

    Fremont. Cong. Ch., 26.10, and Sab. Sch., 15              41.10
    Lincoln. “K. and C.”                                       8.00
    Nebraska City. Cong. Ch.                                   3.75


  WASHINGTON TER., $5.00.

    New Tacoma. Mrs. Eliza Taylor                              5.00


  MISSOURI, $50.50.

    Jefferson City. E. L. A.                                   0.50
    St. Louis. Rev. and Mrs. C. L. Goodell                    50.00


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $48.00.

    Washington. First Cong. Ch.                               48.00


  VIRGINIA, $6.62.

    Herndon. Cong. Ch.                                         6.62


  KENTUCKY, $64.75.

    Lexington. Tuition                                        47.00
    Whitley. Tuition                                          17.75


  TENNESSEE, $489.00.

    Memphis. Tuition                                         207.70
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              279.30
    Nashville. “Cash” _for Freight_                            2.00


  NORTH CAROLINA, $253.25.

    Wilmington. Tuition                                      248.25
    Wilmington. Cong. Ch.                                      5.00


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $349.35.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         339.35
    Charleston. Cong. Ch.                                     10.00


  GEORGIA, $525.17.

    Atlanta. Atlanta U., Tuition                             161.22
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Macon. Lewis High School, Tuition, 177; Rent, 8          185.00
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, 138.95; Rent,
      10                                                     148.95


  ALABAMA, $96.43.

    Athens. Trinity Sch., Tuition                             63.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch.                                         10.33
    Marion. Tuition                                            4.75
    Shelby Iron Works. Mrs. P. F. H.                           0.50
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          17.85


  LOUISIANA, $159.25.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        159.25


  TEXAS, $171.25.

    Austin. Tillotson C. and N. Inst., Tuition               163.25
    Corpus Christi. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch., _for
      Mendi M._                                                3.00
    ——. “A Friend” by Prof. Anderson, _for
      Tillotson C. and N. Inst._                               5.00


  INCOMES, $687.45.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                                83.15
    De Forest Fund, _for President’s Chair,
      Talladega C._                                          344.13
    Graves Scholarship Fund, _for Talladega C._               72.78
    Haley Scholarship Fund, _for Fisk U._                     30.83
    Hammond Fund, _for Straight U._                           22.10
    Le Moyne Fund, _for Memphis, Tenn._                       61.67
    Theo. Endowment Fund, _for Howard U._                     72.79
                                                          ---------
      Total for November                                 $23,654.64
      Total from Oct. 1, to Nov. 30                      $34,544.36
                                                          =========

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                        56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the person
who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.


STATISTICS FOR 1882.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia, 1;
North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky, 7;
Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana, 17;
Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 38. Total, 57.

TEACHERS MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 336;
among the Chinese, 31; among the Indians, 6; in Africa, 16. Total,
389. STUDENTS.—In theology, 72; law, 28; in college course, 104;
in other studies, 9,404. Total, 9,608. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.

       *       *       *       *       *




           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.

                 *       *       *       *       *


It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia: refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives Vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

             Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles
                  of the Ox-Brain and Wheat-Germ.
           Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.
              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.
        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Hereford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meet the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE
                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,
                         Providence, R.I.,
                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  SMITH
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS
  ARE THE BEST.]

                 *       *       *       *       *

                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                            THE CENTURY

                                AND

                           ST. NICHOLAS.

                 *       *       *       *       *

A little more than a year ago the magazine which is now known
as THE CENTURY passed a critical point in its history. Three
important things happened to it: a change in its own name, a
change in the name of the corporation publishing it, and the
death of the editor-in-chief, Dr. J. G. Holland. Probably no such
combination of circumstances had ever come to any periodical, and
people watched with no little interest to see what would be the
result. The change in name began with the November number, and the
death of Dr. Holland came just before its issue. By reason of the
great excellence of this number and its broad, popular features,
its sale reached 137,500 copies, the average edition during the
preceding twelve months having been 120,000. The following number,
December, was a memorial issue to President Garfield and Dr.
Holland; its sale was almost as great, and the increased demand
has largely continued through the year. The November number (1882)
just issued has an edition of 140,000 copies. The reasons of this
growth are various; but they may be, for the most part, ascribed
to the fact that the resources of literature and art have been
constantly augmenting and that a gradual improvement has been
going on, which has resulted in the issue of what the _Providence
Journal_, speaking of THE CENTURY MAGAZINE, calls “the most able
and valuable publication ever put forth in magazine form.” Among
its special features for 1883, “The History of Life in the Thirteen
Colonies,” a series of separate papers by Dr. Edward Eggleston,
just begun, to be richly and accurately illustrated, is alone worth
the subscription price. Washington Gladden’s realistic serial,
entitled “The Christian League of Connecticut,” is attracting wide
attention among business men interested in Christian work. Henry
James, Jr., Alphonse Daudet, Mrs. Frances Hodgson Burnett, Charles
Dudley Warner, “H. H.,” T. W. Higginson and Frank R. Stockton are
among the contributors, and from them and from other distinguished
writers will come the material for another brilliant year of THE
CENTURY. Mr. W. D. Howell’s new novel, “A Woman’s Reason,” will
begin in the February number.

There is another magazine published by THE CENTURY CO., which in
the field of children’s literature occupies the same place that THE
CENTURY fills in the grown-up world. It is ST. NICHOLAS, now just
beginning its tenth year, a magazine of which the _London Times_
said a year ago: “It is above anything _we_ produce in the same
line.” It is a theory of the editor, Mrs. Mary Mapes Dodge, that
there is nothing too good for children, and the boys and girls who
read ST. NICHOLAS are really getting the very best writing and the
finest pictures that can be had. Its circulation is worldwide.
In England, where it has had a large monthly sale for several
years, six copies are said to be taken in the household of the
Prince of Wales. The Queen of Italy reads it every month to her
children. A book was recently issued in the Arabic language, and
printed at Beirut, Syria, made up of poems and stories translated
from ST. NICHOLAS, enriched with the original pictures, loaned
by the publishers for that purpose. This year the magazine is to
have a serial story by J. T. Trowbridge, one of the most popular
writers for boys in the world, and another by Frank R. Stockton—a
historical novelette of boy and girl life in the thirteenth
century—which the _Springfield Republican_ has already predicted
“will prove easily the best story of the year for the young.” ST.
NICHOLAS contains eighty or more pages every month, with from fifty
to a hundred pictures; the best writers of two continents are
educating the young folks who read it.

THE CENTURY costs $4.00 a year, and ST. NICHOLAS $3.00. Special
offers are made to new subscribers beginning with the November
numbers. For further information and a handsomely illustrated
24-page pamphlet describing the magazines and their new home (sent
free to persons mentioning this magazine), address the publishers.


                  THE CENTURY CO., NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  [Illustration: THE ILLUSTRATED

                        CHRISTIAN WEEKLY.]

Among the many family papers of the land, we do not believe one can
be found better suited for general reading than this. It has twelve
pages weekly, filled with the finest cuts and most attractive
reading matter, printed on nice paper.

In a single year it makes a volume of over 600 pages, with 400
cuts, giving able editorials on current topics, best original
matter, notes on the Sunday School Lessons, together with stories
from the best English and American authors.

                     $2 50 PER YEAR, POSTPAID.
         Send for Sample Copy free, if you wish to see it.

  [Illustration]    Illustrated Christian Weekly,     [Illustration]

  [Illustration]     150 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK      [Illustration]


                 *       *       *       *       *


                         New S. S. Cards.

_PICTURES FROM PALESTINE._

A series of six views from the Holy Land, with floral border, text,
and verses of hymns. Six cards, 6½ by 4¼ in. 30 cts.

_=WORDS OF THE WISE.=_ Packet of elegant roses in vases, with texts
from the wise men of the Bible. Order No. 40. Twelve cards 5¾ by 4
in. 30 cts.

_“OVERCOMES” OF THE BIBLE._

Charming floral designs, with texts as indicated by the title. 12
texts. Order No. 41. Twelve cards, 5½ by 3 in. 25 cts.

_=WORDS OF STRENGTH.=_ A packet of twelve cards from original
designs, with Scripture selections. Order No. 42. Twelve cards, 5
by 3¼ in. 25 cts.

_=WORDS OF TRUTH.=_ A packet of vases with flowers from original
designs, with texts. 12 texts. Order No. 43. Twelve cards, 5 by 4
in. 25 cts.

                Send for Catalogue of S. S. Cards.

                      AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY,

150 Nassau St., N.Y.; 52 Bromfield St., Boston; 1512 Chestnut St.,
Philadelphia; 75 State St., Rochester; 153 Wabash Av., Chicago; 757
Market St., San Francisco.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          “Model No. 4.”

We invite the attention of teachers of primary departments,
parents, and others to a new library of 50 books specially intended
for small children.

The books are in good large type, on fine paper, handsomely bound
in cloth, and the library has nearly 4,000 pages of reading, and
over 800 cuts. The books, by the best writers, are bright and
sparkling, and cannot fail to please and instruct the little folks.

Each library has 50 catalogues, and is put in a nice chestnut box.

                          Price $10 net.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                               Send

                     for sample pages of our
                         TEACHER’S BIBLE.

                  with maps, tables, helps, and
                    _INTERLINEAR_ REFERENCES;
                 bound full flexible, silk sewed,
                    kid lined, Levant morocco.

                        ONLY FIVE DOLLARS.

                      AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY,

150 Nassau St., N.Y.; 52 Bromfield St., Boston; 1512 Chestnut St.,
Philadelphia; 75 State St., Rochester; 153 Wabash Av., Chicago; 757
Market St., San Francisco.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                      Life Insurance Company

                           OF NEW YORK.

                 *       *       *       *       *

OVER THIRTY-TWO YEARS’ business experience.

LIBERAL FORM OF POLICY, securing non-forfeiture under the recent
laws of the State of New York.

PROMINENT OBJECT.—Life insurance for policy holders.

RESULTS.—Over 3,000 families benefited.

COST.—The lowest consistent with safety.

DIVIDENDS of surplus made annually, and have been large.

INVESTMENT RULE.—To get the best security rather than the largest
interest.

                          AGENTS WANTED.

Active, reliable and persevering men, who desire agencies in the
states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa and
Missouri are invited to correspond with the company direct.

                                              HENRY STOKES,
                                                    President.

  J. L. HALSEY, Secretary.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  THE
  RISING SUN
  STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed.
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                  FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                       COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.

                 *       *       *       *       *

          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: ESTEY ORGAN

  J. Estey & Co
    Brattleboro Vt.]

As musical culture increases it demands in musical instruments for
home, church, or school, excellence in tone, tasteful workmanship,
and durability.

                  SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                  Carpets, Rugs, Mattings, etc.,

                             FOR CASH.

                 *       *       *       *       *

               $3.50—ELEGANT STYLES, LIGHT AND DARK
                   PATTERNS, AXMINSTER, MOQUETTE
                   AND HEARTH RUGS, 27 × 64 in.

These goods are very serviceable and are suitable for parlor or
drawing room, and are sold elsewhere for $5 to $7 each.

                REVERSIBLE, SMYRNA AND VELVET RUGS
                    AND MATS, large assortment.

REVERSIBLE MATS, 75c., 90c., $1; EXTRA QUALITY, $1.50; REVERSIBLE
RUGS, $1.60, $2.50, $3, $3.75, $4.50; EXTRA LARGE, $6, $6.50, $9
and $10.

               INDIA BODY BRUSSELS CARPETS, 45 and
                          55c. per yard.

                        TAPESTRY BRUSSELS,
                   60c., 65c., 75c. and upwards.

                  VELVET CARPETS (fine quality),
                      $1.25, $1.35 per yard.

                  MATTINGS, OIL CLOTHS, DRUGGETS,
           in numerous designs and worthy the attention
                     of consumers and dealers.

            Mail orders will receive prompt attention.

                       ANDREW LESTER & CO.,

                          511 Broadway,

          St. Nicholas Hotel Block.       NEW YORK, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     60,000 TONS USED IN 1881.

One ton will build two miles of staunch three-strand Barb Fence.
One strand will make an old wooden fence impassable to large
cattle. One strand at bottom will keep out hogs.

                   Washburn & Moen Man’f’g Co.,

                         WORCESTER, MASS.,

                         Manufacturers of

                    Patent Steel Barb Fencing.

[Illustration]

A STEEL Thorn Hedge. No other Fencing so cheap or put up so
quickly. Never rusts, stains, decays, shrinks nor warps. Unaffected
by fire, wind or flood. A complete barrier to the most unruly
stock. Impassable by man or beast.

No other Fence Material so easily handled by small proprietors
and tenants, or large planters in the South.

Shipped on spools containing 100 pounds, or eighty rods of
Fencing. Can be kept on the Reel for transient uses.

           CHEAPEST, BEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE OF FENCES.

Send for Illustrative Pamphlets and Circulars, as above.


                 *       *       *       *       *




               THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                            PRESIDENT,

                    HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, Mass.


                     CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

         Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


                            TREASURER.

           H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


                             AUDITORS.

                M. F. READING.        WM. A. NASH.


                       EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


                       DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

                  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
                Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
                   Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


                          COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


                    DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


No Christian family can afford to be without missionary
intelligence, and no missionary society can afford to be without
readers of its publications; it had better give them to the readers
without pay than to have no readers. Missionary zeal will die in
the churches without missionary intelligence.

But it would be far better for both the societies and the readers
if missionary news were paid for. This would give the magazine
attentive perusal and the society relief from the reproach of a
large expense for publication. Missionary publications should be
put on a _paying basis_. Aside from a free list to life members,
ministers, etc., the cost of publication should be made up by
paying subscribers and advertisements.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on this basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of over 20,000 copies monthly and
that goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will
not our friends aid us to make this plan a success?

Subscriptions and advertisements should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD,
Treasurer, 56 Reade st., New York, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


           ATKIN & PROUT, PRINTERS, 12 BARCLAY ST., N.Y.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors.

Ditto marks replaced with the text they represent to facilitate
eBook alignment.

“Goverment” changed to “Government” on page 21. (The tender mercies
of the Government)

Missing “s” inserted in “raised” on page 24. (And raised his little
shaven head)

Missing “s” inserted in “Boscawen” on page 25.

Missing “l” inserted in “Wallingford” entry on page 26.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 1, JANUARY, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.