[Illustration: MARCH, 1883.

VOL. XXXVII.

NO. 3.

The American Missionary]




CONTENTS


                                                         PAGE.

    FINANCIAL—COST OF LADY MISSIONARIES                     65
    PARAGRAPHS                                              66
    A PERMANENT NECESSITY                                   67
    GENERAL NOTES                                           68
    BENEFACTIONS                                            70
    CONNECTICUT CONVENTIONS—ITEMS FROM THE FIELD            71


  THE SOUTH.

    LEXINGTON HIGH SCHOOL (with cut)                        72
    A WEEK’S WORK BY LADY MISSIONARIES                      73
      Selma, Ala.; Savannah, Ga.; Atlanta,
      Ga.; Raleigh, N.C.; Montgomery, Ala.;
      New Orleans, La., Washington, D.C.
    VANTAGE GROUND NEEDED BY STUDENTS                       80
    CUT OF LADIES’ HALL, TOUGALOO, MISS.                    81


  THE INDIANS.

    WORK AT S’KOKOMISH, W.T.                                83
    INDIANS WATCHING A TRAIN (cut)                          85


  THE CHINESE.

    COMITY                                                  86


  CHILDREN’S PAGE.

    LADY AGNES HAMILTON                                     88


  RECEIPTS                                                  89


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             NEW YORK.
         PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,
                      Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                Price 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.
          Entered at the Post-Office at New York, N.Y.,
                      as second-class matter.




               THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

                 *       *       *       *       *


                            PRESIDENT.

                HON. WM. B. WASHBURN, LL.D., Mass.


                     CORRESPONDING SECRETARY.

         Rev. M. E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


                            TREASURER.

           H. W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


                             AUDITORS.

                 M. F. READING.      WM. A. NASH.


                       EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman; A. P. FOSTER, Secretary; LYMAN
ABBOTT, ALONZO S. BALL, A. S. BARNES, C. T. CHRISTENSEN, FRANKLIN
FAIRBANKS, CLINTON B. FISK, S. B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, CHARLES
A. HULL, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, WM. H. WARD, A. L.
WILLISTON.


                       DISTRICT SECRETARIES.

                  Rev. C. L. WOODWORTH, _Boston_.
                Rev. G. D. PIKE, D.D., _New York_.
                   Rev. JAMES POWELL, _Chicago_.


                          COMMUNICATIONS

relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretary; those relating to the collecting fields,
to the District Secretaries; letters for the Editor of the
“American Missionary,” to Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D., at the New York
Office.


                    DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

may be sent to H. W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York,
or, when more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21
Congregational House, Boston, Mass., or 112 West Washington Street,
Chicago, Ill. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


                        FORM OF A BEQUEST.

“I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of —— dollars,
in trust, to pay the same in —— days after my decease to the
person who, when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the
‘American Missionary Association’ of New York City, to be applied,
under the direction of the Executive Committee of the Association,
to its charitable uses and purposes.” The Will should be attested
by three witnesses.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                              WANTED
                             $375,000,
            Efficiently to prosecute the work in hand.


                           CO-OPERATION

Of every Congregational minister, and of every office bearer in
our Congregational churches to secure (_a_) an annual presentation
or the work, and claims of the A. M. A. in every Congregational
church; and (_b_) an annual contribution from every Congregational
church in the country for this great work.


                               HELP

Of every Congregational Sunday-school superintendent to secure from
his school a contribution to our “Student Aid Fund.”


                                AID

Of every Ladies’ Missionary Society to sustain our work among the
colored women and girls.


                            ENDOWMENTS

For Professorships and Scholarships in our schools. The time has
come when in our larger institutions the chairs of instruction
should be endowed, that the Association may be left to enlarge its
missionary work in other directions.


                               GIFTS

For the improvement of schools and churches already built, and the
erection of additional buildings, imperatively needed.


                           A SUBSCRIBER

In every family for our monthly magazine,

                     THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY,
                Subscription Price, 50c. per annum.

                 *       *       *       *       *




                                THE

                       AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

                 *       *       *       *       *

            VOL. XXXVII.      MARCH, 1883.      No. 3.

                 *       *       *       *       *




American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


Our receipts for the first four months of the present fiscal year,
ending Jan. 31, 1883, amounted to $85,555.11, an increase of
$1,661.72 over the amount received for the corresponding months of
the previous year. The legacies, however, this year, have amounted
to $25,141.83, against $9,191.72 for the year before, showing a
falling off in collections and donations of $14,288.39. We desire,
therefore, to remind our readers that the enlargement so greatly
needed and so deeply felt by the friends who attended our last
annual meeting and reviewed the work of the Association cannot be
accomplished unless the receipts are greatly increased.

       *       *       *       *       *

We devote considerable space in this issue to a report of a week’s
work by our lady missionaries. We believe that what they are doing
is vital to the welfare of the families from which many of our
students come, and wish to commend the work and workers to the
prayers and sympathies of the patrons of this Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


COST OF LADY MISSIONARIES.

We sincerely hope that those who read the record of a Week’s Work
by our lady missionaries will carefully consider the value of these
labors, and the importance of the question as to their duty in
aiding to supply the vast want that exists at the South for this
kind of Christian service. It takes four hundred and fifty dollars
to provide for a lady missionary for one year, including traveling
expenses, board and a moderate salary.

Are there not some societies of ladies who will pledge us the
amount needful, and by so doing have a missionary of their own
in the field? Are there not individuals who will promise as much
for the same purpose? We shall be most happy to answer inquiries
relating to details.

       *       *       *       *       *


The pastor at Hampton writes: “Every night for the last two weeks
we have been having meetings for prayer, and the whole school has
been deeply moved. Many have already confessed their love for
Christ, and there are many now seeking Him. General Armstrong and
all the teachers are thoroughly in earnest in the matter. The
General made a most earnest appeal to the students last evening, in
which he said that nothing like it had been known in the history of
the school.”

       *       *       *       *       *

We have received intelligence from Rev. D. K. Flickinger, D.D., who
has made in Liverpool, London and Glasgow preliminary inquiries
relating to the John Brown steamer. It was his purpose on reaching
Sierra Leone to learn definitely as to the necessary capacity of
the boat for the use of the mission. He hoped also to be able to
conclude contract with the Governor of Sierra Leone for carrying
mails and for doing other business which would be a source of
income to the mission without interfering with its special work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. J. M. Hall writes from the Good Hope Station of a prosperous
year’s work among the Mendi and Sherbro people. He says: “One year
ago yesterday I took charge of the spiritual work at this station.
We have had 48 eleven o’clock Sabbath services, 48 Sabbath night
services, 40 Wednesday night services, 360 early morning six
o’clock services, not including the class and children’s Friday
afternoon services. I have received eight persons into the church,
five on profession of faith in Christ, have baptized 25 children,
and married one couple. I have traveled two thousand miles in
search of medical treatment and in the interest of the mission,
notwithstanding that I have been confined to my bed and room
twenty-two times with this most dreadful fever. We trust that we
shall by the grace of God be enabled to do more the next year if
permitted to live. Our schools, both Sabbath and day, have been
well attended. The work is certainly a great one and I like it more
and more every day.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Baptist Home Mission Monthly_ makes its appearance with
enlarged form and new dress. Its first cover page is tastefully
embellished to indicate the scope of work carried on by the
Baptist Home Mission Society. Its twenty-four pages are packed
with pertinent paragraphs, passages of Scripture, personals,
pictures, poetry, there being over one hundred separate articles,
items, etc., etc. It is edited with the pen, quotation marks being
particularly scarce. Care, literary skill and discernment have been
used in the selection and arrangement of topics, and wide range
has been given in the discussion of matters relating to the world
of missions. The work expended on this publication will stimulate
other societies in providing missionary literature abreast with
the demands of the age. We extend to our Baptist brethren our
gratulations.

       *       *       *       *       *


A PERMANENT NECESSITY.

Temporary evils call for temporary agencies and remedies, but
permanent conditions of society require permanent and adequate
provisions to meet these demands. The confident prediction that the
freedman would rapidly fade away before the superior white races,
suggested to the humane that he should be made comfortable in
some sort of field hospital while he lingered, and made ready, if
possible, for a speedy departure to a more congenial world, where
perhaps the conditions of life would not be so unfavorable for his
continued existence.

The figures given by the unsentimental census-taker showing that
during the past decade there has been an increase of about 34 per
cent. of this race in our population does not indicate that the
black belt stretching along our Southern horizon is likely to
fade away. The negro is here to stay, and in adjusting him to our
natural life we are faced by a permanent, not a temporary problem.

We must either take counsel of the Egyptians and “deal wisely”
with this people and so prevent their increase, or broadly and
comprehensively deal with the question of fitting them for a
large and permanent place as an integral part and most important
factor of our Republic. If we deal wisely with them we must bear
in mind first of all that they are here and will remain here, and
their character and condition will enter largely into that of our
national life and character.

It is not beyond the limits of modest truth to say that the victory
which has been gained over Southern prejudices against the free
common school systems was gained, not by the political conventions
which established them by constitutional provisions, but by the
missionary training-schools and the teachers sent out by them; but
the fact that these are established does not supersede a necessity
for the schools which gained this victory. An intelligent gentleman
who was appealed to for aid in the endowment of one of these
said: “Private charity has demonstrated the possibility and value
of negro education, but it is a work for which it is altogether
inadequate. It must be done in the South as in the North by the
States themselves. These rapidly increasing millions must be, and
can be, cared for alone in schools sustained by government. Your
missionary, pioneer, experimental work has been done so wisely
and so well that its success has superseded the necessity of its
continuance.”

The answer to this is of course not far to seek. Yale and Harvard
did not grow out of the common school systems of Massachusetts and
Connecticut, but made these possible and efficient by supplying the
prime conditions of a good school-trained teachers. These colleges
were founded not by the State, but by private philanthropy, as all
such schools have been, for on no theory which has been accepted
as to the functions of government can such be built by the State.
The primary and preparatory work which has been done by the schools
of the A. M. A. will indeed be remitted, more and more, to the
common schools of the States, but there will always be a demand
and a necessity for fully endowed colleges and universities for
the higher education of the teachers and leaders of this people;
and neither the highest efficiency of the public school, nor the
fullest development of such universities as Vanderbilt and similar
schools for the white race, will lessen the need of such schools as
Fisk and Atlanta Universities. If the day shall ever come, as come
it certainly will, when these schools for whites shall strike out
the word white, and admit all who seek their advantages, it will
come as the result of a work which they are not doing now.

The prejudice which now excludes the negro will yield only to
established facts, but will not, from the nature of the case,
create these facts. When educated negroes in all the public
callings of life shall have proved “that a man is a man for all
that,” that what entitles him to respect and honor lies deeper
than the color of his skin, and is not to be determined at all by
its peculiar shade, so that separate schools will not be demanded
for him, he will come in such numbers that those now established
for him will be urgently needed for the accommodation of students,
regardless of color. Thus are we led by our just and reasonable
views to the conclusion that the schools for higher training of
the negro, established by the A. M. A. and kindred societies, are
demanded for a permanent work most vitally related to all that
is dear to us as Christians and patriots, and that permanent and
adequate endowments for them must be made if these interests are to
be conserved.

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL NOTES.


AFRICA.

—On Nov. 12th, Bishop Crowther, while at Sierra Leone, on his way
back to the Niger, admitted three Africans to deacon’s orders. Gov.
Havelock and other Europeans were present, and more than eighteen
hundred native Christians.

—The C.M.S. Committee has presented a memorial to Lord Granville
on the question of slavery and the slave-trade in Egypt. Pressure
is brought to bear upon the Government not to miss the present
opportunity of using the influence and power of England to abolish
slavery itself, and so put a stop to the slave-trade.

—The River Gambia Trading Company has been incorporated in London
with a capital of $750,000.

—A new station has been founded among the Angoni by Dr. Laws and
Mr. Koyi, of the Livingstonia Mission.

—The gross weight of diamonds passed through the post-office of
Kimberley, South Africa, in 1880, was 1,440 pounds, estimated at
$16,839,485.

—Captain Burton and Commander Cameron, on their return from the
West African Gold Fields, reported that the wealth of the land was
prodigious. “Gold dust is found by native women from the sands of
the seashore. Gold spangles glitter after showers in the streets
of Azim. Gold is yielded by the lumps of yellow swish that rivet
the wattle walls of hut and hovel. Our washings range from half an
ounce to four ounces per ton.”

—In 1880, the number of Protestant communicants in Africa,
according to Dr. Behm, was 122,470. The number composing the
communities in the midst of which these were found was 506,966.
Thirty-four religious societies were prosecuting the work
represented in these communities.

—Dr. Blyden, President of Liberia College, reports increasing
prosperity among the immigrants who have gone from this country.
The commercial interests of Liberia are indicated by the fact that
one vessel, the bark Monrovia, brought 150,000 pounds of coffee to
New York on a recent trip.

—The last report from the missionaries of Tabora marks great
progress in the transportation of letters. The mails have become
more regular, nothing is lost on the route, and the roads are
safer. The Wanyamouesis mounted guides are very capable, and there
is this advantage in employing them that on the return trip, going
back to their homes, they delay less than the other natives. The
station of Ouyoug has met with great misfortune in the loss of Dr.
Southon, who, while filling the place of missionary, has rendered
great service as a physician to the population.


THE INDIANS.

—Red Cloud has paid a visit to Hampton, where he has several
children at school.

—Sec. Teller has set apart a portion of the Turtle Mountain
reservation for the Chippewa Indians.

—It is reported that ex-Congressman Phillips, of Kansas, is paid
$4,000 a year by the Cherokee Indians to look after their interests
in Washington.

—The Commissioner of Indian Affairs reports that, exclusive of the
five civilized tribes, there are 101 day schools for Indians, five
less than last year.

—In the report of Dr. Means, at Portland, he asserts that, “In
proportion to the aid and means employed, no missions to the
heathen since the Apostolic age have been more successful than
those to the American Aborigines.”

—A Quaker and his wife who have labored for seven years among
the Modoc Indians, are reported to have transformed them into
well-mannered and well-dressed people. They own nice farms, and,
for the most part, have connected themselves with the Society of
Friends.


THE CHINESE.

—A Baptist preacher in Portland, Oregon, named Fung Chak, reports
a church of 65 Chinese converts.

—During the first three months after the anti-Chinese law went
into operation, 3,849 Chinese departed from the Pacific coast, and
only 169 arrived.

—The Presbyterian Board has purchased a large and valuable
building, in San Francisco, at a cost of $22,500, for a Chinese
Mission.

—Mr. Yung Wing, so well known for his efforts in establishing a
school for the Chinese in Hartford, Conn., has been appointed chief
magistrate of the city of Shanghai.

—The British and Foreign Bible Society entered China in 1843, and
has agents at Shanghai, operating chiefly through the missionaries
of the different societies.

—A Chinese Sunday-school was opened in Farwell Hall, Chicago,
in 1878. The number of regular attendants at the present time is
between fifty and sixty. On Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings,
secular instruction is given them. The school is under the auspices
of the Y. M. C. A.


—Soon after the American Board, in response to the suggestion
of the A. M. A., decided to open a mission at Hong Kong, a
Thanksgiving offering, amounting to $114, was made by Miss Harriet
Carter’s Chinese Sunday-school, Mount Vernon Church, Boston. The
money was paid over to the treasury of the Am. Board.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENEFACTIONS.

Dickinson College has received $10,000 from Rev. D. H. Carroll, D.D.

Mrs. Elizabeth Hazzard, of Newport, R.I., left a legacy of $1,000
to the Carlisle Indian School.

The Pope of Rome has subscribed $600 to the College of Propaganda,
at Alexandria, Egypt.

The class of ’47 has given $500 to the Mount Holyoke Female
Seminary for the adornment of the chapel of that institution.

A wealthy American of St. Petersburg is reported to have given
$250,000 to found a college for his countrymen at Erzroom, Turkey.

John Wells Hallenhock, of Wilkesbarre, Pa., has given $50,000 to
Lafayette College to endow the chair of the President.

The late S. R. Bearce left $2,000 to the Maine Wesleyan Seminary,
the income to be expended in assisting worthy young men in studying
for the ministry.

James Langlin, of Pittsburgh, Pa., gave by will $15,000 to the
Pennsylvania Female College; $10,000 to the Western Theological
Seminary, and $5,000 to the Western University.

_The increase of the illiteracy at the South during the last decade
was appalling. Every teacher educated in our institutions, however,
labored to overcome it. If a sufficient number of such were
prepared for the work, the illiteracy would virtually disappear in
a generation. Where else is there greater claims for endowments
than in the collegiate and normal schools established by this
Association for this object?_

       *       *       *       *       *


The Connecticut Conventions mentioned in our last issue will be
continued in March at the following places: Tuesday, the 6th,
1st Church, Guilford, morning and afternoon; Wednesday, the
7th, 1st Church, Meriden, afternoon and evening; Thursday, the
8th, Hartford, 4th Church, afternoon and evening; Tuesday, the
27th, East Hartford, morning and afternoon; Wednesday, the 28th,
Willimantic, morning and afternoon; Thursday, the 29th, Plainville,
morning and afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *


ITEMS FROM THE FIELD.

AUGUSTA, Ga.—On the 23d of February a council was to be convened
at this city to organize a church.

TECUMSEH, Ala.—Rev. Milus Harris has taken up the work of teacher
and preacher at this place; the Tecumseh Iron Co., by the manager,
Gen. Willard Warner, having built a home for the mission and for
the minister, is also paying one-half of the salary.

GOLIAD, Texas.—Rev. J. J. Benson, of Orangeburg, S.C., has been
transferred to the church of this place, Rev. B. C. Church having
retired from the pastorate.

LOUISVILLE, Ky.—The Association having helped the Plymouth
Church—Rev. J. D. Smith, pastor—to purchase the house of worship
of the East Baptist Church (white), it was to be re-opened with
dedicatory services on Sabbath, the 18th of February, Rev. B. A.
Imes and W. A. Sinclair and the Field Superintendent assisting and
remaining over for additional service.

BIRMINGHAM, Ala.—Following two preliminary visits of the Field
Superintendent, a council, on the 2d of February, organized a
church of a dozen members, with more to follow. Prof. G. W. Andrews
was Moderator, and Rev. C. B. Curtis, Scribe. Sermon by Rev. J.
R. Sims, right hand by Rev. H. P. Williams, address by Rev. A. W.
Curtis, prayer by Rev. S. G. Norcross. Rev. A. J. Headen, who had
been chosen pastor by the church and the A. M. A. was present, and
he and Mr. Sims and the Superintendent remained over the Sabbath to
preach.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOUTH.

REV. JOSEPH E. ROY, D.D., FIELD SUPERINTENDENT. PROF. ALBERT
SALISBURY, SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION.


[Illustration]

LEXINGTON HIGH SCHOOL.

BY PROF. GEO. F. JEWETT.

Nearly every one knows of the far-famed blue grass region of
Kentucky. It is seventy miles south of Cincinnati, and fifty miles
east of Louisville. Lexington is in the very heart of this fertile
country, eighty miles south of Cincinnati, on the Cincinnati
Southern R.R. The country excels in the production of corn,
potatoes and thorough-bred stock, and it is said that the finest
horses in the United States are raised in this region. Lexington is
one of the oldest towns of Kentucky and has a population of 16,500,
of which one half is colored. Although Kentucky did not take a
very active part in the late war, yet at its close the provisions
for the education of the colored people were as meagre as in other
States.

Last June the Association decided to re-open the school, and
accordingly the building was repaired. The cut given herewith
represents the house in its present shape. On the first floor there
are two large school-rooms capable of seating fifty pupils each,
two large entries and two coat rooms. On the second floor there are
two large school-rooms which may be thrown into one by means of
folding-doors, thus forming our chapel. There are also two small
recitation-rooms. In the front of the building there is a hall and
stairway. The house is also provided with a large bell, which is
a great help in securing punctuality. Our school numbers 133, 38
males and 95 females. There are 31 above 16 years of age. None are
admitted below the fourth reader. The school is divided into three
grades—high school, first and second grammar grades. Miss H. C.
Minton is teacher of the first grammar grade, and Mr. C. H. Jewett
of the second. Our scholars are not far advanced, because of the
very poor advantages which they have had; yet they are a class of
well-behaved and earnest pupils.

The discipline of the school is very easy. The scholars respect
their teachers and seem to consider the school a means by which
they are to rise. Our school-house is far superior to any building
in the city for colored schools. This gives us a great advantage.
We are obliged to turn away many from the lower grades. The State
has just passed a law making the salary of white and colored
public-school teachers equal. This makes it important that the
colored teachers should fit themselves better for their work. Our
school is intended to offer them opportunities for doing this work.

       *       *       *       *       *


A WEEK’S WORK BY LADY MISSIONARIES.

       *       *       *       *       *


FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, SELMA, ALA.

_By Miss Mary K. Lunt._

_Sunday, Jan. 14._—A bright, crisp morning, and as we prepare
for Sunday-school, we think that many of the little ones will be
necessarily detained from their accustomed places, or at least,
be obliged to see their cards with unclipped figures upon them.
But no, one hundred and nineteen are present, a good average,
and but few are tardy, notwithstanding that many have walked
a long distance, and perhaps without having taken breakfast.
At 9:30 A.M. the opening exercises commence—singing, prayer,
chanting the Lord’s Prayer, and responsive reading—after which
the weekly offerings are collected in envelopes, and the amount
subsequently reported, also the number of pupils present, reported
by the Secretary. The contributions are appropriated as follows:
First Sunday of the month, for needy Sunday-schools; second
and third, our own needs; fourth, our church; fifth, foreign
missions. Several schools have been aided by this method, and the
pupils bring their papers carefully folded, to be sent to other
Sunday-schools. Collections last year amounted to $50, revealing
the fact that scarcity of nickels does not keep them from helping
others less favored. After the re-assembling of the classes,
two of which, the infants, the girls named “Buds of Promise,”
the boys, “Little Soldiers,” are taught in the rooms below, the
main school comprising eight classes and one Bible class; their
attention is directed to illustrations and lesson topics on the
board by the superintendent, supplemented by remarks on the
lesson from the pastor. Some of our teachers and pupils have read
original papers on the subject of the lesson for the morning, this
being an incentive to a more thorough study of the lesson. At 11
A.M. we are seated for the morning service, and after the usual
opening exercises and responsive reading we listen to an earnest
discourse, founded on the closing passages of that wonderful Sermon
on the Mount, contrasting the builders, showing the foolishness
of building religious characters on false pretenses, and the
importance of building on the solid rock Christ Jesus.

At 3 P.M. is the children’s meeting known as the “Look Up Legion,”
but called by some the “Look Up ’ligion,” composed of members of
our own and other Sunday-schools of the city, ages ranging from two
and a half to twelve years. Their regular and prompt attendance
attests their interest and zeal. One of the members of the choir
assists in leading the singing, which is a prominent feature of the
hour. Our principal readings and talks are taken from the book,
“Talks to Boys and Girls about Jesus.” Always when available we
give them a short juvenile temperance story, and distribute books
and papers when we have them. Our motto is “Lend a Helping Hand,”
and the aim to teach to become children of the Great King, to help
others to become such by inducing them to come to Sunday-school and
to these meetings, where they can hear about Jesus. One little girl
said to us to-day, “I am glad you have these meetings, for I get
tired reading, and mamma won’t let me play.” One of the larger boys
is anxious to know if we are to continue them during the year. At
7 P.M., with a good and attentive congregation, we listen to one
of a series of illustrated sermons, which has been our privilege
since Christmas, an earnest and solemn appeal to the unconverted
from the passage in Rev. vi., 13-17, plainly proving that the fear
and confusion of those who cried “Fall on us and hide us,” resulted
from the sinner’s own carelessness and indifference, and it is
hoped that the truth found lodgment in the hearts of the hearers,
and will bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Our day closes
full, and if in after years we see the young filling honorably
responsible positions, we shall not regret that we were “sent.”


MISSIONARY WORK, SAVANNAH, GA.

_By Miss Jane S. Hardy._

_Monday, Jan, 15._—Early dawn found me wide awake, and planning
the work of the day. Soon the accustomed “ding dong” caused a
general stir in the Home, and the second call brought us all
into the dining-room, where we soon satisfied our bodily wants,
and on bended knee sought “supplies of grace” for our spiritual
needs. Soon another bell announced the approach of school-time,
and nearly two hundred pupils gathered, as was their wont, in the
chapel of Beach Institute. There God’s blessing was again invoked,
both in song and prayer, a few words of counsel were given by the
Superintendent, and the scholars were dismissed to their respective
school-rooms.

I would fain have lingered there; for it brought to my mind
the many years of happy toil spent among _my_ pupils in the
school-room. Yet I am content—yea, happy, in doing the work that
comes to my hand in visiting from house to house.

My first call this morning was upon the Deacon’s wife, who greeted
me in her usual lady-like manner. Although often bending over
wash-tub or ironing-board, she leaves all to be taught her reading
and Bible lesson. She is not a Christian, but the truth brought
before her in repeated Scripture readings is evidently making deep
impressions.

My next call was at the house of a church member, but a
wanderer—bitterness in her heart, “cares of this life and the lust
of other things entering in have choked the word and made her life
unfruitful.” She cannot read; but I have resolved to carry the word
to her. May God lead her back to her Father’s house!

Mrs. K—— is a cripple. For her diseased feet I carried a pair of
soft shoes, sent by some good friend in the North.

I found her with a company of children gathered about her whom she
was teaching to read, thereby earning five or six dollars a month.
She is an intelligent Christian woman, and has lately been reading
“Prince of the House of David,” for which she expresses great
admiration.

Hastening home, I met a class of young men—hotel-waiters—who are
off duty in the middle of the day, and desire to improve their
leisure time in studying the three R.’s and the Bible.

At two o’clock, I went into the school building to attend a prayer
meeting held daily among the pupils since the opening of the Week
of Prayer. There are indications of the Spirit’s presence among us,
and we are anxiously hoping that some of these dear young people
may be turned to the service of Christ.

After dinner I went to a distant part of the city to meet a regular
appointment for a ladies’ prayer meeting. This week the meeting
was held at the house of a good sister, who kindly opened her
well-furnished parlor. A good number gathered to hear the word
and to mingle their petitions at the throne of grace. Among those
present was Mrs. S——, who, so lately, came into the kingdom.
Her great desire is to work for the Master. Thus passed an hour,
helpful, I trust, to us all. Returning home, I felt called upon,
ere night should close in, to visit a family much afflicted by
sickness. Both father and mother weak and feeble, no ready cash
in hand, and seven small children to care for. No wonder the
days look dark to them. We are glad to give them a helping hand.
A few articles of clothing, a little money, and words of cheer
are the things they most need just now. In the evening a Sunday
school scholar came for instruction, giving me another opportunity
to sow seeds of truth in a darkened mind. How precious are the
opportunities that come to us day by day!


MISSION WORK AT ATLANTA, GA.

_By Miss Lizzie Stevenson._

_Tuesday, Jan. 16._—The heavy rains since my return from the
North, Jan. 3, have kept me much at home. This morning, however,
I started out, and soon found myself at Aunt Judy’s door, but she
had gone to a neighbor’s to get warm. When she saw me, she said,
“Missus I’s so glad you’se come back. I was just talkin’ about
you. We folks don’t have nobody to come roun’ and see and talk to
us since you’se gone.” She has been a cripple for years, but this
winter is unable to work, on account of rheumatism. She has always
been contented and happy, and “proud” that she could pay her rent,
fifty cents a week. But to-day it made my heart ache when she
said that it took all that “Wes,” a grandson ten years old, could
make by picking up rags and papers to get something to eat and a
little coal. The landlady had just been there for rent, but she
did not know where she could get the money. After reading a few of
the Saviour’s words, and commending her to the Father’s care, I
gave her a little toward the rent and left her. I next found two
children about two and four years old hovering around a handful of
coals; talked with them a few minutes, gave them a picture paper
and passed on. I then stopped at Aunt Gracie’s and knocked, but no
answer; so I pushed open the door and went in, and spoke several
times before I could rouse her. Then with great effort she told
me that she had been in bed several days with rheumatism. Her
miserable shanty is but poor protection from the rain. Every thing
in the room was damp, and not a stick of wood or a mouthful of any
thing to eat. I carried her a little food and sent to the wood-yard
for wood. But the streets, which are not paved, were so muddy they
would not deliver nor sell even an _armful_.

Next I find Mrs. Williams, who has been sick for two months. She
is very old, and has for years supported herself and two orphan
children by picking up rags. As soon as it was light she could be
seen with her sack on her shoulder going to her work. She is quite
sick, but fortunately she belongs to a society, which provides for
her. From here I go to see an Auntie who is over one hundred years
old. She is unable to lie down on account of asthma. As she sees
who it is she exclaims “Bless the Lord, honey, I knowed the good
Lord would send you back, kase we old folks haint got no one to
come round and read to us when you’se gone! ’Pears like the rest
are so busy. I prayed the Lord would send you back, and I felt it
in my bones you’d come;” and she thanked the Lord again and again
for sending me back. And at so many places their first exclamation
was to thank the Lord for sending me back to read to them. Another
poor woman, who has not walked for years, and whose husband has
deserted her, is entirely dependent on the neighbors for her
support; and no doubt she goes hungry many days. She said to me
as I was leaving, “Miss Lizzie, I didn’t get no Christmas ’cause
you’se gone.” After making several other calls and distributing
quite a number of Sunday-school papers, I came home with a sad
heart to think how little I could do to relieve these poor needy
ones. Sometimes I feel that it is mockery to offer to read to them,
when they are so cold and hungry. If I only had the _means_ to make
their bodies comfortable, they could enjoy so much more the food
for the soul.


DAY’S WORK FOR JESUS—RALEIGH, N.C.

_By Miss E. P. Hayes._

_Wednesday, Jan. 17._—As this is the day for our woman’s prayer
meeting, I had taken that day to call on the members of our church.
After breakfast, I was preparing to start, when Georgia came in to
inquire if I had heard from the ladies who were coming from the
North. Then Mr. Smith, our pastor, called to decide upon articles
to be read at the concert the next Sabbath evening on the work of
the A. M. A. I wrote a postal to thank the lady who sent a nice
silk hood to an old, sick auntie, and started.

It was raining a little, but I determined to proceed. I made the
first call at Mr. Young’s, close by. Mr. Y. is blind and paralyzed.
They were eating breakfast. It was then 10 o’clock. Mrs. Y. said
they had nothing to eat till she went out and hunted up something.
One day during the snow, as they had no wood, they were obliged to
remain in bed till three in the afternoon, and the Saturday night
before they had no wood, and nothing to eat. I furnished them
with enough to last over the Sabbath. As Mrs. Young is a reader
I gave her a paper, and went on to Mrs. Hills. Mrs. H. has two
little children, and cannot get out to church, but is very fond
of reading. I found her with a good coal fire, and looking very
comfortable. I left a paper, and stepped into Mrs. Smith’s to see
if her children were as destitute as she had represented and to
request her to send her boy to the wood-yard to order some wood
for me. I met her husband coming out half drunk, and talking in
very loud tones. The boy was stretching a line around the room in
which they lived for his mother to dry the washing she took in.
Some wet wood in the fire-place was making a feeble effort to burn.
I couldn’t see how clothes could dry in such a place as that, and
said so to Mrs. S. She replied that she was compelled to dry them.
When I came out, the rain was pouring down, but I was obliged to go
to the Bank to get a check cashed, as I was out of money, and was
expecting a barrel of clothing with a freight bill to be paid.

After going to the Bank, drug store and post-office, the rain and
mud conquered and I turned my face homeward, feeling thankful when
I entered my door that I had so good a shelter. I built a fire,
or tried to, with wet wood, as all our wood is soaked with rain
when we buy it, and spent an hour in selecting Bible verses for a
Sunday-school class coming in the evening to study for a concert
the last Sabbath in the month, partly wrote a letter to thank the
ladies of Hopkinton for a barrel of clothing, and to interest them
further in the work.

After lunch, Dea. Jones called to inquire about his part for
concert. As the rain had slackened, I went to prayer meeting at
three o’clock, at Dea. Dunston’s. We meet with the different
members of the church. Dea. D. is our oldest member, seventy-three,
in feeble health, and enjoys having us meet with them. But five
were there, and three of those members of the family. All took
part in the meeting, and after its close, I assisted the daughter,
in selecting an article to read at the concert. She chose for her
subject the Indians.

When I came home I looked over the mail, and went to inform Mrs.
Bembry, with whom I had engaged board for the Northern ladies, that
they would arrive Friday morning. On my way I stepped in to see
an old lady who is paralyzed, and called to tell Georgia when the
ladies would arrive. In the evening a Sunday-school class came to
study verses, and get temperance cards. Then I finished my letter,
wrote another and retired, feeling that I had accomplished but
little.


ONE DAY’S WEAVING—MONTGOMERY, ALA.

_By Miss Rebecca G. Jillson._

_Thursday, Jan. 18._—The Swayne School for the colored children
of Montgomery, with its four hundred scholars, is just opposite
the “Teachers’ Home.” The day began with a call at the school; a
bundle of Sunday-school papers was soon distributed among the boys.
Near the school-house lives a good woman, from whose home two girls
have just gone to Talladega to school. I stop and talk with her
about their going and read a letter for her. A neighbor needs help,
the mother and seven children are all sick. Although dependent on
friends for care, these are the sick woman’s words: “We’re all
down, but old Marsa knows what He’s doing.”

On the porch of the next house stands an old grandmother, children
of all ages around her. A girl of eighteen promises to come to the
Home twice a week for lessons. Across the way lives a kind-hearted
woman; her neighbor, a sick woman, has only her little son and
this friend to care for her. She needs much the comfort of God’s
word and his assuring promises of help. Another is waiting for
sympathy; she is alone though not widowed, and tells how, when the
human help on which she leaned failed, she found support in God
alone. A young woman whose husband’s health has failed is trying to
help him by keeping a little store; she is brave though sometimes
discouraged. The next call is on a woman just recovering from
illness. Her friends have been kind to her in her sickness; this
interest in one another is especially noticeable among the colored
people. Stopping to speak to a group of children, “this one, they
say, has no father or mother, so we have taken her in.” Two other
calls in this neighborhood are made; an invitation given to a young
man to attend the Singing School and to a young girl to renew her
interest in music; and now the house of a faithful church member
is reached. The Ladies’ Missionary Society and what work it may do
is discussed, and questions from the article on Missions in LIFE
AND LIGHT are left to be prepared for the next meeting. Two calls
near by are made. One lady is interested in music and is glad to
hear of the cantata we are to learn. The next is a scene of labor.
This good woman washes for a large restaurant and has in this way
earned enough money to build a substantial house. Every day piles
of table-linen must be washed and ironed, and when it rains, every
corner in-doors is made use of to dry the hundreds of napkins and
towels.

The first call in the afternoon was on an old lady, a faithful
Christian, who finds that her pilgrim journey has had in it many
passages and experiences like that of the pilgrim of old, in
whose story she is much interested. The Celestial City is for her
almost in view, and her entrance there will be triumphant. “I’se
only waiting,” she says, “for the Lord to say: ‘Elsie, come up to
glory.’”

Several girls come to the Home in the afternoon, two to learn to
make worsted hoods, two others to take lessons in music. There is
also time to fold the Sunday-school papers for distribution next
Sunday. Late in the afternoon I called on a mother whose little
child God had taken home to himself. Our next neighbor is a man of
intemperate habits. I had a talk with him. At nightfall a young
woman came in and sang some of the old plantation melodies. In the
evening a young girl came for lessons, and with her, two boys, who
spent the hour with pencil and drawing cards. With God’s blessing
may the day’s work not be in vain.


A DAY IN NEW ORLEANS.

_By Miss A. D. Gerrish._

_Friday, Jan. 19._—Having attended morning devotions at the
University chapel, equipped with my satchel and a few gifts to be
distributed here and there, I wend my way to Mrs. R.’s to hold a
promised meeting. There are six of us altogether. At the close
of the brief hour spent with Jesus I stop to speak with a young
Catholic girl. The mother is evidently surprised. She “didn’t
know as I’d talk to such as she.” I reply, “I came to speak to
all.” My next call is at what I term the half-way house. A few
late flowers still bloom in the pretty garden and the oranges seem
turning a deeper gold, touched by the warm sunshine. Aunt Comfort
is “only just about so so.” We talk of household affairs and the
revival. An offered prayer for us both and I bid the dear old lady
good morning. On the street a sad-hearted mother delays me for a
moment to ask that I will please pray for her son, who is dying and
without hope in Christ. With a few kindly words of sympathy and a
promise to remember the young man, I pass on. The door of Mrs. A.’s
pleasant room stands open and I pause long enough on the threshold
to receive her cheery “Good morning” and the injunction to “be
sure and stop next time.” As I reach the top of a winding flight
of stairs a voice full of childish eagerness asks, “Did you bring
my little Testament?” The Testament, a tiny book, and some picture
papers are taken from my satchel and three little hearts for the
time made happy. The mother is very grateful for the garments given
her for the children. An urgent invitation is left with her to come
to the evening meeting. Another call made and the city bells ring
out the noontide hour. I stop for lunch and rest at Sister W.’s.

Mrs. M. lives at a distance, so I take the street cars. A rap at
the outside gate, a careful climbing up the rickety stairway and I
am warmly greeted by the little woman. Would that I had space to
describe to you her one bit of a room. She says: “You must excuse
it; ’tisn’t alus possible to keep things lookin jus so.” She has
received no pay for her last three months’ washing, so for want
of car fare her Sabbaths have been spent at home. I must tell her
all about the meetings, the New Year’s tree, how many have joined
the church, and affairs generally. With a prayer and a substantial
proof that the “Lord will provide” her heart is comforted. I find
Aunt Sally “jus tolable, thank’e, but powerful busy.” She tells me
once again, “’Twill be a glorious time, shur nuff, chile, when I
can leave this ere washtub for a manshun in de hebens.” I seek out
a delinquent Sabbath-school scholar and call upon two interesting
little girls, who promise to come to the sewing school. A picture
paper given to each and I hasten homeward.

After dinner I find a little time for writing. Promptly at 7
o’clock the church prayer meeting begins. The passage selected
for the evening lesson is Jer. 8:20. The large audience listen
attentively to the pastor’s words. In the hush of this tender
interest nine come forward for prayers. The voice of petition
rises in their behalf. Two tell us that they have found Jesus. We
sing “Praise God from whom all blessings flow.” Benediction is
pronounced and the meeting closes. Another day, with its joys and
sorrows, its failure and success, is ended. Its record is with Him
who sees and understands. In the quiet of my room I kneel to humbly
ask that it may be accepted as “one more day’s work for Jesus,”
knowing that it is “one less of life” for us all.


LINCOLN MISSION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

_By Mrs. C. B. Babcock._

_Saturday, Jan. 20._—Be sure and find us when you take your
pleasure trip to Washington, and we will show you better than we
can write, the need of missionary work among its 60,000 colored
people. This is one of our winter’s worst days. It rains fast, and
the streets are full of snow and water. Breakfast over, I hastened
to market for meat to make broth for the sick, and to the grocery
for bread. While picking my way over the slippery pavements, a
grandmother calls after me with a request that must be heeded. On
entering my room in the Mission, a barrel from Brooklyn awaits
unpacking. God bless the dear friends of the North who so nobly
respond to my appeal for help. They never will know how much good
the old clothes do. Before I’m half through, knock number one
brings old Auntie Bennett, afflicted with a disease so offensive
that she cannot attend our gatherings. When leaving with her bundle
of warm garments, in steps Auntie Harris, always so trustful in the
Lord, and yet she says, “I sat all yesterday without any fire”;
her husband and crippled son unable to provide. Thankful for a
little relief, she goes out to carry a big bundle to another poor
creature, who, with her old man, have scarcely a crust, and nothing
but a leaky shanty for shelter. Caller No. 3 is a young woman,
bringing a note from the police station and a certificate from her
doctor, that tells of serious sickness, one two-year-old child,
and nothing wherewith to help herself. I send her to see our Day
Nursery, and tell her to bring her baby on Monday, and I will see
what more can be done. Her dull, wan face brightens as she leaves.
Tom C. comes next—my boy, who draws our Temperance blackboard
illustrations, paints our signs, puts up Christmas decorations,
&c. I’ve just received his fit in a suit; so, with a patch to mend
the sleeves, and more work under his arm, he goes. Pinkie T. has
framed some mottoes, and I ask her to hang them in the school room,
paying her with a pair of nice boots. Annie C., our missionary girl
from Howard U., comes to assist, and, as a member of the Doing-Good
Society of the school, this P.M. brings a report from sick Mr.
Green. After preparations for the afternoon, and a peep into the
nursery, where the floors are being scrubbed and the children
are taking their bath (for, though the Associated Charities have
adopted this, my pet project of last year, and have appointed a
committee of ladies, I have the daily supervision). I leave for
lunch at 12½. The girl’s industrial school opens at 1½; 61 out of
130 scholars are present. We are divided into 15 classes, each with
a teacher, if enough ladies are present. I appoint a girl to attend
to callers. We open with singing, and sew until 3 o’clock. Some
are making bags for their work, some patch-work, some, fancy-work,
while others are mending or making garments and learning to cut
them. We intersperse sewing-songs. They help the pupils to remember
instructions. From three to four we have various exercises, such as
talks on health or manners; Bible lessons, repeating the Child’s
Creed or the Commandments, with responsive chant or a Psalm and the
Lord’s prayer. To-day, we have an object lesson in house-keeping. A
table is placed on the platform and Annie C. is asked to prepare it
for tea. She arranges the cloth, dishes and food, with criticisms
from the scholars. Then, she invites four girls to sit and eat
while she acts as waitress. After eating she removes the dishes for
washing and folds the cloth. A few more callers and the busy week
closes. Thank God for the sunlight it has brought to us during our
revival meetings in the conversion of two of our dear girls.

       *       *       *       *       *


VANTAGE GROUND NEEDED BY STUDENTS.

BY MISS JOSEPHINE KELLOGG, TOUGALOO, MISS.

We long for the time when these people shall obtain a little
vantage-ground by industry and—still more essential—by economy
and a prudent use of earnings, so that the children may begin
the work of getting an education betimes and continue it until a
respectable course of study is thoroughly mastered. We have some
such, and we hope much from the earlier training and the favorable
circumstance of their having parents interested in educating them
and able to do it.

In the cases of a majority, they come to us already grown-up,
something having given them an ambition for better things than
they had known. They have their own way to make and can be in
school only a part of each year, many of them working nights and
mornings and one day of each week besides, to pay their board in
whole or in part. As the time approaches when exhausted funds and
worn-out clothing must compel them to go out and seek employment,
thoughts will wander and there will be a relaxation in the matter
of preparation and recitation of lessons in spite of themselves
and the exertions of their teachers. No doubt there is a blessing
connected with their struggles against adverse circumstances, and a
manly and womanly self-dependence is fostered in this way, but it
is not to be expected that a great number will complete the course
in the face of such discouragements.

As year after year passes, and they get education enough to help
them on somewhat in life and a knowledge that fits them to be
useful in church, society and home, and they yet seem almost as
far as ever from the goal of graduation which they once placed
before themselves, they begin to be anxious to settle down to the
real business of life, and they relinquish the hope of a completed
normal course with, perhaps, a subsequent complete collegiate
course.

While it is the few of those who enter that go on to the end of the
course and the many drop out as I have described, yet we do not
consider our labor in vain, but rather hope to claim the assurance
“Blessed are ye who sow beside all waters.” If the teaching were
only in the ordinary elementary branches we might think it of
little avail unless carried on continuously to a more satisfactory
issue, but much of it is more fundamental than even arithmetic. The
entire mode of life is a lesson and a much needed one to most of
those who come to us. The regularity of meals with the laws of the
dining-room, the regularity of retiring and rising, the neatness
and order of the rooms, the care of clothing, the personal habits,
the sanitary regulations, the study and exercise, and the propriety
of deportment required, not to speak of the regular work belonging
to the industrial training, seem to new scholars to form a complete
hedge, if not a bewildering labyrinth; but a very bright feature of
our work is the spirit of subordination and respect for constituted
authority, which greatly simplifies and lightens the enforcement of
all necessary rules. This is an excellent and much-to-be commended
trait in our students. I have asked some of those who go out to
teach if the children in the public schools are easy to govern. Oh,
yes, the answer has been, _they expect to mind_.

[Illustration: LADIES’ HALL, TOUGALOO, MISS.]

It is very edifying to note how those who come without any taste
or neatness in their personal appearance, with sorry attempts at
finery and painfully-laced waists, improve under the tuition of
the lady principal and the influence of those who have been here
longer, the expression of the countenance often changing more
rapidly and noticeably than even the manner of dress. But, O! the
patience and the faculty required for this most important work of
training the girls in womanly virtues and housewifely ways!

With all the patience and with all the faculty possible, it is a
great and constant strain to have the care of such a household,
and the matrons and lady principals need the uplifting prayers and
sympathy of the warm Christian hearts interested in these schools,
in a special degree.

And then the instruction in the Bible, as “the only and the
sufficient rule both of faith and practice”—the value of this work
cannot be over-estimated. The case of a young man who came into
school for the first time this fall, comes to mind. Living far
back from the railroad, in the country, he had had no advantages
of any schooling but a few brief sessions of the public school. He
was entered in the Third-reader grade and was to all appearance
a most unpromising specimen, although a professed Christian, and
apparently a sincere one, with a real experience of trust in God,
but wofully untaught as to Christian character and duty. As the
Scripture was from time to time plainly and searchingly expounded,
and the vices which are sometimes permitted under the garb of
religion were exposed, it was plain to see that he was listening
as to a new revelation. In school-room work there was a marked
improvement, especially in the expressiveness of his reading, but
the great benefit that came in his term of school was in the way of
moral enlightenment. A month ago he joined the temperance society.
The last prayer-meeting was taken up largely with speaking of the
temptations that would be met at Christmas-time to violate the
pledge, and one young man said that, in view of these temptations
he would rather spend Christmas at Tougaloo than anywhere else.
This young man then “spoke in meeting” for the first time, I think,
and said he did not feel that way. It seemed to him that the
principal thing he wanted to go home for, was to tell his people he
had become a temperance man. He had been a good deal of a drinker,
a member of church, too, and his people were all in the same way,
and didn’t know any better, but now he would tell them that he had
found a better way, and that they, too, must forsake the old bad
way, or they would surely go down. He said, “If I can’t keep my
pledge, I may as well find it out first as last, but _I do believe
I can_. I does feel as if temperance _is grafted in here_,” laying
his hand upon his breast. He hopes to return and bring a sister
with him, but if he cannot get the means and never comes, is there
not here a little bread cast on the waters?

The evening before school closed there was a beautiful Christmas
exercise, consisting of recitations, Scripture and music, lighted
by a large star of evergreen filled with burning candles. No doubt
many a new idea concerning the universal holiday was imbibed. This
was followed by an exhibition by the temperance society.

Thanksgiving day was a blessed occasion with us. Rev. Mr. Stickel
preached on Tests of Character, dwelling upon the test of faith
and the test of gratitude, basing his sermon upon the story of the
ten lepers. An opportunity has usually been given, in connection
with the morning service, for personal testimonies, and so many had
given themselves to the service of the Lord and so many had been
led into a fuller Christian experience since last Thanksgiving that
there was a real eagerness for this service, and a somewhat wistful
look on a good many faces when the meeting was closed without it.
At the end of dinner, however, President Pope rose and said such an
opportunity would be given then and there; that we could not spend
a portion of the afternoon more profitably nor have a pleasanter
sort of after-dinner speeches than in recounting the good dealings
of God with us. Notwithstanding the fact that a Thanksgiving dinner
is about as well calculated to promote a spirit of thankfulness as
anything that can be mentioned, it was a little harder to rise from
the table and speak in the dining-room than in the chapel. Yet,
after the first momentary hesitation, the testimonies came, briefly
but freely, of gratitude for health, for success in work, for the
privilege of being at school, for the pardon of sins, and many
other things.

One young man said he had felt all the year, as never before, that
all his blessings came right from the hand of God. He had felt
it in his teaching, and had thanked God for all his success. He
thanked God for this school, and for those friends in the North
who had established it, and for all the benefits it is conferring
upon the people of this State. One youth said he was thankful he
had learned the true object of man’s life—what he was made for. He
used to think a man could serve God or let it alone—that his time
and faculties were his own, and he could do as he pleased. But now
he had learned that a man’s true calling is to serve the Lord. He
was glad to know that the great God has something for every one to
do, and has His eye upon the way he does it, and that his reward is
according to his faithfulness, and not according to the greatness
of the work. It seemed to make life worth living.

Prof. Salisbury was with us three days of the last week, in the
tour of the schools which he is making to get his work in hand.
He gave us a helpful talk in chapel one morning, and again gave
an account of the other schools he had visited, and we trust his
subsequent visits will aid in promoting the symmetry and efficiency
of the work of this school.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INDIANS.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHURCH AND SABBATH-SCHOOL WORK AT S’KOKOMISH, W.T.

BY REV. MYRON EELLS.

June 22d and 23d, 1874, this church was organized with eleven
members, only one of whom was an Indian. But while there was only
one Indian, it was hoped that God would bless the work so that
others would be induced to come in, and we have not been wholly
disappointed. Since that time twenty-eight Indians and half-breeds
have joined it and our new church at Jamestown, near Dunginess,
besides thirteen whites who have joined on profession, and thirteen
more by letter, making seventy-five in all, including the first
members. Forty-five Indian marriages have taken place here in a
Christian way, and twenty-seven funerals. All of those married,
who are alive, are still living together, owing mainly to the
Agent. Christian services at funerals are something about which
the Indians at first cared very little, and often have the dead
been hurried off to burial without even letting me know that any
one was dead; and their burying-ground with its small houses and
clothes, cloth and other things, was a curiosity to visitors. But
after a time, having made some slow improvements, they opened a new
burying-ground, and when the first grave was made the chief said
to me: “To-day we become white people. We do not like the idea of
having cloth and other things around our graves, and we expect that
there will be none of it here.” That was nearly four years ago, and
there are now no such things visible. At a later day I was absent
when one person died, and no white man was present at the funeral;
but when I returned, the Indians asked me to make arrangements so
that if I should necessarily be absent some Christian white man
should go and help them bury their dead in a Christian manner.

A prayer-meeting was begun here as soon as the present Agent came
(before there was a church or minister), which has been constantly
maintained, and its influence has gone into all the Christian work
here. But it has been too old for some of the children, and too far
away and in a wrong language for many of the Indians; hence it has
been supplemented by children’s, ladies’ and Indian prayer-meetings.

It has been my custom, as I have been able, to hold such meetings
with the Indians at their logging camps. The following incidents
show a change. About six years ago they said they did not know how
to pray or what to say. So to help them we would say a sentence and
let one whom we supposed to be the most suitable in heart repeat
over the prayer, line after line. One evening something comical
struck one, and he burst out laughing in the midst of his prayer.
At another time a hunter came home during a prayer-meeting, and,
without any regard to it, came in, throwing down his saddle and
things, and talking very much as if there were no prayer-meeting
there. That Indian of late has been one of the leading ones to
pray. Another evening, when I was through and was leaving I said
“Good night,” and the reply came, “Good night,” but as I was
outside the door and shutting it, the words were added in a not
very complimentary way, in a lower tone and yet so that I heard
them, “old man.” That Indian, after going to great lengths in
gambling, has been one during the past few months to try to induce
his relations to enter the right road.

I have been reminded of these incidents lately by way of contrast,
because of the earnest requests that have come to me, during the
past few months, to go to the same place, and the earnest and
apparently hearty thanks which have come from the same persons and
the same camp for the same work.

About eight years ago an Indian was wandering around during
Sabbath-school time, and was asked why he was not inside the
church. His reply was, that the services were so much in English
that they were dry to him. Only when the time came for singing the
Chinook song was he interested. There was only one song, then,
but the necessity for them seemed to grow until there were enough
to make our little book, in 1878, “Hymns in the Chinook Jargon
Language.” Indians living away from the Reservation have learned
to sing them who have learned but little else about the Gospel,
because they could not sing them without learning them. They have
carried and sung them down the straits to Cape Flattery and across
the straits to British Columbia, to Indians I probably never shall
see, and some Gospel truths have gone with them. The Indians of
both tribes, however, Twanas and Clallams, felt that another
important step had been taken when last spring they could sing in
their own native language.

In our Sabbath-school we have always followed the plan of having
the scholars commit five or six verses a week to memory, and most
of those who have done the best in this respect have come into the
church. Eight out of ten of the highest on the list for 1878 are
now members, and the same proportion holds good for some other
years. In all, twenty-seven have come in on profession of faith
from the Sabbath-school.

[Illustration: INDIANS WATCHING A TRAIN.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMITY.

REV. W. C. POND, SAN FRANCISCO.

From the first I have conducted the operations of our mission
on principles of denominational comity. There are five distinct
missions at work for the Chinese of California, besides our own.
The Presbyterian has schools in San Francisco, Oakland, Sacramento,
San José, and, perhaps, I may add, at Napa and Santa Rosa, though
I am not aware that the work done in these two places is directly
connected with their Board; the Methodist mission has schools
also in San Francisco, Oakland, Sacramento, and San José, and one
besides, at Chico; the Baptist and Episcopal missions conduct
each one school in this city; the United Presbyterian mission has
schools in Oakland and Los Angeles. The total number of schools
sustained by all these missions—so far as I am informed—is
thus 15. Our mission has six schools in San Francisco, and ten
elsewhere. Sacramento and Oakland are the only points outside
this city occupied by us and by other missions also. At each of
these points our schools were first established, and we have not
felt it due to comity to abandon our work begun and carried on
for years because others came in to divide it with us. But we
have never yet planted a school in any field already occupied,
unless San Francisco be an exception, where the occupation was so
incomplete, that we, ourselves, having one school, have established
five others. I am led to these remarks partly because the facts,
it seems to me, are worth reporting, and partly because, just
now, questions of comity have been and are still before us to be
answered. Thus, in accordance with a purpose expressed at the
close of our last fiscal year, to do something this year for the
large colony of Chinese that has established itself in the town
of Chico, I visited that town last month. I heard of a school as
already established—though its existence had been before unknown
to the pastor with whom I had corresponded. I visited the school;
found four pupils present, and learned that it was sustained by
the Methodist Mission. There was room for so much more to be
done that I made conditional arrangements for planting a school
there. The condition was that the Methodist Mission should give us
cordial welcome and divide the field with us territorially. But our
Methodist brethren say that they would prefer to occupy the whole
territory, and promise to do so in adequate force, and therefore we
have withdrawn. The large town of Vallejo has a Chinese population
somewhat exceeding 200, and no one was caring for their souls. I
determined to put into that field the work which I had intended
to do at Chico. I have made arrangements accordingly—renting a
mission-house, engaging a teacher, and arranging for a helper to
go there as soon as the building can be made ready. But the school
will be in special relation with the Presbyterian Church, there
being no Congregational Church, except at South Vallejo, nearly
two miles distant. I have accordingly said to our Presbyterian
friends that I would establish and carry on the school, subject to
transfer at any time when their Board will assume the care of it,
and will reimburse our treasury for expenses incurred up to the
time of the transfer. At Los Angeles we had sustained a school for
two or three years, and several of our pupils had been brought so
clearly into Christian light and life that almost immediately after
the establishment of a Presbyterian mission there and the transfer
of our work to its care, they were baptized and received into the
Presbyterian church. But the brother to whose care the work was
committed removed, after about two years, to Oakland, and left it
in other hands. This field has now become so large that it need
involve no criticism upon the mission already existing there to say
that there is room for another, and that souls in large numbers
are walking in darkness that might be led into light, if we should
resume the work we unwisely (I now think) laid down. I propose,
therefore, to do this as soon as I can command the time necessary
to visit Los Angeles, unless I should then find that the facts have
been incorrectly represented to me.

Two principles of denominational comity suggest themselves as the
outcome of my thought on these questions and these fields. The
first is _no crowding_; the mission already at work in a field, to
be left in sole possession, provided it will render the service
needed there; the second is, _no possession without occupation_; no
leaving of souls to perish because somebody’s dog is in the manger,
and a field has been entered but not worked. Am I right?


SOUND DOCTRINE.

The following sermon-sketch was read for criticism by our helper,
Lee Sam, at our regular exercise last Wednesday afternoon. I
ventured to ask him whether he found what he had written in some
commentary, or whether it came from his own study of the text and
of related passages. He told me that it was what he himself had
thought out in Bible study. It may be interesting to see what
views of human depravity a thoughtful man unschooled in theology,
unbiassed by ancient traditions, untrammeled by any standards or
any creeds, has drawn forth for himself from the Word of God. The
text was in Romans, 5:21.

  “That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign
  through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our
  Lord.”

1. What is meant by reigning unto death and reigning unto eternal
life? It means the work of Christ and the work of Adam. What was
the work of Adam? What is the work of Christ? The work of Adam
was the work of death. The sin of Adam brought death upon all our
race. In the 17th verse of this chapter “By one man’s offence
death reigned by one,” because Adam transgressed God’s command by
eating the forbidden fruit, so God turned him out of the Garden of
Eden. But we are of the race of Adam. He transgressed God’s will
and brought sin upon us all. But some say our hearts are full of
good when we are born, but, by and by, we learn the evil from the
others. But we don’t believe that; we see sometimes the little
baby when he begins to talk, then he tell lies; when he begins
to walk then he fight with others; when he know his parents then
he disobeys them; when he grow to be a man then he walks his own
way, it may be “committing adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envying, murders, drunkenness,
revelings.” So we know the evil is not learned from the others, we
have it when we are born. By getting away from God and doing those
wicked things we cause the death of both soul and body.

2. What is the work of Christ?

“In Christ shall all be made alive.” It is said, John, 5:21, “For
as the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the
Son quickeneth whom he will.” In Adam all die, but in Christ shall
all be made alive.

How can we reign unto eternal life? If we want to obtain eternal
life we must come to Jesus and trust in Him. Jesus says, “All power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth.” In 1st John, 2:1, “If
any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
righteous.” Though we are sinners, and far from God He can bring us
back. But our God hates sin, he loves us, and would save us from
our sin, and bring us near to Him. “For God so loved the world
that he gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him
might not perish but have everlasting life.” Jesus came into the
world to save us. His whole life was spent in doing good, and at
last he died on the cross to give his life a ransom for many, for
all who will come to him and be saved. He is able to save us. We
are commanded to love the Lord with all our hearts and with all our
minds and with all our souls. Adam loved God with all his heart,
but lost God’s love. The Lord Jesus, by his holy spirit, restores
this love in our hearts, so that we do love him with all our hearts
and souls, and through Christ we can do all things. Without Jesus
we can do nothing. Christ gives us victory over death. In 1st Cor.,
15:55, 56, 57, “O death where is thy sting! O grave where is thy
victory! The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law. But thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.”

       *       *       *       *       *




CHILDREN’S PAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *


LADY AGNES HAMILTON.

BY MISS HENRIETTA MATSON, NASHVILLE.

The teacher was passing from one to another of her pupils, taking
their names. “Missie, Capitola, Viola, Colly, Prudy, Vic,” were
some of the names already recorded, but here was a little mite of a
girl, who gravely gave her name as Lady Agnes Hamilton. The teacher
smiled, but kindly said, “Agnes, is it not?” “No, Lady Agnes,”
persisted the child, in a decided manner, that accorded well with
the name.

The little lady is, perhaps, seven years of age, but not larger
than an ordinary child of four. Her face is of a rich olive tint,
and now the scarlet mingles with the brown, as she becomes confused
and excited under the teacher’s questioning. Her eyes and hair are
brown, the latter with a golden tinge, falling in short, crisp
curls around her neck and face. The small, sensitive mouth, with
its childish bloom and sweetness, tempts the teacher to stoop down
and kiss her to atone for disturbing her with doubts in regard to
her title and rank.

Afterward, the teacher, becoming acquainted with the little Lady’s
mother, asked if that was her real name. “Her sure nuff name,
Miss,” was the reply. “Young Miss, she done names de chile. I was
stayin’ dar on de ole place, after de war, da _pays_ me an’ my ole
man, kase we’se free, an’ we stays wid ’em a long spell. My little
gal was born dar, an’ young Miss Sue, she say she so little an
frail her name should allus be Lady. We calls her Lady most times,
but her sure nuff name is Lady Agnes Hamilton. Miss Sue done writ
it down. Lady feel mighty bad kase de teacher reckon her name
somefin else. Nary odder name Miss, an’ dats de truff.” Her right
and title thus established, the teacher no longer questioned the
sweet-faced little Lady, and indeed, soon came to believe that the
child belonged to nature’s true nobility. She was always, in school
and out, a veritable little lady. Mingling with the dusky children,
who were her playmates, some of them dirty and ragged, while her
own garments were always daintily neat she never manifested any
conscious superiority, but was always sweet and gentle and happy,
whether the rain fell or the sun shone. The secret of her wonderful
sweetness and gentleness was not in that her name was Lady, nor
because she was a lady, but because very soon after the school
began, this little girl, only seven years old, gave her heart to
Jesus, and became as truly one of his children, as though she had
waited until she was twenty.

Jesus, her Saviour, was a real presence to her—a wonderful Friend,
ever near to help her, and she was careful in what she said and
did, because she was anxious to please Him in everything.

Often the little brown head dropped on the desk before her, and for
a few moments she was very still—then, when she lifted her face,
the soft eyes always sought her teacher’s face, and a loving look
was exchanged. The teacher knew that little Lady had been given a
victory over some temptation that had beset her childish heart. At
such moments she was very beautiful, perhaps it was the beauty of
Heaven shining in her small, dark face.

But she did not die because she was so good, as is sometimes said
of good children. It is a blessed truth that many good children
_live_ long lives of usefulness, in which they are able to do
greater things for the Master, because they began to love and serve
Him when they were little children. Lady Agnes Hamilton was for
many years a student in one of the institutions of the South, and
is now the wife of a minister of the gospel, leading a happy and
useful life.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECEIPTS FOR. JANUARY, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *


  MAINE, $562.66.

    Andover. Mrs. E. Poor                                     $5.00
    Bangor. Cen. Cong. Ch., _for Dakota M._                    5.50
    Brewer. M. Hardy to const DANIEL S. TIBBETS,
      L. M.                                                   50.00
    Castine. Trin. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          5.00
    Cornish. Cong. Ch.                                        12.41
    Cumberland Mills. Warren Ch. to const. WILLIAM
      L. LONGLEY and ERVIN B. NEWCOMB L. Ms                   76.50
    Dennysville. Cong. Ch.                                    10.90
    Falmouth. Second Cong. Ch.                                 7.70
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                      4.75
    Gardiner. Bbl. C., _for Selma, Ala._
    Norridgewock. Cong. Ch.                                   40.00
    North Yarmouth. Cong. Ch.                                  6.95
    North Yarmouth. “Cash,” _for Selma, Ala._                  3.00
    Orland. Mrs. S. T. Buck and daughters, 35;
      Mrs. O. B. Trott, 7                                     42.00
    Portland. State St. Cong. Ch., 150; High St.
      Ch., 112.45                                            262.45
    Portland. Brown Thurston’s Sab. Sch. Class,
      High St. Ch., _for Student Aid, Hampton N. &
      A. Inst._                                               25.00
    Skowhegan. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc.                             3.00
    South Bridgton. Mrs. J. O. K., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                 1.00
    Union. Cong. Ch., for freight, _for Selma,
      Ala._                                                    1.50
    Woolwich. Cong. Ch., 4 Bbls. C., _for Memphis,
      Tenn._


  NEW HAMPSHIRE $562.69.

    Alstead Centre. Cong. Ch.                                 11.67
    Amherst. Cong. Ch.                                        13.48
    Amherst. Ladies’ Soc., Box of C., _for
      Raleigh, N.C._
    Antrim. “Friends”                                         26.00
    Concord. South Cong. Ch.                                  56.00
    Concord. W. H. Pitman, _for Mendi M._                      2.00
    Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               10.00
    Dover. John Mack, _for Dakota M._                          2.00
    East Alstead. Cong. Ch.                                   13.86
    Epping. S. T. Billson, _for maps for Athens,
      Ala._                                                   10.00
    Exeter. First Cong. Ch.                                   34.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch.                                     15.00
    Fitzwilliam. L. Hill                                      10.00
    Harrisville. Mrs. L. B. Richardson                        10.00
    Hillsborough Center. Cong. Ch.                             5.00
    Hollis. Cong. Ch.                                          9.56
    Keene. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      47.04
    Lebanon. First Cong. Ch.                                  40.00
    Manchester. Franklin St. Ch.                              30.00
    Marlborough. Ladies’ Freedmen’s Aid Soc., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                              10.00
    Mason. Ladies, _for Memorial Inst.,
      Wilmington, N.C._                                        5.00
    Milford. Cong. Ch.                                        14.30
    Nashua. Cong. Ch.                                         74.92
    New Boston. Presb. Ch.                                    22.00
    New Ipswich. Cong. Ch.                                     9.16
    Northwood. Cong. Soc.                                     12.00
    Orford. Mrs. Myra B. Pratt, 10; John Pratt, 5             15.00
    Pembroke. Mrs. Mary W. Thompson                           12.00
    Peterborough. Ladies’ Circle, _for Freight,
      for Tougaloo U._                                         3.20
    Portsmouth. Rev. W. W. Dow                                 3.00
    South Weare. Cong. Ch.                                    10.00
    Stratham. Cong. Ch., 21.50, and Sab. Sch., 5              26.50


  VERMONT $2,027.86

    Bennington Center. Cong. Ch.                              19.00
    Brattleborough. Dr. C. S. Clark, _for
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Cabot. Mrs. S. S. H.                                       1.00
    Chester. Cong. Sab. Sch., Penny Contributions
      for 1882, 52; “A Friend,” 8                             60.00
    Craftsbury. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., Bbl. of C.
      and Bedding, _for Atlanta U._
    Danville. Cong. Ch.                                       26.00
    East Hardwick. Cong. Sab. Sch., 32.58 to
      const. ANCIL BABBIT BUNT L. M.; A. H.
      Jordan, 5; O. P., 50c.; C. M. B., 1                     39.08
    Enosburgh. “The Widow of Enosburgh”                        2.00
    Essex Center. Cong. Ch.                                   10.00
    Essex Junction. Cong. Ch.                                 21.00
    Hartland. Cong. Ch.                                        5.25
    Holland. Cong. Ch., 4; Rev. J. Fraser, 4                   8.00
    Jericho. Second Cong. Ch.                                  6.22
    Jeffersonville. “A Friend”                                25.00
    Milton. Cong. Ch.                                          2.36
    Newbury. Hon. P. W. Ladd                                   5.00
    North Thetford. Cong. Ch.                                  8.50
    Pittsford. “D.”                                            1.00
    Saint Albans. A. O. Brainerd to const. MRS.
      FIDELIA G. B. HATCH, L. M.                              30.00
    Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch., $211.62;
      South Cong. Ch., $52.94                                264.56
    Sharon. Cong. Ch., $16.60; Miss S. P. F. and
      Mrs. A. F., $1 each                                     18.60
    Springfield. “A Friend of Missions,” to const.
      AUGUSTA G. HAYWOOD L. M.                                33.81
    Stowe. Cong. Ch., to const. Rev. W. S.
      ANDERSON L. M.                                          48.48
    West Westminster. “Mission Band”                          18.00
                                                           --------
                                                            $677.86

    LEGACY.

    Grafton. Estate of Caroline B. Akin, by
      William Hastings, Ex.                                1,350.00
                                                        -----------
                                                          $2,027.86


  MASSACHUSETTS, $11,656,72.

    Acton. Cong. Ch. to const. C. A. HARRINGTON L. M.         30.00
    Amherst. Miss I. G Jewett                                  1.50
    Andover. Calvin E. Goodell, 26; “A Friend,”
      10; “A Friend,” 4                                       40.00
    Andover. Mrs. Sophia K Tuffts, _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                       5.00
    Ashby. Cong. Ch.                                          11.15
    Ashburnham. First Cong. Ch. to const. AUGUSTUS
      A. CHAMBERLAIN L. M.                                    33.17
     Ashfield. Ladles of Cong. Ch. Bbl. C. and 2,
      _for Freight, for Chattanooga, Tenn._                    2.00
    Auburn. Cong. Ch. (ad’l)                                   2.00
    Barre. Evan. Cong. Sab. Sch.                              17.90
    Beverly. Washington St. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                          10.00
    Beverley. Dane St. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           50.00
    Bolton. “A Friend,” _for Student Aid, Atlanta
      U._                                                     10.00
    Boston. Mount Vernon Cong. Ch., 287.85;
      Charles Nichols 30, to const. MRS. SARAH J.
      BIGGS L. M.; Union Ch. 20                              337.85
    Boston. Cong. Pub. Soc., Pkg. Books, _for
      Macon, Ga._
    Boston. Hon. T. W. Bicknell, Books and
      Pictures; Hon. Hiram Orcutt, Books; _for
      Library, Straight U._
    Braintree. First Cong. Ch. bal. to const. REV.
      THOMAS A. EMERSON L. M.                                  8.54
    Brimfield. Benev. Soc., First Cong. Ch.                   34.04
    Brookline. Harvard Ch.                                   118.65
    Brockton. Mrs. B. Sanford, Bbl. C., _for
      Tougaloo, Miss._
    Cambridgeport. Prospect St. Ch.                           80.38
    Canton. Elijah A. Morse                                  200.00
    Chelsea. First Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Chicopee. Third Cong. Ch.                                 23.37
    Conway. Mrs. Wm. Tilton                                    2.00
    Cummington. “Friends,” by Mrs. C. E. Porter                6.25
    Curtisville. Rev. A. G. Beebe, _for Tillotson,
      C. & N. Inst._                                           5.00
    Dalton. Hon. Z. M. Crane, 100; Mrs. James B.
      Crane, 100                                             200.00
    Easthampton. Payson Sab. Sch.                             50.00
    East Longmeadow. Cong. Ch.                                24.00
    East Weymouth. Cong. Ch.                                  51.00
    Enfield. Cong. Ch.                                        44.29
    Fairhaven. First Cong. Ch.                                10.00
    Fall River. First Cong Ch.                                85.35
    Fitchburg. Ladies of Rollstone Ch., _for
      Furnishing Room, Straight U._                           28.00
    Framingham. Plymouth Ch. and Soc.                        110.40
    Freetown. Cong. Ch. and “A Friend.”                       20.00
    Gardner. J. B. Drury to const. Mrs. L. M.
      DRURY L. M.                                             30.00
    Georgetown. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                         14.07
    Gloucester. Evan Cong. Ch. to const. Mrs.
      ELIZA G. KING, D. O. MARSHALL and WILLIAM T.
      FISHER L. Ms.                                          110.00
    Grafton. Sewing Circle of Cong. Ch., Bbl.
      Bedding, _for Atlanta U._
    Granby. Cong Sab. Sch.                                    25.83
    Great Barrington. First Cong. Ch. (24 of which
      _for Hampton N. & A. Inst._)                           124.00
    Great Barrington. Mrs. L. M. Chapin                        5.00
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch.                              47.33
    Greenfield. Second Cong. Ch., 25 and Sab.
      Sch., 25, _for Memorial Window_; Miss E. F.
      Osgood’s Class, 25, _for a Door, Tillotson
      C. & N. Inst. (Building)_                               75.00
    Greenfield. Miss Jeanette Thompson, in memory
      of Jennie Thompson, deceased, _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                         100.00
    Groton. Miss Elizabeth Farnsworth                         20.00
    Groton. “Mother and Daughter,” (10 of which
      _for Chinese, and 10 for Indian M._)                    30.00
    Hardwick. First Cal. Ch.                                  11.00
    Harwich. Cong. Ch.                                        16.66
    Harwichport. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                            20.00
    Haverhill. North Ch. and Soc., 50; Fourth
      Cong. Ch., 5                                            55.00
    Hopkinton. First Cong. Ch., 50.46, and Sab
      Sch., 69.96                                            120.42
    Ipswich. Linebrook Cong. Ch.                               5.27
    Ipswich. South Cong. Ch.                                  35.00
    Lawrence. Lawrence St. Ch., 147.16; “E. F. E.,” 2        149.16
    Leeds. “E. L. C.”                                          5.00
    Leominster. Bible Class, by Rev. G. H. De
      Bevoise, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                     25.00
    Lexington. Hancock Ch.                                    25.11
    Lowell. First Cong. Ch., to const. EDWARD W.
      FLETCHER, JACOB MURPHY and LEONARD H.
      HARTLEY L. Ms.                                          97.86
    Ludlow. Mrs. M. E. Jones, Box C. and 4, _for
      Macon, Ga._                                              4.00
    Melrose. Orthodox Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       6.25
    Millbury. First Cong. Ch.                                 60.01
    Millbury. Ladies’ Soc., Case C. and Bedding
      _for Atlanta U._
    Monson. Cong. Ch., 20; Mrs. Dewey’s S. S.
      Class, 8                                                28.00
    Monson. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                10.00
    Natick. First Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          10.00
    New Braintree. “H. D. R.”                                  1.00
    Newton. Eliot Ch.                                        210.73
    Newton. W. H. Wardwell, _for Student Aid,
      Theo. Dept., Talladega C._                              36.00
    Newton. Ellen D. Jackson, Bbl. C. and Books,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Newton Center. First Cong. Ch.                            61.10
    Newburyport. “A Friend,” _for Dakota M._                  25.00
    Newburyport. Miss T., 1; Freedmen’s Aid, Bbl.
      of C., _for Washington, D.C._                            1.00
    Northbridge Center. Cong. Ch.                              5.00
    Northfield. Trin. Cong. Ch.                                5.00
    Norfolk. Cong. Ch.                                        11.50
    Norfolk. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             12.00
    Northampton. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Atlanta U._                                        48.39
    Northampton. Wm. K. Wright                                30.00
    North Adams. Cong. Ch.                                    65.52
    North Brookfield. Union Cong. Ch.                          9.50
    North Brookfield. By S. F. Fairbanks, Bbl. C.
    North Falmouth. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        25.00
    North Rellionse. Mrs. E. R. Gould, _for Macon, Ga._        3.00
    Oxford. First Cong. Ch., 21.50, and Sab Sch., 16.66       38.16
    Palmer. Second Cong. Ch.                                  13.15
    Paxton. Cong. Ch. and Sab. Sch.                           22.28
    Prescott. First Cong. Sab. Sch.                            6.25
    Pittsfield. James H. Dunham                              100.00
    Pittsfield. “Friends,” by Mrs. Mary B. Davis.
      Box C. and Bedding, Val. 70, _for Atlanta U._
    Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch.                                   75.00
    Reading. Bethesda Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Revere. “A Friend.”                                        1.00
    Rockland. Elijah Shaw, to const. WARREN LANE L. M.        50.00
    Salem. Henry D. Sullivan. _for Ind. Dept.
      Atlanta U._                                             20.00
    Salem. ——, Box C. and Toys, _for Washington, D.C._
    Sharon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               110.00
    Sherborn. “A Friend.”                                      3.00
    Somerville. E. Stone, _for Student Aid, Fisk U._          50.00
    Southbridge. Cong. Ch., 3 Bbls. C., _for
      Talladega C._
    Spencer. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                              195.33
    Spencer. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Library,
      McIntosh, Ga._                                          10.05
    Spencer. Primary Dept. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               7.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 139.73; South
      Cong. Ch., 76.40                                       216.13
    Springfield. Morgan Envelope Co., 5000
      Envelopes, Val. 4.50, _for Atlanta U._
    Stoughton. Mrs. B. E. C.                                   1.00
    Sunderland. Cong. Ch. and Soc. (of which 13.58
      _for Memphis, Tenn._)                                   37.13
    Sutton. “Friends” in Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. and
      Bedding, 1 _for Freight, for Atlanta U._                 1.00
    Swampscott. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      BARNETT W. REDFERN L. M.                                30.00
    South Amherst. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.                        33.45
    South Braintree. Rev. J. B. Sewall                         9.50
    South Framingham. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._                                20.00
    South Sudbury. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., Bbl. C.,
      _for Atlanta U._
    South Weymouth. Miss Grover’s S. S. Class,
      Second Ch., _for Student Aid, Atlanta U._                6.00
    Taunton. Union Cong. Ch.                                  12.92
    Wakefield. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             55.16
    Watertown. Collected by Mrs. C. L. Woodworth,
      4 Bbls. C., _for Savannah, Ga._
    Watertown. Phillips Mission Band, _for
      McIntosh, Ga._                                           1.00
    Wellesley. Cong. Ch.                                      78.00
    Wellesley Hills. Grantville Ch. and Soc.                  36.00
    West Boylston. Cong. Ch.                                  51.00
    West Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                           7.62
    West Cummington. J. B. B.                                  0.50
    West Dennis. Mrs. S. S. C.                                 1.00
    West Newbury. First Cong. Sab. Sch., 6, _for
      Student Aid, Atlanta U._; First Cong. Ch.,
      Bbl. C., val. 25, and 1 _for Freight, for
      Atlanta, Ga._                                            7.00
    West Springfield. Second Cong. Ch.                        11.88
    Westport. Pacific Un. Ch. and Soc., 7, and
      Sab. Sch., 2                                             9.00
    Williamsburgh. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         92.00
    Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                             19.02
    Winchester. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                             4.10
    Woburn. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 144.20; H.
      Whitford, 5; Wm. Temple, 5                             154.20
    Worcester. Union Ch., 301.24, to const.
      FRANCIS E. KIMBALL, MISS HARRIET T.
      BOARDMAN, JOHN W. FOLLETT, FRANCIS A.
      GARDNER, ORANGE S. GORDON, EDWARD B. J.
      NORMAN, EDWARD W. VAILL, CHARLES A. VAUGHAN,
      WARREN WILLIAMS and MRS. HENRIETTA A.
      WAKEFIELD, L. Ms.; Central Ch., 70.16; Old
      South Ch., 40; Salem St. Ch., 6; “A Friend,”
      2.50                                                   419.90
    Worcester. Central Ch. (80c. of which from 4
      little children for two bricks each) _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst. (Building)_                      2.80
                                                           --------
                                                          $5,540.08

    LEGACIES.

    Acton. Estate of Mrs. Harriet Davis, by Moses
      Taylor, Ex.                                            112.60
    Holbrook. Estate of Mrs. Prudence D. Holbrook
      ($800 of which _for support of two teachers_)        1,000.00
    Lancaster. Estate of Miss Sophia Stearns, by
      Wm. W. Wyman, Ex.                                        4.04
    Salem. Estate of John Bertram, by James B.
      Curwen                                               5,000.00
                                                          ---------
                                                         $11,656.72


  RHODE ISLAND, $598.30.

    Providence. Union Cong. Ch.                              574.30
    Little Compton. Union Ch.                                 24.00
    Westerly. Women’s Benev. Soc., Box of C. _for
      Raleigh, N.C._


  CONNECTICUT, $4,556.37.

    Ansonia. William Terry                                    10.00
    Ashford. “A Friend”                                        5.00
    Bethel. Cong. Ch.                                         10.00
    Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                                   9.98
    Black Rock. Cong. Ch.                                     17.75
    Branford. First Cong. Ch. to const. DEA. A. M.
      BABCOCK L. M.                                           30.00
    Bridgeport. Second Cong. Soc.                             50.54
    Bristol. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John Brown
      Steamer_                                                20.00
    Bristol. “A Friend”                                       15.00
    Broad Brook. Cong. Ch.                                    18.65
    Brookfield Center. Cong. Ch.                              14.84
    Canton Center. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Talladega C._        25.00
    Cornwall. First Cong. Ch.                                  9.40
    Cromwell. Cong. Ch.                                       55.10
    Danielsonville. _For Washington, D.C._                     5.61
    East Wallingford. Mrs. Benj. Hall, _for
      Tillotson C. & N. Inst._                                 5.00
    Essex. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                             33.00
    Essex. First Cong. Ch.                                    13.00
    Farmington. Cong. Ch. (175 of which from Henry
      D. Hawley)                                             236.95
    Georgetown. E. Gilbert, _for Library Building,
      Macon, Ga._                                             25.00
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Furnishing a
      Room, Straight U._                                      32.73
    Guilford. First Cong. Ch.                                 24.00
    Hadlyme. Richard E. Hungerford                           150.00
    Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch., 410.54;
      Windsor Av. Cong. Ch., 60; to const. TIMOTHY
      E. STEEL and EDGAR A. BELDEN L. Ms.; Mrs.
      Mary C. Bemis 25                                       495.54
    Hebron. Geo. H. Lord                                       8.50
    Higganum. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Lady
      Missionary, McIntosh, Ga._                              35.17
    Jewett City. Cong. Ch.                                    26.00
    Kensington. Cong. Ch.                                      9.37
    Lyme. First Cong. Ch.                                     21.00
    Meriden. E. K. Breckenridge, 5; R. P. Rand, 2              7.00
    Milford. First Cong. Ch.                                   2.74
    Montville. First Cong. Ch.                                 4.40
    Moodus. Amasa Day Chaffee                                  3.00
    New Britain. Mrs. E. W. Welles, 25; Mrs. J. A. K., 1;
      _for Tillotson C. & N. Inst. (Building)_                26.00
    New Britain. South Cong. Ch. ($5 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                   130.07
    New Haven. “S. S. T., Centre Ch.,” $5; E. A. P., $1        6.00
    Newington. Cong. Ch., 2 bbls. C. and $2 _for
      Freight, for Talladega C._                               2.00
    New London. Second Cong. Ch.                             596.00
    New London. O. Woodworth, _for furnishing
      room, Straight U._                                      40.11
    North Branford. J. A. Palmer                               2.00
    Northford. Cong. Ch.                                       5.00
    North Greenwich. Cong. Ch. and Soc., to const.
      SYLVESTER D. HUSTED L. M                                55.15
    Norwich. Mrs. Chas. Lee, $30; Buckingham Sab.
      Sch., $20; Miss S. S. Coit, pkg. Pamphlets              50.00
    Norwich Town. “*, First Ch.”                              35.00
    Orange. Cong. Ch.                                          1.00
    Oxford. Mrs. J. C., _for Tillotson C. and N.
      Inst._                                                   1.00
    Plymouth. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           30.00
    Prospect. Cong. Ch.                                       20.00
    Redding. Mrs. C. D. S.                                     2.00
    Rockville. White, Corbin & Co., 13,250
      Envelopes, value $16.04, _for Atlanta U._
    Somers. Cong. Ch.                                         21.50
    Stafford. Mrs. Thomas H. Thresher                          5.00
    Staffordville. Cong. Ch.                                   5.00
    Stamford. Thomas Davenport                                 2.00
    Stonington. “Rising Sons and Daughters of
      Abraham,” by A. Morrison                                 5.00
    Thomaston. Cong. Ch.                                      56.27
    Thompsonville. D. P.                                       0.50
    Washington. Mrs. O.S. Brinsmade                            1.50
    Washington Depot. O. B. Gibson                             5.00
    Wapping. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                               25.08
    Watertown. Cong. Sab. Sch., to const. HELEN
      GERTRUDE DAYTON and LUCIEN R. HITCHCOCK L.
      Ms.                                                     66.00
    Watertown. Dr. John De Forest, 100; Sab. Sch.
      Classes, 8.15; Rev. B. D. Conkling and wife,
      6.85, _for Student Aid, Talladega C._                  115.00
    West Chester. Cong. Ch., _for Tillotson C. and
      N. Inst._                                               15.48
    West Hartford. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                          9.14
    Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                         70.00
    Windsor Locks. “A Friends.”                               10.00
    Winsted. Mrs. M.A. Mitchell, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           20.00
    Winsted. Elias E. Gilman, 10; Mrs. Emily W.
      Case, 10                                                20.00
    Wolcott. Cong. Ch.                                        10.80
    Woodbury. Mrs. E. L. Curtiss, 10; Mrs. C. P.
      Churchill, 1.50                                         11.50
                                                          ---------
                                                          $2,905.37

    LEGACIES.

    Avon. Estate of Harry Chidsey, by L. H. Chidsey          400.00
    Ellington. Estate of Maria Pitkin, by Edwin
      Talcott, Ex.                                           251.00
    Farmington. Estate of Asahel Thomson, by
      Julius Gay, Admr.                                    1,000.00
                                                          ---------
                                                          $4,556.37


  NEW YORK, $2,318.74.

    Adams Basin. Mrs. Ezekiel Clark                            5.00
    Albany. First Cong. Ch.                                  100.00
    Ashville. Cong. Ch.                                        2.00
    Brooklyn. Clinton Av. Cong. Ch., $871.95, (100
      of which from A. S. Barnes, _for Tillotson
      C. and N. Inst._); Mrs. Mary E. Whiton, 20;
      Mrs. Geo. Hollis, 3                                    894.95
    Brooklyn. “Friends,” Bbl. C., Mrs. F., 2, _for
      Washington, D.C._                                        2.00
    Brooklyn. Freedman’s Helpers, Bbl., C., _for
      Macon. Ga._
    Canastota. Enoch B. Northrup, 5; Mr. and Mrs.
      R. H. Child, 5                                          10.00
    Cohoes. Mrs. I. Terry                                      5.00
    Felt’s Mills. Joel A. Hubbard                             30.00
    Fredonia. Miss Jeannie Kinsman, _for Student
      Aid, Athens. Ala._                                       8.50
    Granby Center. J. C. Harrington                           10.00
    Hudson. Mrs. D. A. Jones                                  15.00
    Ilion. Mrs. Sophia Miller                                  7.00
    Kingsborough. J. W.                                        0.50
    Lockport. By Mrs. G. M. Day, _for Industrial
      Work, Memphis, Tenn._                                    8.00
    Marcellus. Mrs. L. Hemenway                                2.00
    Middlesex. L. Adams and wife                              10.00
    Millville. Henry L. Hommedieu                              2.25
    New York. Dr. A. S. Ball                                   5.00
    New York. Century Co., Papers and magazines;
      Harper & Bros., pkg. books; E. B. Treat,
      pkg. books, _for Library, Macon, Ga._
    New York. A. S. Barnes, 12 vols.; Clark &
      Maynard, 12 vols.; _for Library, Straight U._
    New York. Rev. G. D. Pike, D.D. Empress Range,
      val. 30, _for Housekeeping School, Atlanta U._
    Napoli. First Cong. Ch.                                   18.10
    North Walton. Cong. Ch., 14.47 and Sab. Sch.
      13.16                                                   27.63
    Oswego. Cong. Ch.                                         43.91
    Phelps. Mrs. G. C. Prichard, _for Mobile, Ala._           10.00
    Plattsburgh. G. W. Dodds                                   5.00
    Perry Center. Ladies Benev. Soc., _for
      Raleigh, N.C._                                          13.40
    Rochester. A. Hubregtse                                    1.50
    Rome. Rev. Wm. B. Hammond                                  5.00
    Sag Harbor. Geo. B. Brown                                  5.00
    Smyrna. MARTHA H. NORTHUP, to const. herself
      L. M.                                                   30.00
    Troy. Mrs. E. C. Stewart                                   5.00
    Waterville. Mrs. William F. Winchell, 5; Mrs.
      J. Candee. 5, _for Student Aid_                         10.00
    Wellsville. First Cong. Sab. Sch., Box Books
      and Papers, _for Macon, Ga._
    West Chazy. Rev. L. Prindle                                2.00
    Whitesborough. James Symonds                               5.00
    “A Lady in Broome Co.”                                 1,000.00


  NEW JERSEY, $50.

    Salem. W. G. Tyler                                        50.00


  PENNSYLVANIA, $17.25.

    Canton. H. Sheldon, Map Palestine, _for Macon, Ga._
    Centre Road. J. A. Scoville                                5.00
    Guy’s Mills. S. O. F.                                      0.50
    Hyde Park. Plymouth Cong. Ch. (1 of which _for
      John Brown Steamer_)                                     1.25
    Le Raysville. “H. G.”                                      7.00
    Neath. Cong. Ch.                                           3.50
    Philadelphia. Rev. E. W. Rice, 20 Copies
      Books, _for Macon. Ga._


  OHIO, $1,219.25.

    Andover. Cong. Ch.                                         3.86
    Berea. James S. Smedley (5 of which _for John
      Brown Steamer_)                                         10.00
    Chardon. Cong. Ch. (5 of which from Rev. A. T.
      Reed)                                                   13.82
    Cincinnati. Mrs. Betsey E. Aydelott                        5.00
    Claridon. D. B. Ladd                                       2.00
    Cleveland. First Cong. Ch., 50 to const. MRS. R. O.
      BESWICK L. M.; Franklin Ave. Cong. Ch., 9.41            59.41
    Cleveland. S. C. Ruggles, _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Delaware. Wm. Bevan                                        5.00
    Elyria. First Cong. Sab. Sch. to const. LESTER
      F. MCLEAN L. M.                                         40.00
    Gambier. James S. Sower                                    5.00
    Harmar. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch. _for Talladega C._            21.94
    Huntsburgh. Capt. A. E. Millard, M. E. Millard            15.00
    Huntsburgh. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           15.00
    Kingsville. Myron Whiting                                 20.00
    Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                           22.77
    Madison. One and a half Bbl. C., 4 _for
      Freight, for Selma, Ala._                                4.00
    Martinsburgh. “A Friend.”                                  0.50
    Medina. Woman’s Missionary Soc., _for Student
      Aid, Talladega C._                                      10.00
    Monroeville. Hoyt Children, _for new Building,
      Mobile, Ala._                                            0.10
    Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch.                                  107.71
    North Bloomfield. E. A. Brown, _for Talladega C._         50.00
    Oberlin. Ladies Aid Soc., First Cong. Ch.,
      _for Lady Missionary Atlanta, Ga._                      75.00
    Painesville. First Ch. to const. ALBERT C.
      PEPOON, HARRY C. BEARDSLEE, HERBERT G.
      HOUSE, GEO. W. VIESEY, JAMES RIVERS, WM.
      CLAYTON, LUCIUS E. JUDSON, W. H. LUDLUM, J.
      S. WERNER, HENRY P. BATEHAM, LOUIS G. SEARS,
      C. O.  HIGGINS, H. C. CAMP, CLARENCE A.
      HINE, FRED. W. LITTLEJOHN, HEBER LITTLE, W.
      C. TISDEL and T. S. BALDWIN L. Ms.                     588.35
    Peru. “Friends.” _for Student Aid, Talladega C._          16.00
    Springfield. First Cong. Ch., 25.80; Miss
      Lizzie Wright’s S. S. Class, 4.45; Mattie
      Berry’s Class, 4.73; Infants’ Class, 3                  37.98
    South Toledo. Mrs. J. H. N.                                1.00
    Strongsville. Elijah Lyman                                10.00
    Tallmadge. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                20.35
    Wakeman. Second Cong. Ch.                                 21.69
    Windham. Wm. A. Perkins                                    5.00
    Weymouth. Miss F. J. Webster, 2.60, Ladies’
      Miss’y Soc., _for Reading Room 2.02, for
      Tougaloo U._                                             4.62
    Weymouth. Rev. G. J. Webster, _for Freight,
      for Macon, Ga._                                          1.60
    West Andover. Cong Ch.                                     1.55


  INDIANA, $35.00.

    Fort Wayne. Plym. Cong. Ch.                               25.00
    South Bend. R. Burroughs                                  10.00


  ILLINOIS, $692.04.

    Albion. Mrs. M. Skeavington, 4.50; Dea. James
      Green, 1.50                                              6.00
    Batavia. Cong. Ch.                                        34.50
    Belvidere. Miss Elizabeth Smith                            3.00
    Beecher. Cong. Ch.                                        12.90
    Cambridge. First Cong. Ch.                                13.55
    Chebansee. Cong. Sab. Sch. _for Student Aid,
      Straight U._                                            10.00
    Chicago. N. E. Cong. Ch., 93.55, and Sab.
      Sch., 74.61; Mrs. J. H. McArthur, 5; Mrs. C. R., 1     174.16
    Chicago. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               30.90
    Chicago. First Cong. Sab. Sch., _for
      Chattanooga, Tenn._                                     25.00
    Chicago. A. H. Andrews & Co., 8 in. Globe,
      _for Macon, Ga._
    Cobden. E. W. Towne                                        6.50
    Danville. Miss Anna Swan, _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                            5.00
    Elgin. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                25.00
    Evanston. Mrs. J. M. Williams, Bdl. Sheets, _for
      Fisk U._
    Genesee. Cong. Ch.                                        30.86
    Hamlet. L. C.                                              0.50
    Hinsdale. J. W. Bushnell                                   5.00
    Kewanee. Cong. Ch.                                        50.00
    Lyndon. Mrs. O. Hubbard, 1.50; Mrs. M. A. W.,
      50c.; J. W. H., 50c                                      2.50
    Millburn. ——                                              10.00
    Millburn. Ladies Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Mobile, Ala._                               15.00
    Oak Park. First Cong. Ch.                                 93.52
    Payson. Cong. Ch.                                         15.00
    Princeton. Mrs. P. B. Corss                               15.00
    Rochelle. Mrs. Holcombe, Box Bedding, _for
      Fisk U._
    Rockport. Ladies of First Cong. Ch., _for
      Student Aid, Fisk U._                                   25.00
    Roscoe. Cong. Ch.                                         15.11
    Shirland. Mrs. J. G. L.                                    0.50
    Sycamore. Mrs. Henry Wood, 2.50; David West,
      2; “Anon,” 50c                                           5.00
    Wethersfield. A. B. Kellogg                                5.00
    Winetka. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., _for Student
      Aid, Fisk U._                                           20.00
    Winnebago. Ladies’ Soc., Box Bedding, _for
      Fisk U._
                                                            -------
                                                            $654.50

    LEGACY.

    Galesburgh. Estate of W. C. Willard, by Prof.
      T. R. Willard                                           37.54
                                                            -------
                                                            $692.04


  MICHIGAN, $310.81.

    Calumet. “Calumet”                                        25.00
    Calumet. Mrs. F. M. Wright’s S. S. Class, 5;
      Ruth, Louisa and Winifred Cole, 1.50, _for
      Student Aid, Talladega C._                               6.50
    Chelsea. John C. Winans                                  200.00
    Columbus. Cong. Ch.                                        8.60
    Deep River. N. H. Culver                                  10.00
    Dexter. Dennis Warner                                     10.00
    Excelsior. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00
    Greenville. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           22.02
    Lansing. Rebecca S. Brown                                  2.00
    Richmond. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                  1.50
    Summit. Ladies Miss’y Soc.                                 3.59
    White Lake. Robert Garner                                 10.00
    Walton. Cong. Sab. Sch.                                    1.60


  IOWA $190.23.

    Burlington. Cong. Ch.                                     51.35
    Clay. Cong. Ch., 8, and Sab. Sch., 4                      12.00
    Corning. Cong. Ch.                                         7.25
    Council Bluffs. Ladies’ H. M. Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans, La._                           15.00
    Decorah. Cong. Ch., 19.90; G. C. Winship, 10              29.90
    Garner. C. Wells                                           5.00
    Genoa Bluffs. Cong. Ch.                                   11.00
    Grinnell. Cong. Ch, 39.04; Prof. F. P. B., 1              40.04
    McGregor. Woman’s Miss’y Soc.                              9.24
    Nashua and Bradford. Ladies, _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 2.25
    New Hampton. Woman’s Cent. Soc.                            2.20
    Sherrill’s Mound. Rev. Jacob Reuth                         2.00
    Stacyville. Woman’s Miss’y Soc. _for Lady
      Missionary, New Orleans_                                 3.00


  WISCONSIN, $510.62.

    Appleton. First Cong. Ch., ad’l                            5.09
    Arena. Ladies’ Missy Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                            3.39
    Beloit. First Cong. Ch.                                    3.96
    Fond du Lac. Ladies’ Miss’y Soc., _for Lady
      Missionary, Montgomery, Ala._                           10.00
    La Crosse. First Cong. Ch.                                50.75
    La Crosse. Cong. Ch., _for Student Aid,
      Talladega C._                                           25.00
    Lake Geneva. Presb. Ch.                                   30.22
    Madison. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid,
      Fisk U._                                                50.00
    Madison. Wm. J. Park & Co., Books, val. 10
    Milwaukee. Grand Av. Cong. Ch., 60; Ladies’
      Miss’y Soc. Grand Av. Ch., 25                           85.00
    Ripon. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Student Aid, Fisk U._        13.00
    Rosendale. Cong. Sab. Sch., _for Library,
      Macon, Ga._                                              5.00
    Salem. Wm. Munson                                         50.00
    Sheboygan. D. B.                                           1.00
    Union Grove. Cong. Ch.                                    20.00
    Whitewater. First Cong. Ch.                              100.84
    Whitewater. “Friends,” by Mrs. Coburn, _for
      Memphis, Tenn._                                          7.37
    —— “Friend,” _for Student Aid, Straight U._               50.00


  MINNESOTA, $214.92.

    Alexandria. Sophronia H. Childs, deceased, by
      Marian Childs                                            3.50
    Armada. First. Cong. Ch.                                  26.03
    Austin. Cong. Ch.                                         22.22
    Faribault. Cong. Ch.                                      26.42
    Glyndon. Cong. Ch., Bbl. of C. and 3 _for
      Freight, for Talladega C._                               3.00
    Hamilton. S. H. Gaylord                                    5.00
    Hutchinson. Cong. Ch.                                      4.26
    Minneapolis. Plymouth Ch., 60.22; Pilgrim Ch., 4.76       64.98
    Minneapolis. Second Cong. Ch., _for Furnishing
      Treasurer’s Office, Stone Hall, Atlanta U._             50.00
    Minneapolis. E. T. First Cong. Ch.                         5.51
    Plainview. Cong. Ch.                                       4.00


  MISSOURI, $20.00.

    St. Louis. First Cong. Ch.                                20.00


  KANSAS, $517.65.

    Atchison. Cong. Ch.                                       17.65

    LEGACY.

    Lawrence. Estate of Sarah C. Adams, by E.
      Corning Cowles, Ex.                                    500.00
                                                            -------
                                                            $517.65


  NEBRASKA, $41.00.

    Indianola. Cong. Ch.                                       9.00
    Lincoln. “R. and C”                                        6.00
    Nebraska City. “A Friend”                                 15.00
    Silver. Melinda Bowen                                     10.00
    Wayne. Rev. G. S.                                          1.00


  DAKOTA, $3.00.

    Mitchell. J. J. Gray, _for Student Aid,
      Atlanta U._                                              3.00
    Vermillion. Rev. G. S. Bascom, Pkg. Books,
      _for Macon, Ga._


  ARIZONA, $1.50.

    Fort Whipple. Mrs. D. R. Clendenin                         1.50


  WASHINGTON TER., $10.00.

    Skokomish. Cong. Ch.                                      10.00


  CALIFORNIA, $437.45.

    Colton. Chas. A. Birchard                                 10.00
    San Francisco. Receipts of “The California
      Chinese Mission”                                       427.45


  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $4.10.

    Washington. “Friends,” _for Washington, D.C._              2.10
    Washington. Lincoln Memorial Ch.                           2.00


  TENNESSEE, $766.35.

    Chattanooga. Rent                                        175.00
    Memphis. Le Moyne Sch., Tuition                          230.10
    Memphis. Second Cong. Sab. Sch., _for John
      Brown Steamer_                                           7.50
    Nashville. Fisk U., Tuition                              353.75


  NORTH CAROLINA, $213.00.

    Raleigh. Cong. Ch.                                         1.40
    Wilmington. Normal School, Tuition, $206.60;
      Cong. Ch., $5                                          211.60


  SOUTH CAROLINA, $327.65.

    Charleston. Avery Inst., Tuition                         327.65


  GEORGIA, $752.09.

    Atlanta. Storrs Sch., Tuition, $210.35; Rent, $3         213.35
    Atlanta. First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00
    Atlanta. Chamberlain & Boynton, M. Rich &
      Bro., John Keeley, Wm. Bolman & Bro.,
      _Articles for Furnishing Housekeeping
      School, Atlanta U._
    Macon. Lewis High Sch., Tuition, $280.28;
      Rent, $16; Cong. Ch., $5                               301.28
    McIntosh. Tuition, $41.68: Cong. Ch., $10.37              52.05
    Savannah. Beach Inst., Tuition, $145.41; Rent, $10       155.41


  ALABAMA, $859.02.

    Athens. Tuition                                           43.00
    Marion. Cong. Ch., 60.37; Tuition, 6.25                   66.62
    Mobile. Emerson Inst., Tuition, 568.85; Cong.
      Ch. 60c                                                569.45
    Mobile. “Friends,” _for School Mottoes_, 13;
      Geo. R. Dunham, 13.30; Wm Otis, 10.; Neander
      Crane, 5.; Others 60c. _for new Building
      Mobile, Ala._                                           41.90
    Montgomery. Cong. Ch.                                     37.00
    Selma. Cong. Ch.                                          18.00
    Talladega. Talladega C., Tuition                          83.05


  MISSISSIPPI, $61.40.

    Tougaloo. Tougaloo U., Tuition                            61.40


  LOUISIANA, $188.50.

    New Orleans. Straight U., Tuition                        188.50


  TEXAS, $189.60.

    Austin. Tillotson C. & N. Inst., Tuition                 189.60


  INCOMES, $618.92.

    Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._                               608.50
    Tuthill King Endowment Fund, _for Atlanta U._             10.42


  CANADA, $5.00.

    Sherbrooke. Rev. Archibald Duff                            5.00
                                                         ----------
      Total                                              $30,539.69
    Total from Oct. 1, to Jan. 31                        $85,555.11
                                                         ==========

         *       *       *       *       *


    RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION, E.
      Palache, Treasurer, from Sept. 20, 1882, to
      Jan. 20, 1883:
    FROM AUXILIARY MISSIONS: Marysville,
      Anniversary Col., 15.40; Annual Members, 10;
      Chinese Monthly Offerings, 32.20.—Petaluma,
      Chinese Monthly Offerings, 6.95—Sacramento,
      First Cong. Ch., 12.50; Chinese Monthly
      Offerings, 35.—Santa Barbara, Chinese
      Monthly Offerings, 21.—Santa Cruz, First
      Cong. Ch., 10; Chinese Monthly Offerings,
      8.50.—Stockton, Annual Members, 6: Chinese
      Monthly Offerings, 12.85                               170.40
    FROM CHURCHES: Calahan’s, Cong. Ch.,
      4.75—Etna, Cong. Ch., 1.50.—Fort Jones,
      Cong. Ch., 2.35.—Grass Valley, Cong. Ch.,
      Mrs. H. Scott, 2.—Oakland, First Cong. Ch.,
      11.40; Chin Fung, 50c.—Oakland, Plym. Av.
      Ch., Annual Members, 4.—Oro Fino, Cong.
      Ch., 2.25—Rio Vista, Cong. Ch., Annual
      Members, 6.—Saratoga, Cong. Ch., Rev. W. H.
      Cross, 2.—San Francisco, First Cong. Ch.,
      18.75; Annual Members, 2; Third Cong. Ch.,
      Collected at Annual Meeting of the Mission,
      $14.20.—Bethany Ch., Annual Members, 2;
      Hong Sing, 50c.—Chinese Monthly Offerings,
      Central No. 7, 19: Central No. 2, 15.90;
      Barnes, 14.85; Bethany, 7.85; West, 22.25              154.05
    FROM INDIVIDUAL DONORS: Oakland, Mrs. N. Gray,
      1; Rev. F. J. Culver, 2.—San Francisco, W.
      F. & Co., 5                                              8.00
    FROM EASTERN FRIENDS: Bangor, Me., Hon. J. B.
      Foster, 50; “Almost Home,” 25; “Friends,”
      10.—Wilmington, Mass., Rev. D. P. Noyes,
      5.—Mitchellville, Ia., M. B. Turner, 5                  95.00
                                                            -------
      Total                                                 $427.45

         *       *       *       *       *


  FOR AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

    Subscriptions                                            195.31
    Previously acknowledged                                  141.55
                                                            -------
      Total                                                 $336.86

         *       *       *       *       *


  FOR ENDOWMENT FUND.

    Boston, Mass. Mrs. H. M. Kent, FOR STONE
      PROFESSORSHIP HOWARD U.                                 50.00
    Chicago, Ill. Tuthill King, FOR BEREA COLLEGE          5,000.00
                                                           ========

                                     H. W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
                                            56 Reade St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




           BRAIN AND NERVE FOOD. VITALIZED PHOS-PHITES.


It restores the energy lost by Nervousness or Indigestion;
relieves Lassitude and Neuralgia; refreshes the Nerves tired
by Worry, Excitement or Excessive Brain Fatigue; strengthens a
Failing Memory, and gives Renewed Vigor in all Diseases of Nervous
Exhaustion or Debility. It is the only PREVENTIVE of Consumption.

It gives vitality to the Insufficient Bodily or Mental Growth of
Children; gives Quiet, Rest and Sleep, as it promotes Good Health
to Brain and Body.

          Composed of the Nerve-Giving Principles of the
                     Ox-Brain and Wheat-Germ.

           Physicians have Prescribed 500,000 Packages.

              For sale by Druggists, or by Mail, $1.

        F. CROSBY CO., 664 and 666 Sixth Avenue, New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             EUROPE!!!

=Cook’s Grand Excursions= leave New York April 26th, June 1st,
June 13th and June 30th, 1883. =Passage Tickets= by all =Atlantic
Steamers=. Special facilities for securing =good berths=. =Tourist
Tickets= for individual travelers in =Europe=, by all routes, at
reduced rates.

=Cook’s Excursionist=, with Maps and full particulars by mail 10
cents. Address

               THOS. COOK & SON, 261 Broadway, N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    THE ALBUM WRITER’S FRIEND.

Containing 300 Choice Gems of Poetry and Prose for writing in
Autograph Albums; 64 pages, paper covers. 15 cents. We will send
this book on receipt of 15 cents in stamps. Address

J. S. OGILVIE & CO., 21 Rose St., New York.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             PAYSON’S

                          INDELIBLE INK,

                   FOR MARKING ANY FABRIC WITH A
                      COMMON PEN, WITHOUT A
                           PREPARATION.


          It still stands unrivaled after 50 years’ test.


                      THE SIMPLEST AND BEST.

Sales now greater than ever before.

This Ink received the Diploma and Medal at Centennial over all
rivals.

Report of Judges: “For simplicity of application and indelibility.”


                            INQUIRE FOR

                      PAYSON’S COMBINATION!!!

Sold by all Druggists, Stationers and News Agents, and by many
Fancy Goods and Furnishing Houses.


                 *       *       *       *       *


              A Gift to Missionaries of the A. M. A.

                     THE REV. THOMAS DOUGLAS,

of Harwinton, Conn., offers his book, entitled “The Pastor’s
Companion and Register,” free to Missionaries of the A. M. A.,
beyond the cost of postage, handling, etc. The book contains forms
of Marriage Ceremony and Funeral Service, Baptisms, Admission and
Dismission of Members; also space for a Diary, Scripture Lessons,
Notices of Prayer Meetings, Benevolent Contributions, etc., etc.

The book will be mailed to Missionaries on receipt of seven
three-cent stamps. Application must be made directly to Mr. Douglas.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                      A CHANCE OF A LIFETIME.

[Illustration:

  6 TEA SPOONS.
  1 BUTTER KNIFE.
  1 SUGAR SHELL.

FREE]

Wishing to introduce our new and beautiful weekly publication, =THE
GOLDEN ARGOSY=, into every home in the United States where it is
not now taken, we make the following remarkable and magnificent
=offer to all= who read this advertisement, =relying upon future
patronage for our profit=. If you will send us =50= cts., which is
the price of a three months’ subscription, we will forward you

  ONE SILVER-PLATED BUTTER KNIFE,
  ONE SILVER-PLATED SUGAR SPOON,
  SIX SILVER STEEL-PLATED TEA SPOONS.

packed in a neat box, all charges prepaid. These goods are worth
and are sold for more than twice the subscription price, and if
not perfectly satisfactory may be returned, and we will refund the
money in every case. =Our only object= in making this offer to you
is to place in your hands the best and most popular weekly story
paper in the United States, believing you will always remain a
subscriber after once reading some of its fascinating stories. In
the thirteen numbers you will receive will be found four serial
stories by HORATIO ALGER, JR., EDWARD S. ELLIS, ROLLO ROBBINS,
JR., and HARRY CASTLEMON. Any one of these stories when bound in
book form sell for =$1.25=. =THE GOLDEN ARGOSY= is the =finest
illustrated= and =most elegant weekly paper= published in the
United States, costing nearly =$200= a week to illustrate. We are
positive when once introduced into a family it will always remain
and we shall always have you as a permanent subscriber. Our list of
contributors embrace the best talent of the world, among whom may
be mentioned: HORATIO ALGER, JR., EDWARD S. ELLIS, HARRY CASTLEMON,
FRANK H. CONVERSE, MARY A. DENISON, EDWARD EVERETT HALE, OLIVER
OPTIC AND A HOST OF OTHERS. Our firm is known as one of the most
reliable in the United States, and doing a business of =$500,000=
yearly with the country people as we do, we could not afford
to misrepresent. We refer to any New York publishers as to our
reliability. Show this to your friends, and get five to join you,
and we will send you your subscription free. Address all orders to

         =E. C. RIDEOUT & CO.=, 10 Barclay St., New York.
             ☞ Cut this out, it will not appear again.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: COUNT RUMFORD.]

                            HORSFORD’S

                          ACID PHOSPHATE.

                             (LIQUID.)

                FOR DYSPEPSIA, MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
                     EXHAUSTION, NERVOUSNESS,
                   DIMINISHED VITALITY, URINARY
                        DIFFICULTIES, ETC.

              PREPARED ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF

             Prof. E. N. Horsford, of Cambridge, Mass.

There seems to be no difference of opinion in high medical
authority of the value of phosphoric acid, and no preparation has
ever been offered to the public which seems to so happily meed the
general want as this.

It is not nauseous, but agreeable to the taste.

No danger can attend its use.

Its action will harmonize with such stimulants as are necessary to
take.

It makes a delicious drink with water and sugar only.

Prices reasonable. Pamphlet giving further particulars mailed free
on application.

                        MANUFACTURED BY THE

                      RUMFORD CHEMICAL WORKS,

                         Providence, R.I.,

                  AND FOR SALE BY ALL DRUGGISTS.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE

RISING SUN STOVE POLISH]

    For beauty of gloss, for saving of toil,
    For freeness from dust and slowness to soil,
    And also for cheapness ’tis yet unsurpassed,
    And thousands of merchants are selling it fast.

    Of all imitations ’tis well to beware;
    The half risen sun every package should bear;
    For this is the “trade mark” the MORSE BROS. use,
    And none are permitted the mark to abuse.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                     ESTABLISHED THIRTY YEARS.

[Illustration:

  Smith
  AMERICAN
  ORGANS]

                           ARE THE BEST.


                 _Catalogues Free on Application._

Address the Company either at

  BOSTON, MASS., 531 Tremont Street;
  LONDON, ENG., 57 Holborn Viaduct;
  KANSAS CITY, Mo., 817 Main Street;
  ATLANTA, GA., 27 Whitehall Street;
  Or, DEFIANCE, O.


                         OVER 95,000 SOLD.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                    7 PER CENT. TO 8 PER CENT.

                     Interest Net to Investors

                      In First Mortgage Bonds

                         ON IMPROVED FARMS

                  In Iowa, Minnesota and Dakota,

                            SECURED BY

                        ORMSBY BROS. & CO.,

                  BANKERS, LOAN AND LAND BROKERS,

                         EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

        References and Circulars forwarded on Application.


                 *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

  Home
  Estey
  Chapel]

                          THE ESTEY ORGAN

will deserve the reputation of former years by the continued
addition of all the embellishments and improvements that costly and
skilled artisans can produce.

Illustrated Catalogues, with elegant and varied styles, sent free
to all applicants.

J. ESTEY & CO., Brattleboro, Vt.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                             MANHATTAN

                    LIFE INS. CO. OF NEW YORK,

                      _156 and 158 Broadway_.


                        THIRTY-THIRD YEAR.


  DESCRIPTION—One of the oldest, strongest, best.

  POLICIES—Incontestable, non-forfeitable, definite cash
    surrender values.

  RATES—Safe, low, and participating or not, as desired.

  RISKS carefully selected.

  PROMPT, liberal dealing.

GENERAL AGENTS AND CANVASSERS WANTED in desirable territory, to
whom permanent employment and liberal compensation will be given.

Address

                                          H. STOKES, President.

  H. Y. WEMPLE, Sec’y.
  S. N. STEBBINS, Act’y.
  J. L. HALSEY, 1st V.-P.
  H. B. STOKES, 2d V.-P.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                        LILIPUTIAN BAZAAR.

[Illustration: Perfect]

EVERY CHILD should wear our =“Perfect” Waists=. They support the
clothing directly from the shoulders, and far surpass all others
in comfort, perfection in fit and beauty of shape. _We furnish
everything for children’s wear_, =Boys’=, =Girls’= and =Babies’
Clothing=, including every article required for complete outfits
for all ages up to 16 years. =Better styles better made, better
fitting=, than can be had elsewhere, and lower prices. _Mail orders
have careful attention._ Catalogues free.

  BEST & CO.
  60 W. 23d ST.,
  Bet. 5th & 6th Aves.
  N.Y.


                 *       *       *       *       *


                          FRANK LESLIE’S

                         SUNDAY MAGAZINE.

                    T. DE WITT TALMAGE, Editor.

                       SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT.

With 1883 the SUNDAY MAGAZINE entered on a new series, with
the distinctive purpose of providing such a variety of reading
matter of the highest literary merit (entertaining, chaste and
instructive) as shall commend it to Christian parents and those
engaged in the instruction of the young. Its purpose is to provide
the healthiest, yet most sparkling literature, for young and old.
DR. TALMAGE is the real editor, and intends to put his best work
into it. Writers of the greatest acknowledged excellence contribute
to its pages, and THE ILLUSTRATIONS are of a higher grade than any
that have hitherto appeared in the Magazine.

Among other unique attractions are the following twelve questions
answered by the leaders of each denomination:

  WHAT IS METHODISM?
  WHAT IS MORAVIANISM?
  WHAT IS LUTHERANISM?
  WHAT IS EPISCOPALIANISM?
  WHAT IS PRESBYTERIANISM?
  WHAT IS SWEDENBORGIANISM?
  WHAT IS CONGREGATIONALISM?
  WHAT IS ROMAN CATHOLICISM?
  WHAT IS THE BAPTIST CHURCH?
  WHAT IS THE CHURCH OF THE DISCIPLES?
  WHAT IS THE DUTCH REFORMED CHURCH?
  WHAT IS THE REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH?

Rev. Moses D. Hoge, D.D., Richmond, Va.; Rev. Charles H. Hall,
D.D., Brooklyn, N.Y.; Rev. Chauncey Giles, D.D., Philadelphia, Pa.;
Rev. Isaac Errett, D.D., Cincinnati, O.; Rev. Daniel Curry, D.D.,
N.Y.; Rev. Edwin F. Hatfield, D.D., N.Y.; Rev. F. C. Ewer, D.D.,
N.Y.; Bishop Charles E. Cheney, Chicago, Ill., and others will
answer the above questions.

  SUNDAY MAGAZINE is $3 per Year, Postage Free; 4 Copies, $9; 6
    Copies, $12.

Liberal terms to agents. Specimen Copy to any address for 10 cents.
Remit by Money Order or Registered Letter to

                  FRANK LESLIE’S SUNDAY MAGAZINE,
                    53, 55, 57 Park Place, N.Y.

                 *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


No Christian family can afford to be without missionary
intelligence, and no missionary society can afford to be without
readers of its publications; it had better give them to the readers
without pay than to have no readers. Missionary zeal will die in
the churches without missionary intelligence.

But it would be far better for both the societies and the readers
if missionary news were paid for. This would give the magazine
attentive perusal and the society relief from the reproach of a
large expense for publication. Missionary publications should be
put on a _paying basis_. Aside from a free list to life members,
ministers, etc., the cost of publication should be made up by
paying subscribers and advertisements.

We are anxious to put the AMERICAN MISSIONARY on this basis. We
intend to make it worth its price, and we ask our patrons to aid us:

1. More of our readers can take pains to send us either the
moderate subscription price (50 cents), or $1.00, naming a friend
to whom we may send a second copy.

2. A special friend in each church can secure subscribers at
club-rates (12 copies for $5 or 25 copies for $10).

3. Business men can benefit themselves by advertising in a
periodical that has a circulation of over 20,000 copies monthly and
that goes to many of the best men and families in the land. Will
not our friends aid us to make this plan a success?

Subscriptions should be sent to H. W. HUBBARD, Treasurer, 56 Reade
st., New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


AIM AND WORK.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. It originated in a sympathy with
the almost friendless slaves. Since Emancipation it has devoted its
main efforts to preparing the FREEDMEN for their duties as citizens
and Christians in America, and as missionaries in Africa. As
closely related to this, it seeks to benefit the caste-persecuted
CHINESE in America, and to co-operate with the Government in its
humane and Christian policy toward the INDIANS.


STATISTICS FOR 1882.

CHURCHES: _In the South_—In District of Columbia, 1; Virginia,
1; North Carolina, 9; South Carolina, 2; Georgia, 14; Kentucky,
7; Tennessee, 4; Alabama, 14; Kansas, 2; Arkansas, 1; Louisiana,
17; Mississippi, 5; Texas, 6. _Africa_, 3. _Among the Indians_, 2.
Total, 88.

INSTITUTIONS FOUNDED, FOSTERED OR SUSTAINED IN THE
SOUTH.—_Chartered_: Hampton, Va.; Berea, Ky.; Talladega, Ala.;
Atlanta, Ga.; Nashville, Tenn.; Tougaloo, Miss.; New Orleans,
La., and Austin, Tex.—8. _Graded or Normal Schools_: Wilmington,
N.C.; Charleston, Greenwood, S.C.; Savannah, Macon, Atlanta, Ga.;
Montgomery, Mobile, Athens, Selma, Ala.; Memphis, Tenn.—11. _Other
Schools_, 38. Total, 57.

TEACHERS, MISSIONARIES AND ASSISTANTS.—Among the Freedmen, 336:
among the Chinese, 31; among the Indians, 6; in Africa, 16. Total,
389. STUDENTS.—In theology, 72; law, 28; in college course, 104;
in other studies, 9,404. Total, 9,608. Scholars taught by former
pupils of our schools, estimated at 150,000. Indians under the care
of the Association, 13,000.


WANTS.

1. A steady INCREASE of regular income to keep pace with the
growing work. This increase can only be reached by _regular_ and
_larger_ contributions from the churches, the feeble as well as the
strong.

2. ADDITIONAL BUILDINGS for our higher educational institutions, to
accommodate the increasing number of students; MEETING HOUSES for
the new churches we are organizing; MORE MINISTERS, cultured and
pious, for these churches.

3. HELP FOR YOUNG MEN, to be educated as ministers here and
missionaries to Africa—a pressing want.


ATKIN & PROUT, Printers, 12 Barclay St., New York.




Transcriber’s Notes


Obvious printer’s punctuation errors and omissions silently
corrected. Inconsistent hyphenation retained due to the
multiplicity of authors. Arithmetic errors in the receipts have
been retained as printed.

Images have been moved outside of paragraphs, resulting in page
numbers that are slightly off.

Changed “carrried” to “carried” on page 86. (our work begun and
carried)

Missing “a” inserted in “and” on the back cover (humane and
Christian policy)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 37, NO. 3, MARCH, 1883 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.